SATHYA SAI SPEAKS 


VOLUME - 37 


Discourses of 
BHAGAWAN SRI SATHYA SAI BABA 
delivered during 2004 
(except 5 Dasara Discourses in 10/2004) 


PRASAI ILAYAM 


SRI SATHYA SAI BOOKS & PUBLICATIONS TRUST 
Prasanthi Nilayam - 515 134 
Anantapur District, Andhra Pradesh, India 
STD: 08555 ISD: 91 - 8555 
Phone: 287375 Fax: 287236 
email: enquiry@sssbpt.org 


© Sri Sathya Sai Books & Publications Trust 
Prasanthi Nilayam (INDIA). 


All Rights Reserved 


The Copyright and the rights of translation in any language are 
reserved by the Publisher. No part, para, passage, text or photograph or 
artwork of this book should be reproduced, transmitted or utilised, in 
original language or by translation, in any form or by any means, 
electronic, mechanical, photo copying, recording or by any informa- 
tion, storage or retrieval system, except with the express and prior 
permission, in writing from the Convener, Sri Sathya Sai Books & 
Publications Trust, Prasanthi Nilayam (Andhra Pradesh) India, except 
for brief passages quoted in book review. This book can be exported 
from India only by the Publishers - Sri Sathya Sai Books & Publications 
Trust, Prasanthi Nilayam (India). 








International Standard Book No. 81 - 7208 - 428 - 5 
81 - 7208 - 118 - 9 (Set) 





First Edition 


Published by 


The Convener, 

Sri Sathya Sai Books & Publications Trust 
Prasanthi Nilayam, India - Pin Code 515 134 
STD: 08555 ISD : 91- 8555. 

Phone: 287375 — Fax : 287236 

email : enquiry@sssbpt.org 


Printed at 


10. 


ii. 


he: 


13. 


14. 


13. 


CONTENTS 


Service To Man Is Service To God la... 1 
Respect For Parents - The Greatest Virtue __..... 17 
Character Is The Goal Of Education  —_e_...... 30 
Love Is The Royal Path To RealiseGod i... a1 
Concentration Of Mind On The Divine Is 

Real Sadhana 69 
Realise The God ImmanentIn You lai... 87 
Manifestation Of The Vedas In Human Form __...... OF 
Uphold Truth Under All Circumstances... 105 
Develop Love To Experience Divinity 121 
MotherIs Your FirstGod sn 133 
The Form OfGodIsLove aan. IS 
My Students Are My Wealth nn 161 
Do Constant Namasmarana For Mental Peace _...... 171 
Divine Love Alone Can Save Us From Sorrows ...... 185 


The Lord Accepts Only A Pure Heart —s_s_.... 199 


16. 


Vis 


18. 


19, 


20. 


21; 


22, 


God Protects Those Who Protect 
SathyaAnd Dharma ean 


Teachings of Noble Souls Essential For The Young .... 
Obtain Divine Grace By Obeying Your Parents ...... 
Your Reality Is In your Own Self, Not Elsewhere...... 
Experience Divinity Within In Total Silence __...... 
Dedicate Your Life To Serve Society as. 


My PowerIs The PowerOfLove 


Service To Man Is Service To God 


People can say that this is Brahman, 
None can say, however, that this is not Brahman, 
God only exists always, 


The world is illusory, look! 
(Telugu poem) 


Embodiments of Love! 


ODAY, everybody is enthusiastic about New 

Year’s day. Significantly, this New Year Day has 
started on a Thursday. It is one’s foolishness to single 
out a particular day in a year and celebrate that day with 
great joy. For a true devotee, every day is a festival day. 
Therefore, it is essential that we have to consider every 
minute, every day as new and celebrate it with joy. In 
fact, every day is a New Year Day. 


2 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


This Body Is For Serving Others 


Everything in this objective world is impermanent 
and unreal. Hence, we have to contemplate on the 
eternal truth and reality. We should not waste our time 
brooding over the past or anticipating the future. It is 
great foolishness to worry about the future or the past, 
forgetting the present. The present is only real. Past is 
past, you cannot get it back however much you may 
pray for it. The future is hidden in the womb of time. It 
is not possible to visualise it. Therefore, only the present 
is important. Unable to realise this truth, people are 
worried about the past and future. 


The foremost activity man should engage in is 
service to fellow human beings. Instead, people are 
wasting their precious time worrying about either the 
past or the future. Therefore, embodiments of love! 
You should always engage yourselves in service to 
fellow human beings. There is no greater sadhana 
than such service. Considering the nine paths of 
devotion, namely, sravanam (listening), kirtanam 
(singing), Vishnusmaranam (contemplating on Vishnu), 
padasevanam (serving His Lotus Feet), vandanam 
(salutation), archanam (worship), dasyam (servitude), 
sneham (friendship), atmanivedanam (self-surrender) 
as the only important means for salvation, people are 
engrossed in these activities. They totally forget the 
importance of service. Only the fruits of service will be 
eternal. We must constantly engage ourselves in service 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 3 


to others. God has given us this body for that purpose 
only. This body is not meant to be engaged in mere eating 
and drinking and thus wasting our valuable time. We 
must realise the truth that God has given us this body 
for serving others and thus help others. There is nothing 
greater than service to humanity. 


Service To Man Is Service To God 


All great men have sanctified their lives only by 
serving humanity. Therefore, you start serving humanity 
at least from now onwards. Service is more important 
than bhajan and all other sadhanas. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Service Alone Brings Eternal Joy 


What, according to you is service? You consider 
helping people in difficulties is service. No. It is not 
as simple as that. Your body should be constantly 
engaged in serving others. The human body consists of 
several limbs. All these limbs are meant to be engaged 
in serving your fellowmen and not for other activities. 
Unfortunately, we are forgetting this basic fact. Every 
limb in the human body has been granted by God for 
karmopasana (worshipping God through service). 
Karmopasana is the only means by which the human life 
can be sanctified. We are building several temples. We are 
undertaking various sadhanas. But, all these sadhanas 
can give us only temporary satisfaction, not eternal joy. 
Our ancient Rishis have been able to achieve eternal joy 


4 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


through a conscious effort. Therefore, you must develop 
firm faith in the truth that nothing can provide eternal 
joy, except service to humanity. Undertake service to 
the suffering humanity. Service is not merely confined 
to health services. Service encompasses every possible 
help to fellow human beings. 


The ancient culture of Bharat is still preserved 
in the villages and not in towns and cities. In fact, 
our culture is defiled in all possible ways in the cities. 
Therefore, go to the villages, find out their necessities 
and undertake such types of services that will alleviate 
their sufferings. Today, several people shift to the 
towns and cities in pursuit of comfort and luxuries. In 
the process, they end up in sorrows and difficulties. 
This is their own making. Na sukhat labhyathe sukham 
(happiness cannot be obtained out of happiness). It is 
only through suffering, that happiness is achieved. 


You should undertake service. In fact, the hands 
are given to you to serve humanity. The hands that serve 
are holier than the lips that pray. Therefore, undertake 
selfless service and attain glory. When you undertake 
good work, you enjoy peace in your life. Today, the boys 
who sang bhajans are former students of the Institute. 
They have undertaken several service activities to 
please Swami. God is not interested in worship and 
other sadhanas. He is interested only in service. Hence, 
undertake service and more and more service. The best 
way to love God is to Love all and Serve all. God is 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 5 


interested only in love and service. If you can recognise 
the importance of these two and conduct yourself 
accordingly, there can be no greater sadhana. You need 
not spend a lot of money in service. Sanctify your life 
by undertaking loving service. Today, the old students 
of Sri Sathya Sai Institute of Higher Learning brought 
a cheque for Rs. 48 lakhs for presenting to Swami as a 
token of their love and service. This amount has been 
saved by them from their salaries, by undergoing lot of 
difficulties. But, to whom should the amount belong 
really? This amount is meant to be utilised for service 
in the villages. It is for serving the poorest of the poor. 
Therefore, I told them, “My dear ones! You deposit the 
money in the bank and undertake service activities with 
the interest accrued on the amount.” Money is of no help 
in developing good qualities. Sacrifice alone can develop 
noble qualities. It is only in sacrifice, there is real yoga. 
That is why it is said Thyagenaike amrutatthwamanasu 
(it is only by sacrifice that man can attain immortality). 
Today, however, people want bhoga (enjoy material 
comforts). By such bhoga, only roga (disease) will be 
contracted. They cannot attain yoga. Hence, you try to 
attain yoga by thyaga. Only then can you attain eternal 


JOY. 
Embodiments of Love! 
Human Beings Are Embodiment Of Divinity 


There is no use contemplating on God without 
making sacrifice. By contemplating on God, you may 


6 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


perhaps derive some mental satisfaction. But, that is 
of no use. Therefore, you develop firm faith in the 
truth that every living being is permeated by God and 
act accordingly. God lives in every living being and 
experiences bliss. The Upanishads declare, Easwarah 
sarva bhutanam (God is the indweller of all beings) and 
Isavasyam idam sarvam (the entire universe is permeated 
by God). You should not be under the impression 
that God is confined to some temple or a structure 
somewhere. It is said Deho devalaya proktho jivo devah 
sanathanah (the body is a temple and the indweller is 
God). The real temple for God is the body itself. God 
is installed in the temple of our heart. That is why it is 
given the name of hridaya. hrid + daya = hridaya. It is 
only when you cultivate compassion in your heart, it 
can be called hridaya. Therefore, cultivate the quality 
of compassion. Whatever service you undertake with 
a compassionate heart, it becomes sanctified. Consider 
every human being as a living divinity. God is present 
everywhere. Forgetting such an omnipresent divinity, we 
are hankering after petty and trivial bodily pleasures. The 
fact, however, is that we can never attain real happiness 
with the body. This body has several limitations. With 
such a body, you can never attain limitless ananda. 
(bliss). 


The body is made up of five elements and is bound 
to perish sooner or later; but the Indweller has 
neither birth nor death. The Indweller has no 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 7 


attachment whatsoever and is the eternal witness. 
Truly speaking, the Indweller who is in the form 
of the atma is verily God Himself. 

(Telugu poem) 


You must be able to recognise such a divine atma. 
Today, we are worshipping idols and pictures, thinking 
that God is somewhere in the outside world. But, God 
is very much present in the human being. That is why 
our ancient rishis have proclaimed, Daivam manusha 
rupena (God incarnates in the form of a human being). 
Of what use is it to worship unseen God, while at 
the same time causing suffering to the living beings 
around us? Every human being you come across is an 
embodiment of divinity. No purpose will be served by 
worshipping the idols and pictures, forgetting the living 
gods in front of us. Therefore, give less importance to 
such indirect methods of worshipping God. Consider the 
human being standing in front of you as an embodiment 
of divinity. Even if you come across your worst enemy, 
say, ‘hello’ to him lovingly. Address him as brother. 
Then, he will also respond by saying, ‘hello brother’. 
On the other hand, if you hate him and start scolding 
him, he will reciprocate the same thing to you. Respect 
every individual and you will be respected. Man, today 
expects others to respect him; but he will not respect 
others. If you do not respect others, how can you expect 
others to respect you? Manava (human being) means an 
individual deserving respect. Since you are born as ahuman 
being, give respect and take respect. This is the quality you 


8 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


have to cultivate today. When you respect others, others 
will also respect you. When you offer your pranams to 
somebody, to whom does it go actually? You are not 
merely offering pranams to the physical body consisting 
of the five elements. It reaches in fact the indweller in 
that human body who is none other than God. Now, what 
is the nature of this body? 


This body is a den of dirt, and prone to diseases; 
it is subject to change from time to time; it cannot 
cross the ocean of Samsara. It is nothing but a 
structure of bones. Oh mind! Do not be under 
the delusion that body is permanent. Instead take 
refuge at the Divine Lotus Feet. 

(Telugu poem) 


What can you achieve by relying on such a body? 
Itis only sin that you accumulate. You should sustain the 
body for the purpose of serving others. You have taken 
upon this human body only for the purpose of serving 
your fellow human beings. Develop firm conviction in 
that truth. What happiness do you derive with the body? 
In fact, nothing. Whatever pleasures you enjoy with the 
help of this human body will have to be left along with 
the body in a trice one day or the other. Should you have 
to undergo so many trials and tribulations for the sake 
of these momentary pleasures? You have to respect the 
Jiva in the human body. That is the real Daiva seva 
(service to God). You have to dedicate your body to such 
service. If you do that, every minute of your life is fresh 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 9 


and new. Every day is a festival day. On the other hand, 
if you undertake service once in a year, that is not real 
service. Your deha (body) is mrinmaya (made up of five 
elements). The divinity residing as indweller therein is 
Chinmaya (consciousness). Therefore, rely on such a 
divinity and earn salvation. 


An Ideal Son Of A Noble Mother 


You all know about Abraham Lincoln. He used 
to go to school in the company of wealthy boys, in his 
childhood. Those boys were wearing costly clothes and 
ornaments. Lincoln, however, had to go to school with 
worn out clothes that were mended by his mother. One 
day, his friends made fun of his poor dress. He could not 
control himself. He went straight to his mother crying 
and told her, “Mother! I will not attend school hereafter. 
My classmates are making fun of me. They are looking 
down upon me as a poor boy unable to wear decent 
dress.” Then, the mother took him into her arms lovingly 
and consoled him saying, “My dear son! You need not 
feel sorry for such a trivial issue. All this is going to help 
you in your future life. You keep our family condition 
in view. Do not give credence to what others say. Lead 
a life of self-confidence and self-respect. Respect every 
individual and be respected by every individual.” From 
that day onwards, Lincoln put his mother’s advice into 
practice and started respecting everybody. He used to be 
courteous with even a cobbler saying “Sir! How sacred 
is your life! You are doing great service by stitching 


10 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


sandals for us so that our feet are protected from thorns”. 
Gradually, Abraham Lincoln could command respect 
from all people by his good behaviour. He earned a 
very good name for himself. After sometime, elections 
were held in America. He was persuaded by his friends 
and well-wishers to contest the elections. He expressed 
his inability saying, “I am a poor man. Who will vote 
for me? I do not want these positions and power”. 
Today, Indians are spending crores of rupees to contest 
elections, but refuse to part with even a rupee as alms 
to a beggar. 


The good words taught by Lincoln’s mother made 
a lasting impression on his mind. He started respecting 
every individual. He used to speak courteously with 
everybody. As a result he earned a very good name for 
himself. At last, he bowed to the wishes of his friends 
and well-wishers and contested the elections. He scored 
a spectacular victory and was elected the President 
of the United States of America. Then, he went to 
his mother and said “Mother! I am able to 
rise to this exalted position and command the respect of 
the people of America, because of your noble teachings 
those days”. 


It is the mother that is responsible for the children 
earning reputation and fame. If children wish to earn 
good name, they should obey the command of their 
mother. That is why, the Veda has conferred the supreme 
position on the mother and father and declared Matru 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 ll 


devo bhava, Pithru devo bhava ( Mother is God, Father 
is God) . The mother is like the body and the father, the 
atma. Hence, we have to respect our father and mother. 
Then, we can earn any amount of respect. Abraham 
Lincoln could earn great name and fame and become the 
president of America, only on account of his respect for 
his mother. What do the children earn today? Nothing. 
They simply waste the money earned by their parents. 
They bring bad name to their parents. This is not what 
the children are expected to do. They should properly 
utilise the money given by their parents. In fact, every 
drop of your blood is the contribution of your parents. 
You owe your existence in this world to the love of 
your parents. Hence, whenever there is a need for blood 
donation, you should come forward to donate your 
blood. Thereby fulfil your obligation to your parents 
and society. Do not ever work for your selfish interests. 
In fact, selfishness and self-interest are the main causes 
degrading the human being. You might have heard 
about Winston Churchill, the former Prime Minister of 
England. He once declared “man has conquered all, but 
not conquered himself’. 


Good Qualities Only Can Confer Peace 


Children should cultivate good habits and good 
qualities and reach good position in life. Thus, they 
should bring good name to their parents. You can earn 
good name not by money, but by sterling character. No 
matter how wealthy a person is, his reputation will be 


12 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


tarnished if his character is not good. A wealthy person 
may be living in a great mansion and enjoying the 
luxuries of life; but, he will not have peace of mind and 
happiness. People crave to earn more and more money. 
But, of what use is the money they earn? They waste 
all their money in worthless things. One has to utilise 
the money earned by him for undertaking good and 
beneficial activities for the society. He should conduct 
himself with good behaviour and good habits. Only then 
will he have real peace in life. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Today, everyone is literally crying for peace. 
But, what is this peace? It is in you itself. You are 
most sacred souls. Love is within you. Peace is within 
you. Unfortunately, today you are losing the peace 
and happiness that is within you and craving to earn 
something in the outside world. You want to earn 
great wealth and build big mansions. Devoid of good 
qualities, all the wealth that you earn becomes mere 
waste. Therefore, cultivate good qualities. There can 
be no greater wealth in the world than good qualities. 
The more you exercise good qualities, the more you 
accumulate. They will never exhaust. 


Embodiments of Divine Atma! 


Prepare yourself for sacrifices. You will find 
eternal bliss only in sacrifice. One who does not make 
sacrifice will not find peace anywhere. People of every 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 13 


country in this world pray for peace chanting ‘Santhi, 
Santhi, Santhi’ But do they get peace? No. They are 
engulfed in disappointment and despair. Therefore one 
should develop faith in the truth that the eternal Lord is 
always with us. How can you obtain peace by ignoring 
the Divinity immanent in you and worshipping some 
unseen God? 


Embodiments of Love! 


Share your education and wealth with your fellow 
human beings. In fact, God is the real owner of the 
wealth acquired by you. The money you earn belongs to 
God’s Trust. God Himself is the President of the Trust. 
Keep your trust on God and make proper utilisation 
of your money. Do not hanker after money and other 
forms of wealth. Constantly contemplate on God. You 
need not have to go to the forest or caves in the hills 
in search of God. He is always with you. Develop that 
faith and win over demonic qualities. Today, wherever 
you see, demonic qualities and violence are rampant. 
People do not hesitate to acquire wealth by sinful ways. 
What ultimately comes along with you at the time of 
leaving the body is the sin or merit you have accumulated 
and not the wealth you have acquired. Share at least a 
morsel of food you eat, with others. Help yourself and 
help others. This is the greatest sadhana. In fact, it is 
so easy to practise. Leaving aside this simple sadhana 
and forgetting the noble quality of love, you are going in 
search of peace in the wide world. Is it not foolishness 


14 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


on your part? 
Embodiments of Love! 
Cultivate Love And Brotherhood 


Develop the quality of love. Do not hate anybody. 
Develop the faith that whatever happens is for your 
own good. Whenever you encounter any difficulty or 
suffering, you alone are responsible for it. Respect others. 
That alone will protect you. On the other hand, if you 
insult somebody that will punish you. Pleasure or pain, 
they are the products of your own making. The merit or 
sin committed by you will follow you like a shadow. Man 
today is giving sermons to others. But he himself 1s not 
following his precepts. What values such teachings will 
have? All this is mere deception. Whatever teachings 
you may read or listen to, can never help you if you 
do not put them into practice. Help your fellow human 
beings at least in a small measure. That alone will help 
you. Do not blame others for the difficulties you face. 
Do not ever abuse others. Love all. Treat all people 
as your brothers and sisters. Cultivate the feeling of 
brotherhood of man and fatherhood of God. 


Embodiments of Love! 


The Bharatiyas are really fortunate. They have all 
facilities. But the quality of love is missing in them. If 
only they cultivate love, none can excel them. Therefore, 
enhance your honour and prestige by cultivating the quality 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 15 


of love. Follow the twin principles of Sathya and Dharma 
with love. Love alone can protect you. 


Embodiments of Love! 


What for are you given the hands? Is it for 
feeding the mouth? No, no. You have to sing the glory 
of God with your tongue. The hands are given to you 
for the purpose of keeping the beat in accordance with 
the tune. Bharatiyas are those who worship God with 
Bhava (feeling) Raga (the tune) and Thala (the beat). 
The syllable ‘Bha’ also stands for bhakti (devotion) ‘Ra’ 
for Raga (tune) and ‘Tha’ for Thyaga (sacrifice). You 
have to sing the glory of the Lord combining these three 
aspects. They alone are the real Bharathiyas. Every 
individual born in the country of Bharat is sanctified. We 
do not need heaven. Let’s participate in seva chanting 
the divine name. There can be no greater wealth than 
this. Why should we suffer when we have such a great 
wealth with us? Consider all your education and the 
service you undertake as God’s work. The Gitacharya 
has given a clarion call, Sarvadharman parithyajya 
Mamekam saranam vraja (surrender unto Me all your 
activities and seek refuge in Me alone). Hence, dedicate 
all your activities to God. Only then will you attain peace 
in every possible way. 


[New Year Day, 1-1-2004, Prasanthi Nilayam] 


2 


Respect For Parents - 
The Greatest Virtue 


The sun shines serene and gentle. The brief 
daylight is softly wafting the cool wind. The fields 
are ripe with golden crops. Marigold flowers 
are blossoming like garlands of pearls on the 
banks of rivers. The farmers are rejoicing and 
singing. The ripened chillies are colouring fields 
with vestments of bright red. The sweet festival 
of Sankranti has come, filling our homes with the 
freshly harvested grains of cereals and pulses. 
(Telugu poem) 


F ALL the festivals, the imminent 
Sankranti is the most important. It is the day 
on which the farmers bring home the harvested crop, 
feed the poor and rejoice. On this day, the Vedic scholars 
get up during the sacred Brahmamuhurtha time and 


18s Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


chant the Vedic mantras, purifying the hearts of one and 
all. This festival has a special significance also for the 
householders. They invite their newly married sons-in- 
law to their house, present them with new clothes and 
the entire house abounds with joy. In this context, there 
is a folk song in Telugu: 


A Festival Heralding Plenty And Joy 


As Sankranti is the festival of festivals, 

Oh newly married bridegroom, visit your 
in-laws’ house, 

Come, spend your time in fun and frolic with 

your brothers-in-law 
and sisters-in-law, 

The entire household and the neighbourhood 
will honour you with love and affection. 


It is also an occasion when the bullocks are decorated 
elaborately and taken to various houses in the village. 
The bullocks are worshipped and fed sumptuously as an 
expression of gratitude for all the hard work they do in 
the fields. Even the bovine members of the household 
are feted, a symbolic marriage is performed between a 
pair of bull and cow, naming them as Rama and Sita. 
They are taken along the streets and made to dance to 
the delight of everyone. In this manner, the festival 
of Sankranti bestows great joy and auspiciousness on 
farmers, householders, priests and children. Not only the 
human beings, even the birds and animals rejoice with 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 19 


the arrival of the sacred Sankranti festival. At sunset, it 
is a wonderful sight to see the birds flying back to their 
nests chatting merrily and loudly in their own language 
filling the air with a joyous hum. It is an equally delightful 
sight to see the cows rushing back from the grazing fields 
to feed their young ones and the young ones craving for 
the caresses of their mothers, mooing loudly. Sankranti 
festival is so sweet and endearing to one and all. Cool 
winds, mellifluous bird songs and the sweet sugarcane 
crops herald the arrival of Sankranti. People celebrate 
this festival by distributing sweets and rice puddings. 
This festival drives away all disappointments and despair 
and fills our hearts with hope and enthusiasm. People get 
up early in the morning, have a sacred bath and worship 
their chosen deities, such as, Ganapati, Subrahmanya 
and Lord Easwara. The divine form of Lord Siva is 
described thus: 


The Lord of Kailasa has manifested His Divine 
form with the crescent moon adorning His head, 
the cool water of the Ganga flowing between the 
matted locks, with His radiant eye in the middle 
of the forehead and the purple neck gleaming 
like the sheen of a blackberry. He wears serpent 
bracelets and a snake belt, His entire body is 
smeared with Vibhuti, His forehead is adorned 
with a kumkum dot, His ruddy lips glow with the 
Juice of the betel, diamond-studded gold earrings 
dangle from His ears and His whole swarthy body 


20 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


glows with divine effulgence. 
(Telugu poem) 


However, nowadays people are not celebrating 
Sankranti in its true spirit. Their celebration is confined 
to mere performance of rituals. They lack purity and 
sanctity. They are unable to enjoy the bliss of Sankranti 
because of hatred, jealousy and conflicts. 


On this auspicious occasion of Sankranti, children 
aged 5 years are initiated into the process of learning 
with the chanting of sacred Vedic mantras. Our ancient 
sages declared, Vedahametham Purusham mahantham 
Aditvavarnam thamasah parasthath (1 have visualised 
the Supreme Being who shines with the effulgence of 
a billion suns and who is beyond thamas - the darkness 
of ignorance). The Vedas have extolled the Supreme 
Being in manifold ways. The Rig Veda contains mantras 
extolling God and His blissful form which attracts one 
and all. 


People address their bullocks with names such as 
Ramudu, Bhimudu, etc. Similarly, cows are named after 
Sita, Gowri, Lakshmi, etc. The inner meaning of this 
is that even animals are treated with the same concern 
and care as human beings. They decorate the cows and 
bullocks with saris and dhotis and take them out in a 
procession. 


These days only birds and animals lead their lives 
in accordance with their natural qualities. So, they are 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 21 


able to enjoy happiness. On the other hand, man has 
forgotten his true nature and is behaving like an animal. 
Consequently, he is leading a miserable life. Birds and 
animals are better than men in the sense they live in 
unity and harmony. But due to the impact of modern 
education, man has degenerated to the level of a beast. 
He has lost the virtues of honesty and integrity. Birds 
and animals have a reason and a season, but man has 
no reason or season. In every house and in every human 
endeavour, money is given utmost priority. People are 
ready to stoop down to any level for the sake of money. 
Animals are satisfied once their hunger is satiated, but 
man has no sense of satisfaction. The more he earns, the 
greedier he becomes. 


When a dog is sick, it does not eat food. If you have 
a pet dog, you might have observed this. Even if you 
pour milk into its mouth by force, it refuses to drink. It 
likes to remain on empty stomach. But man observes 
no such restraint with regard to diet when he is sick. He 
wants to take complete rest when there is only a mild 
rise in his temperature. He covers himself from head 
to foot and lies down on his bed. However, he gives 
no rest to his stomach nor does he observe proper diet 
restrictions even when he runs high temperature. He likes 
to eat sweets like Mysorepak, Burfi, Gulab Jamoon, etc., 
which will only aggravate his sickness. Man is behaving 
like an animal and animals are behaving like humans! 
When a person misbehaves, the elders reprimand him 


22 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


saying, “Why do you behave like an animal?” Due to 
the impact of modern education, man has lost morality 
and integrity and has become worse than an animal. 
He is acquiring high academic qualifications like B.A. 
and M.A. But what is the use? He is adding the letter 
‘D’ (dirty qualities) to his qualification and becoming 
‘BAD’ and ‘MAD’. This type of perverted behaviour 
is unbecoming of a human being. Man should develop 
good thoughts, good qualities and good character. On 
the contrary, he is taking to wrong ways to earn money. 
Money comes and goes, morality comes and grows. 
But man is selling morality in the market for the sake 
of money. 


Embodiments of Love! 
Resolve To Start A New Life 


At least from this Sankranti day, make efforts to 
cultivate good qualities. Let there be a change in your 
behaviour for the better. The festivals of Bharatiyas 
are meant to impart sacred teachings and transform 
human behaviour. They are not meant to merely eat, 
drink and make merry. First of all, there should be 
transformation at the individual level. There should be 
unity in the family. In olden days, people used to live 
in joint families. The young couples would live with 
their parents, in-laws and other elders of the family in 
harmony. Whenever there was any difference of opinion 
between the couple, the elders in the family would give 
proper guidance and pacify them. The daughters-in-law 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 23 


would implicitly follow the advice of their in-laws. As 
a result, there never used to be any chance for conflicts 
in the family. But the modern trend is such that the 
daughter-in-law does not want to live in the house of her 
in-laws. She wants the family to be divided. Because of 
such divisive mentality, conflicts in the family are on the 
rise. Consequently, Kali Yuga has become Kalaha Yuga 
(age of conflicts) and Kalmasha Yuga (age of pollution). 
People in those days talked always in a pleasing manner. 
They would welcome the guests wholeheartedly by 
exchanging pleasant feelings like “How are you? Please 
have your food with us, etc.” More than the food, it was 
the warmth and affection of the host that appeased the 
hunger of the guest. But nowadays, even on a festival 
day, people do not like to entertain guests. When they 
find a guest entering their house, they greet him with the 
remark, “Please come, hope you have already had your 
lunch; please be seated.” Man has become so narrow- 
minded that he does not want to offer even a morsel of 
food to the guests. Such being the sorry state of affairs, 
how can you expect the children to be ideal citizens? Due 
to the influence of parents, even children are becoming 
narrow-minded. Parents want them to acquire modern 
education and earn a lot of money. In order to get the 
children educated in expensive prestigious schools, even 
the mother has to take up a job. The children are left to 
the care of ayas (female attendants). Consequently, the 
children are unable to experience the love of the mother. 
They shed tears when the aya dies, but not when the 


24 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


mother passes away. The children should be brought up 
under the loving care of the mother. They should listen to 
her sacred teachings. Otherwise, how can they come up 
in life? Modern education cannot redeem man’s life. 


One may have acquired high academic 
qualifications such as B.A. and M.A. and 
attained name and fame, 

One may have all the wealth and one may do 
acts of charity and earn merit and good 
reputation, 

One may have all the physical strength and lead 
a long and healthy life, 

One may be a Vipra (Brahmin) who teaches the 
Vedas and performs spiritual practices such 
as penance and meditation, 

But none of them can be equal to the devotee of 
the Lord. 

(Telugu poem) 


Education Must Transform 


What is this education? It is only leading to 
agitation. People are only acquiring degrees, but are 
not broadening their mind. True education is that which 
brings about transformation of the heart. There should 
be expansion of love. But, the present-day education 
system is leading to narrow-mindedness. People are 
highly egoistic of their academic qualifications. They 
have given up morality and integrity, the very essence 
of Indian culture. Without the virtue of honesty, how can 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 25 


one attain ananda (bliss)? How can education bereft of 
morality redeem your life? Today the students are going 
to countries like America, Japan, Germany, etc., as soon 
as they complete their studies. When the parents go all 
the way to spend their time with their children, they are 
asked to have their food in restaurants. Modern educated 
people are not so fortunate as to serve food to their 
parents with their own hands. They do not show gratitude 
to their parents who have brought them up with love and 
care. This is the worst sin. You should look after your 
parents well. You should take care of their needs in their 
advanced age and protect them with love and concern. 
Today, when parents become old, the children demand 
a share of their property. They are interested in property 
but not in developing a proper mind. They do not hesitate 
to go even to the Supreme Court to settle their property 
disputes. Instead, one should strive to attain the Supreme 
State by cultivating virtues. The more one is educated, 
the more virtuous one should become. 


Dear Students! 


Just now you have seen Me calling an American boy. 
This boy is studying in our institution. Simultaneously, 
he is also learning Veda. In whichever portion of the Veda 
you question him, he will be able to chant the concerned 
mantra beautifully. In fact, it is the good fortune of the 
parents to have such children. It is only because of such 
parents, children are able to cultivate good qualities. 
This boy’s parents are living in America, yet they have 


26 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


admitted him in our Institute which is far away from 
their native place to enable him to learn good qualities 
and good behaviour. In fact, they have all the facilities 
available in America to educate their son there itself. But, 
they did not want to educate their son in America. They 
love our country and the noble qualities that the children 
imbibe here. Here the children learn education coupled 
with love. The children prostrate before their parents 
with respect and reverence. Such noble qualities have 
impressed these parents and therefore they have brought 
their son to pursue his education in our institution. 


Here is a small example. There was one Hindi 
Pandit who was reputed for his literary skills. His two 
sons were studying in Allahabad, while he and his wife 
lived in a small town. One day he and his wife had to go 
by train on a visit to another town and they had to pass 
through Allahabad. He wrote to his sons to come and 
meet them at the station on that particular date. 


The train halted at the station and the parents stood 
at the door of the carriage. They saw their sons hurrying 
towards them. The elder one touched the feet of both the 
parents before talking to them, while the younger son 
did not show such respect and reverence. The parents 
enquired about their health and studies. The elder son 
said, “We are fine here. Please take care of your health. 
Your happiness is our happiness.” On the other hand, 
the younger son did not enquire about their health at 
all. He asked for more money. As the train was about 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 27 


to start, once again the elder one bent and touched the 
feet of his parents while the younger one just waved his 
hand. As the train was leaving the platform, the parents 
were watching their sons through the window. The elder 
one was offering his namaskar till the end, whereas the 
younger son was keeping his hands in the pocket and 
looking somewhere with a callous attitude. 


The mother became worried seeing the behaviour 
of the younger son. She blamed her husband for the 
reckless behaviour of the younger son. She said, “You 
have kept him away from us for the sake of his education. 
He is behaving like an animal as there is no one to guide 
him properly.” The father pacified her saying, “After 
all, he is young, he will learn and improve in course of 
time.” But, the mother could not come to a compromise 
and said, “He is already doing his degree course, if not 
now when will he learn?” Unable to control her feelings, 
she shed tears. 


The mother’s words proved to be true. In course of 
time the elder son, by virtue of his diligence and good 
behaviour, attained a high position in society. He was very 
much respected for his manners and sense of courtesy. 
He prostrated before his parents and said, “It is because 
of your blessings that I have come up in life.” The parents 
shed tears of joy and blessed him profusely, “Son, it is 
because of your virtues that you have attained an exalted 
position in life.” What happened to the younger son? He 
could not fare well in the examinations and ultimately 


28 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


had to be contented with a clerical job. While the elder 
one received salutations from everyone, the younger 
son had to salute everyone. How can one who does not 
respect his parents be respected by others? Yad bhavam 
tad bhavati (as is the feeling, so is the result). Our 
future depends upon our present behaviour. In Western 
countries today, they give respect and take respect. But 
this quality is becoming extinct in our country. When 
you do not respect your own parents, even dogs would 
not care to look at you. Therefore, wherever you go, you 
should never forget to respect your parents. The Vedas in 
our country have also exhorted, Matru Devo bhava, Pitru 
Devo bhava, Acharya Devo bhava, Atithi Devo bhava 
(revere your mother, father, preceptor and guest as God). 
Thus, they promoted noble qualities by their exhortation. 
Whoever respects his parents and obeys their commands 
will certainly reach high positions in life. In fact, the 
festival of Sankranti exhorts us to cultivate such noble 
qualities. ‘Kranti’ means transformation. Therefore, 
Sankranti is supposed to bring about a transformation 
in our lives. But, how are we reacting to this? Are we 
able to achieve transformation in our life? No. The 
purpose of our education is to remove the bad qualities 
and cultivate good qualities and good behaviour. This 
is what the festivals in India are meant for. But nobody 
realises the inner meanings of these festivals. 


Revere Your Parents First 


Embodiments of Love! Students! 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 29 


Your parents are struggling hard to feed you, 
educate you and bring you up in life. Even if they have 
to starve, they would somehow try to feed you and look 
after your welfare. They always struggle to keep you in 
good mood and good condition. They give you good 
food, good clothing and good education. If you do not 
respect such parents, how do you expect to be respected 
by society? 


You all know about Abraham Lincoln. He used 
to go to school in the company of wealthy boys, in his 
childhood. Those boys were wearing costly clothes and 
ornaments. Lincoln, however, had to go to school with 
worn-out clothes that were mended by his mother. One 
day, his friends made fun of his poor dress. He could not 
control himself. He went straight to his mother crying and 
told her, “Mother! I will not attend school hereafter. My 
classmates are making fun of me. They are looking down 
upon me as a poor boy unable to wear decent dress.” 
Then, the mother took him into her arms lovingly and 
consoled him saying, “My dear son! You need not feel 
sorry for such a trivial issue. All this is going to help you 
in your future life. You must keep our family condition 
in view. Do not give attention to what others say. Lead 
a life of self-confidence and self-respect. Respect every 
individual and be respected by every individual.” From 
that day onwards, Lincoln put his mother’s advice into 
practice and started respecting everybody. Gradually, 
Abraham Lincoln could command respect from all 
people by his good behaviour. He earned a very good 


30 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


name for himself. After sometime, elections were held 
in America. He was persuaded by his friends and well- 
wishers to contest the elections. At last, he bowed to the 
wishes of his friends and well-wishers and contested 
the elections. He won the elections with a thumping 
majority and was elected President of the United States 
of America in due course of time. He attained such an 
exalted position because he implicitly followed the 
advice of his mother and respected everybody. Truly 
speaking, he did not have much money, but he had the 
wealth of virtues. He was happy at the prosperity of 
others. He was contented with what he had and did not 
crave for money and material possessions. Because of 
such noble qualities, he rose to become the President 
of America. During his tenure, he passed a decree for 
abolishing slavery of black Africans in America thereby 
putting an end to their inhuman suffering. 


It is self-respect that protects man and takes him 
to an exalted position. You may be poor financially, but 
if you uphold your self-respect, you will be respected 
by all. Do not look down upon the poor. Respect them 
and treat them with love. That is the true human nature. 
Lincoln’s mother inculcated such noble qualities in her 
son. That is why Lincoln considered his mother as God 
and revered her. Whoever inculcates sacred qualities in 
you is your God. He is not to be sought after somewhere 
else. When you develop self-respect, He will manifest 
right in front of you. 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 31 


Dear Students! 


You must respect your parents, whoever they may 
be and in whatever condition they may be. You must 
respect their words and obey their commands, without 
any reservation. Then only you will be able to command 
respect from society. All the great people in yesteryears 
did obey and respect their parents and set an example to 
the world. Do you know the underlying meaning of the 
ancient customs and traditions of Bharat? For example, 
they used to build big mansions with small doors. Do 
you know why? We think that these small doors were to 
prevent thieves from entering the houses and escaping 
with ease. No, that was not the reason. These doors were 
purposely kept low to enable the visitors to observe 
the custom of entering the houses with their heads 
bent in reverence to the inmates. Thus, every custom 
and tradition of Bharat were meant to promote mutual 
respect and goodwill among people. It was established 
with great care and wisdom. But, even the Bharatiyvas 
have forgotten such noble traditions. Nowadays you will 
not find even a ‘gadapa’ (threshold) to the door frame 
of the main entrance to the house. They think that the 
threshold is an unnecessary hindrance to enter the house. 
No, it is not a hindrance at all! The ancient traditions 
and customs of Bharat are meant to promote humility, 
respect and reverence among people. 


Dear Students! 


32 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


Let Humility Be Your Badge 


You must learn and observe such great traditions 
and command the respect of people. You must bring joy 
to your parents, by your behaviour. The parents must feel 
happy that their children are obeying them. It is enough 
if you earn such a good name. God’s grace cannot 
be obtained by performing mere rituals like worship. 
However highly qualified you are, it will only promote 
ego, but not humility and respect towards parents and 
elders. Therefore, you must cultivate the qualities of 
humility, respect and reverence. Then only you will 
become good citizens of the country. It is not necessary 
that you should become great. It is enough if you become 
good citizens. Name and fame come today, but may be 
lost tomorrow. But, the good name acquired will last 
forever. Therefore, earn a good name. We must earn the 
‘grace’ of God. But, contrary to this, people are craving 
for the ‘grass’ of worldly desires. Grass is something that 
is consumed by the cattle. You should not become cattle 
by developing a taste for grass. You must strive to earn 
God’s grace and thus become good individuals. 


Dear Students! 


These are the sacred days of the festival of 
Sankranti. On this occasion, we must cultivate the 
quality of giving respect to others and taking respect. 
I am giving you a small example here. (Swami called 
the American boy, a student of Sri Sathya Sai Higher 
Secondary School, and said), “This boy is securing first 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 33 


class not only in studies but also in the study of Vedas. 
He has given immense joy to his parents with his good 
behaviour. His father is very happy that his son has 
earned a very good name and is appreciated by one and 
all.” (Swami called his father to the dais and showered 
His blessings on him.) This boy’s mother is working in 
our Primary School and spending her time blissfully. 
The boy’s parents have earned the love and respect of 
all because of his exemplary behaviour. In this manner, 
every one of you should strive to bring good name to 
your parents. Only then will your parents experience 
the real joy of begetting you as their son. You may earn 
a lot of money and build big mansions, but they cannot 
bring you good name. They are temporary. Once you 
earn good reputation, it will remain with you forever. 
Bring good name to the institution in which you have 
studied. Observing your noble qualities, people should 
be able to recognise you as Sathya Sai’s Students. You 
are aware that we are not charging even a paisa from 
our students. Further, I am also providing books and 
other facilities for the needy and deserving students. The 
students have immense love for Swami and Swami also 
showers His love and grace on them. Even while leaving 
their parents and coming here, they do not shed tears. 
But when I go to Brindavan and return to Puttaparthi, 
the students in Brindavan start shedding tears unable 
to bear the separation from Me. How did they acquire 
such intense love? It is Swami’s love that is responsible 
for this. It is only the love that I disseminate to all. 


34 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


My property does not comprise mansions and palatial 
buildings. Love is My biggest property. I am giving 
My love and receiving your love in return. I often tell the 
students, “Give Me your love, I will give you whatever 
you want.” That is why the students have such intense 
love for Me. Develop love more and more. Love your 
parents. Obey their command. Your lives will certainly 
be sanctified. 


Think of God always. Wherever you are, in the 
forest or in the sky, in the village or in the city, on the 
hilltop or in the middle of the deep sea, love alone can 
come to your rescue. It is always with you, in you, around 
you, above you and below you. 


Chaala Santhosham (very happy). 


[Sankranti Eve, 12-1-2004, Prasanthi Nilayam] 


Character Is The Goal Of Education 


Students, Boys and Girls! 


HE present Vice Chancellor, the former Vice 

Chancellor, the Secretary of the Central 
Trust and two students have made excellent speeches 
in beautiful vocabulary. In this vast world, wherever 
you see, you find most wonderful and joyful events 
that awaken your inner being and fill your heart with 
immense bliss. Our students also have developed 
great skill, intelligence and expertise in the fields of 
sports, games and music and demonstrated their talents 
giving joy to one and all. Whatever be the activity 
they undertake, they do it to please Swami and not for 
temporary happiness. 


Education Must Develop Inner Vision 


Right from the time of birth, all activities of man 


36 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


are centred round the process of learning and acquiring 
wisdom. It is absolutely necessary to teach the spirit of 
idealism to our students so that they fill their hearts with 
love and give happiness to one and all. Today, there are 
a number of educational institutions all over the world, 
but, nobody seems to have understood what education 
really means. Students fill their heads with mere bookish 
knowledge, write examinations, secure pass marks and 
claim that they are educated. 


In spite of his education and intelligence, a 
foolish man will not know his true Self and a 
mean-minded person will not give up his evil 
qualities. (Telugu poem) 


Modern education leads only to argumentation, 
not to total wisdom. What is the use of acquiring 
education which cannot lead you to immortality? 
Acquire the knowledge that will make you 
immortal. 

(Telugu poem) 


Vidya means Jnana (wisdom). Jnana does not 
mean worldly intelligence. True education is that 
which develops inner vision and makes you experience 
everlasting bliss. In what way are the students benefited 
by the present educational system? They are merely 
acquiring degrees and earning the appreciation of 
the authorities, but they do not understand the real 
significance of education. Modern students are unable to 
realise the true spirit behind their participating in sports 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 37 


and cultural events. In all events of sports and games, 
you have a winner and also a loser. People are interested 
only in the outcome of the events and not in enjoying 
the spirit of sports. The aim of sports and games is not 
to produce a decisive result but to inculcate the spirit of 
sportsmanship in the participants. Life is a game, play 
it. Life is a dream, realise it. Life is love, enjoy it. It is 
only he who understands the import of these statements 
and realises them in his daily life is a true student. 


Modern system of education, instead of developing 
the power of discrimination in students, is making them 
narrow-minded. It neither bestows true wisdom nor does 
it help them to become broad-minded. The present-day 
education has become meaningless. The textbooks that 
are prescribed for students do not contain the essence 
of true education. I wonder why the government 
promotes such meaningless textbooks! May be, even 
the government is unaware of the realities. It appears 
as though someone at some low level is taking these 
decisions without consulting the higher authorities. It 
is bringing a bad name to the government, but nobody 
seems to be concerned about it. Such an unhealthy 
trend is on the rise. Nobody is making efforts to 
understand the sacredness associated with the ancient 
system of education. Students are interested only in 
bookish knowledge, not in the essence of education. 
Only their textual knowledge is tested, but not practical 
knowledge. Students think that degrees are meant to 
earn a livelihood. Education is for life, not for a living. 


38 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


But neither the students nor the parents realise this truth. 
Parents are happy if their children score high marks in 
their examinations. They are not bothered about the heap 
of bad remarks their children get. If only they care to 
look into the remarks, they will truly understand the type 
of education that their children are receiving. Due to the 
advancement in modern education, the study of Vedas 
and Sastras has declined. In this situation, how can the 
present education confer true wisdom on you? 


Parents And Teacher Should Be More Responsible 
Students! 


You should acquire such education which will be 
beneficial to the society and the world at large. What is 
the present state of society? In what way can we make it 
ideal? How should one work for the advancement of the 
society? Nobody seems to think on these lines. Even the 
present system of education does not lay emphasis on 
service to society. If someone talks about reforms in the 
system of education, the students just brush it aside. They 
think that textual knowledge is the be-all and end-all of 
education. The elders should take up the responsibility 
to give proper education to students. Students should 
uphold the honour of the society. We should follow 
the teachings of our ancient sages and seers who have 
given us the true meaning of education. It is a sign of 
foolishness to become egoistic by merely acquiring a few 
degrees. You should understand the needs of society and 
utilise your education for its progress. People say they 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 39 


are serving the society, but without really understanding 
what the requirements of the society are. Such service 
is not samaja seva (social service), but samadhi seva, 
meaning a lifeless, mechanical activity. Society will 
progress only when the system of education is set right. 
As the craze for Western education has increased, the 
study of vedic texts is being neglected. Parents should 
teach their children what is good and what is bad right 
from their childhood. They should not be satisfied 
merely by securing admission in a college and acquiring 
a degree by their children. They should ensure that 
their children utilise their education to serve the nation. 
The government may not be able to do much in this 
regard; it is the responsibility of the parents to guide 
their children on proper lines. They should encourage 
the children to work for the progress of the nation. But 
nowadays, parents do not have such broad-mindedness. 
Even teachers are not interested in the welfare of the 
nation. They feel that their responsibility ends with 
imparting bookish knowledge to students. They do not 
even enquire whether the information contained in the 
textbooks is beneficial to society or not. They do not 
take up the matter with the government. Even if they do 
take it up, the government is not responsive. They are 
changing educational institutions into factories which 
produce degree holders. Students alone are not to be 
blamed for this state of affairs. Parents, teachers and the 
government are equally responsible for this dismal state 
of affairs. It is not enough if students secure high ranks 


40 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


in the class and earn a good name. They should work 
for the progress of the society and the nation and thus 
bring a good name to parents. Parents should monitor the 
progress of their children from time to time, inculcate 
virtues in them and mould them into responsible citizens. 
They should not rest satisfied if their children get good 
marks. They should also observe what type of books 
they read at home. Some students read meaningless 
novels. But the parents do not bother to correct them. 
On the other hand, they say, “What is wrong in reading 
novels? It is enough if they are happy.” In this manner, 
they spoil their own children. They do not care to observe 
how their children behave in their absence. There is no 
point in merely educating the children without correcting 
their behaviour. Parents should emulate the ideals of our 
forefathers who brought up their children in the most 
ideal way. 


Students Be Provided A Blend Of Secular And 
Spiritual Education 


Embodiments of Love! 


The modern system of education needs reforms. 
Parents today take pride that their children are studying 
in English medium schools and are able to recite English 
poems. They fail to understand what type of impact and 
influence this modern education has on their children. 
The tiny tots in kindergarten are taught nursery rhymes 
like “Ba ... Ba ... Black Sheep”. Because of such 
education, the children are ultimately becoming black 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 41 


sheep themselves. I am really pained and disgusted 
watching the present-day system of education which 
is totally spoiling the lives of students. That is why 
I have established educational institutions spending 
crores of rupees to mould the character of students. I am 
providing even textbooks free of cost to the students. In 
the present-day world, the situation is so bad that even 
for admission to a primary school one has to register 
well in advance paying thousands of rupees as donation. 
Parents are happy if their wards get admission in what 
they consider good schools, but they do not bother 
about the benefit that would accrue on account of such 
an educational system. The children do not appreciate 
the privations the parents have to undergo for educating 
them. Parents take loans and even forgo proper food and 
sleep to educate their children. Ultimately, the children 
do not benefit out of this system of education. They are 
unable to understand what is good and what is bad for 
them. Today when the quality of education has become 
so ‘cheap’ how can such education make one a ‘chief’? 
Neither the parents nor the teachers nor the students are 
able to understand how the society and the nation are 
benefited by the present system of education. Therefore, 
all of them should join hands and work unitedly to bring 
about a complete transformation in the society. At present 
students’ agitation is on the increase. However, it is not 
their fault. They are in themselves very good-natured. 
Fault lies with the teachers, elders and the government. 
It is a decided factor that the present system of education 


42 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


is not designed to mould the character of the students. 
There are many good students, but parents, teachers and 
textbooks do not guide them properly. It is high time that 
the parents opened their eyes and seen the real state of 
affairs. They should see to it that their children come 
up in their life by acquiring proper education. They 
should encourage their children to pursue such type 
of education which will lead them to immortality. Of 
course, secular education is also necessary. But, secular 
education should be harmonised with spiritual education 
to mould the character of the students and make them 
better citizens of the country. 


The End Of Education Should Be Character 
Students! 


Do not feel proud that you are pursuing higher 
education. Along with higher education, you should 
cultivate noble qualities. Education bereft of virtues 
is useless. The end of education is character. Today 
many students read useless, even immoral fictions. The 
authorities should ensure that such books are not sold in 
the market. Students should read only such books which 
can improve their character. They should participate in 
sports and games in the true spirit. This advice would 
equally apply to the girl students as well. They question, 
“When boys ride motor bikes, why can’t we do the 
same?” In this way they argue and waste their time. 
Nobody says that girls should not ride motor bikes. But 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 43 


one should act according to the time and circumstances. 
The number of fatal accidents of young people involved 
in two wheelers is on the increase. Parents make many 
sacrifices to bring up their children. But, if the precious 
lives of students are lost in motor cycle accidents, I can 
understand their agony. 


Today, girls want to compete with boys in every 
field. They also aspire for name and fame. Their argument 
is, “In what way are we inferior to boys? Why can’t we 
acquire the same type of education as boys?” However, 
each one should acquire such type of education that 
is appropriate and suitable to them. It is essential for 
women to look after their families well and shape the 
character of their children in an ideal manner. Along 
with inculcating virtues in children, they should also 
be given proper education. The present-day education 
is leading students in the wrong direction. Parents are 
to be partly blamed for this. They want their children to 
acquire high qualifications and get married to another 
highly qualified person. Some parents while trying to fix 
up marriage alliance ask, “My daughter has completed 
her postgraduation. She is good. looking. What about 
your son? Has he completed his postgraduation? Is 
he handsome?” In fact, beauty is related to character, 
not to the physical appearance. Beauty of character is 
what one should aspire for. Is it always possible to get 
a postgraduate bridegroom for a postgraduate bride? 
The present-day education is leading to unhealthy 


44 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


competition and conflicts. I do not say that girls should 
not pursue higher education. If I am against women’s 
education, why should I establish women’s colleges? I 
have established various educational institutions with 
the sole purpose of inculcating virtues in students. 
I am providing education free of cost. There are no 
examination fees even. My only aim is that students 
should acquire proper education, become ideal citizens 
and give happiness to their parents. 


Students! 


Do not misunderstand My words. I am telling you 
all this for your own welfare and progress. You should 
acquire such education which will bring a good name 
to you and uphold the reputation of your family. Do not 
become egoistic and take to wrong ways in the name 
of freedom. I quite often caution the boys not to look 
here and there while walking on the road. Some boys, 
while speeding on their motor bikes, keep looking at 
girls who are passing by. Their attention is diverted and 
they end up in accidents. If your character is good, you 
will always be protected. You should always keep your 
senses under control. You should always have a check 
on your vision, listening and speech. Buddha undertook 
various spiritual practices with a view to have mastery 
over his senses. 


Why are the eyes given to you? 
Is it to look here and there? No. 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 45 


The eyes are meant to see the beautiful form of 
the Lord. 
Why are the ears given to you? 
Is it to listen to vain gossip? No. 
The ears are meant to hear the glories of the 
Lord. 
(Telugu poem) 


The ears are given for hearing good words and 
putting them into practice and thereby lead a virtuous 
life. Having realised that God has given the sense 
organs for the purpose of leading a virtuous life, Buddha 
discarded all ritualised spiritual practices and put his 
senses to sacred use. He assured himself that what he had 
to achieve in life was virtues, and not sensual pleasures. 
He realised that conscience was his true Guru and made 
efforts to control his sense organs like eyes and tongue. If 
these two sense organs are controlled, all the other organs 
would automatically come under control. Having thus 
set a goal for himself in life, Buddha entered the wide 
world, after renouncing his wife and only child. I am not, 
however, advising you to leave your wife and children 
and go to the forest like Buddha. You look after them 
well and fulfil your responsibilities towards them. Teach 
your children noble qualities and bring them up in life. 
Lead a life of virtue. This is what Buddha taught. If you 
cultivate samyak drishti (right vision) like the Buddha, 
the whole world will be under your control. 


Strive For A Virtuous Life 


46 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


Do not pay heed to the wrong advice of others. 
Foster noble qualities. If you can control your senses, 
that itself amounts to realising the essence of the epic, 
Bhagavata. The study of the epic Bhagavata is meant to 
transform you into a man of virtue. Hence, control your 
senses and become a master of the world. This is what 
you have to strive for, today. Explain to your parents 
also about your priorities in life. Tell them,”Mother! You 
expect me to go for a job which offers a fat salary. But, 
high salaries are not as important as a virtuous life. If we 
give preference to money instead of a noble life, our life 
itself will be ruined.” When you keep your senses under 
control, you will become a person of noble qualities. 
You will also gain the strength of character. Hanuman, 
the illustrious servant of Lord Rama is an example of 
such noble qualities. He was extolled as ‘santhudu’, 
‘gunavantudu’ and ‘balavantudu’ (calm and serene, one 
of virtues, one of mighty strength). He became a great 
Guru because of his noble qualities. We should emulate 
his noble qualities. 


Dear Students! 


You are like pure gold. You are people of noble 
qualities. You are precious. But, some of you are 
misguided by bad elements. Even if others try to mislead 
you, do not deviate from your chosen path. Stand firm. 
Only then will you acquire name and fame. This is My 
advice to the students. In today’s education you are 
taught skills which will enable you to rise up in your 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 47 


career, but, nobody teaches moral education. Morality 
is the most important aspect of education. Money comes 
and goes, morality comes and grows. Therefore, cultivate 
morality. That will earn you respect from society. 


God is your sole refuge wherever you may be, be itin 
a forest or in the sky or ina city or ina village or on 
the top of amountain or in the middle of a deep sea. 


(Telugu poem) 


Cultivate noble qualities. I shall give you everything. 
Nay, I shall give Myself to those who cultivate noble 
qualities and also to those who teach them. In fact, I 
am living only for their sake. I do not seek anything in 
return from them. Lead a life of character and nobility. 
Bring good name to your parents, your institution and 
to Swami. 


Dear Students! 


You are all men of noble qualities, but you are 
influenced by the contemporary society to a certain 
extent. Therefore, do not succumb to distracting 
influences. First and foremost, make proper use of your 
senses. Any elders you come across, revere them as your 
father and mother. Earn good name for yourself by your 
thoughts, words and deeds. 


Join good company, speak good words, cultivate 
samyak drishti and pursue good education that will build 
your character — this is what I expect from you, students. 


48 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


In fact, this is what your parents also wish for. No father 
or mother will expect their children to be spoiled. But, 
they are unable to advise the children properly and put 
them in order, out of some sort of inhibition. Of course, I 
have no such qualms. Therefore, I am advising you, with 
all the emphasis at My command, to see good, be good 
and do good. Cultivate noble qualities. Thyaga (sacrifice) 
is the noblest of all qualities, not bhoga (indulgence). 
In fact, bhoga will lead you to roga (disease). The 
Veda has proclaimed Na karmana na prajaya dhanena 
thyagenaike amrutatthwamanasu (immortality is not 
attained through action, progeny or wealth; it is attained 
only by sacrifice). Hence, Bangaru! (My dear golden 
students) cultivate such noble qualities as thyaga. | am 
prepared to sacrifice everything for you. But, you must 
also be in a position to receive My grace. I am yours and 
you are Mine. That should be the relationship between 
us. Try to understand Swami’s love. All this is meant to 
advise you to tread the right path. Do not go against the 
wishes of your parents. If, by any chance, you have to 
differ from their views, explain to them lovingly your 
viewpoint. They will also feel happy that you have 
respected their feelings. The Veda has declared, Matru 
devo bhava, Pitru devo bhava, Acharya devo bhava, 
Atithi devo bhava (revere your mother, father, preceptor 
and guest as God). Speak sweetly and softly to your 
parents. Convince them, if necessary. I am prepared to 
sacrifice anything for the sake of such students. Several 
students join our educational institutions. Some of them 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 49 


may not be in a position to pay fees. Therefore, we have 
decided that all education in Sathya Sai institutions 
should be totally free and no fees be collected from the 
students. You should be free from all anxieties and enjoy 
peace. By conforming to good behaviour only can peace 
be obtained. Several students today wish to enjoy good 
things in life, but are following wrong methods. They 
wish to partake of sugar, but consume bitter pills. They 
say one thing and do another. That is why it is said 


Manasyekam vachasyekam karmanyekam 
mahatmanam 

Manasyanyat vachasyanyath karmanyanyath 
duratmanam 


(those whose thoughts, words and deeds are in 
perfect harmony are noble ones; those who lack harmony 
of these are wicked) 


I like such students whose thoughts, words and 
deeds are in perfect accord. I am prepared to sacrifice 
anything for them, nay, I will give away Myself to such 
people. 


Dear Students! 


Knowingly or unknowingly you might have 
committed mistakes in the past. But, at least in future, 
cultivate good qualities and try to keep your parents as 
well as Swami always happy. 


(Swami called students from Primary School, 


50 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


Higher Secondary School and also from the three 
campuses and gave away glittering silver trophies in 
appreciation of their performance in the Sports and 
Cultural Meet.) 


[Sankranti Message, 15-1-2004, Prasanthi Nilayam] 


4 
Love Is The Royal Path To Realise God 


The sacred feet of the Lord are as vast as the 
cosmos, as pervasive as the sky. They reach 
even Patala Loka (lower world). His sacred 
crown lies beyond Bhrahmanda (cosmos). He is 
inaccessible, imperceptible and incomparable. 
(Kannada poem) 


Embodiments of Love! Students, Teachers and 
Educators! 


FIND it difficult to deliver a speech in 

Kannada language. It requires regular practice. 
If you do an activity regularly, you become adept in 
it. I get a chance to speak in Kannada very rarely, not 
always. N. Kasturi stayed at Prasanthi Nilayam for 
about 30 years and he was always with Me. He made 
good use of this golden opportunity for Seva Sadhana. 


52 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


Kasturi was a well-known creative writer in Kannada. 
He was popularly known as “Kannada Kasturi.” He was 
very pure and sacred. Just by looking at his respectable 
personality one could make out the fragrance and 
sacredness of Kannada language. It is likely that I may 
make some mistakes here and there while speaking such 
an extremely fragrant language. 


Pioneering Efforts Of Narayana Bhat 


Narayana Bhat established two schools in Karnataka 
one at Alike in Dakshina Kannada district and another 
at Muddenahalli in Kolar district. Following Sathya 
Sai educational principles, he worked very hard for a 
long period of time to develop them into model schools 
(loud applause). In order to develop the schools, he had 
to take loan from various sources and also from a large 
number of his well-wishers. But he had to struggle hard 
to pay off the loan. He and his mother went to so many 
villages and towns and approached several persons 
for raising money. But the debts went on increasing 
and never showed any sign of coming down. On one 
occasion, Narayana Bhat approached Me and briefly 
explained how those outstanding debts were causing 
him a lot of worry. He prayed to Me, “Swami, Anyatha 
sharanam nasti, Twameva sharanam mama, Tasmat 
karunyabhavena.... (I have no other refuge except You. 
You are my saviour. Show mercy on me and protect 
me.) Swami, I beg and plead with You, please take over 
these two schools and put new life into them..” Then I 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 53 


said to him, “Narayana Bhat! Health and education are 
essential for all. I know that. But right now, don’t give 
them to Me. You look after them as long as you can.” I 
encouraged him to go ahead with his service activities. 
I blessed him and said, “Be happy. Carry on teaching 
spiritual truths.” Later on, Narayana Bhat worked with 
much more zeal and vigour. These institutions made 
rapid progress. They were hailed as model schools. He 
was indeed a beacon light for all spiritual-seekers and 
service-minded persons. Yad bhavam tad bhavathi (As 
is the feeling, so is the result). Soon many good teachers 
joined him. They were all men of character, intelligence 
and sacrifice. They renounced everything and stood by 
him steadfastly. Presently, all those dedicated teachers 
together are running the institutions very efficiently. 


Noble Ideals Set By Alike And Muddenahalli 
Institutions 


Narayana Bhat carried on his mission and 
worked tirelessly day in and day out. But his time 
was drawing near. This body goes with time. ‘Kalaya 
namah, Kala kalaya namah, Kaladarpa damanaya 
namah, Kalatheethaya namah, Kalaswarupaya namah, 
Kalaniyamitaya namah (salutations to time, to the one 
who is beyond time, to the one who has conquered time, 
to the one who transcends time, to the one who is the 
embodiment of time, and to the one who ordains time). 
Time is supreme. Everyone has to bow down to time. 
As time moved on, all of a sudden, Narayana Bhat met 


j4 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


with a car accident in 1978. The accident proved fatal 
and he left his mortal coil at once. The organization lost 
its mother. It was orphaned. Then Gangadhara Bhat, 
Narayana Rao, Narasimha Murthy and others came to 
Me and said, “Swami, that day You made a promise that 
You would look after these institutions. Kindly take over 
these schools and protect us all.” They intensely prayed 
and pleaded with Me. 


My intention is to give proper direction to the 
present educational system. I always encourage any good 
move in this direction. Vidya has an important role in 
the life of man. Life without vidya is useless. One has 
to learn real Vidya and share it with others to lead them 
on the righteous path. That is what I intend to do in the 
field of education. If I took Alike and Muddenahalli 
institutions, I had to bear the burden of those debts 
standing against them. It was not a meagre sum. It was 
ten lakh rupees of those days! But all the teachers were 
praying; “Swami, You are our Lord, You are our saviour. 
You have to save us.” My heart melted at their sincere 
prayer. Instantaneously, I took over those institutions and 
cleared all their outstanding debts once and for all. 


From then onwards, I used to visit Muddenahalli 
while travelling between Prasanthi Nilayam and 
Brindavan. I would talk to those dear children and 
enthuse them. Darshanam papa nashanam, Sparshanam 
karma vimochanam, Sambhashanam sankata nashanam 
(sight of the Lord destroys all sins, His touch frees from 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 55 


Karmic consequences, conversation with Him destroys 
all sufferings). Thus, I gave them Darshan, Sparshan 
and Sambhashan. The teachers too felt encouraged 
and happy. Being free from all worries and problems, 
the teachers worked with relaxed mind and brought 
the institutions to this level. Now the institutions do 
not have the burden of debt. The schools have made 
a considerable progress attracting the attention of the 
world. The teachers are very good. They recognize the 
good qualities in each other and adopt them in their lives 
and thereby raise their moral and spiritual levels. They do 
not get into bad and demeaning company. You are judged 
by the company you keep. Tell me your company, I shall 
tell you what you are. Association plays crucial role in 
one’s spiritual life. Teachers should always relish the 
company of the good and thereby work for the growth of 
the institution. The teachers of Alike and Muddenahalli 
are doing it. They are developing the inner strength of 
the schools. The schools have been showing excellent 
progress. They have now reached college stage. They 
have already won a lot of fame. People call them Sathya 
Sai Loka Seva Colleges. They will become full-fledged 
colleges in a few years. To reach the same standard, the 
remaining institutions of the Sai Organisation will have 
to put in a lot of effort. 


The day-scholars in these institutions come from 
distant places. Some students walk some distance and 
then catch a bus and reach the schools. The heads of the 
schools and teachers cooperate with each other and help 


56 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


each other to make good progress and march towards 
perfection. The students there have a high moral and 
spiritual standard. Students should totally avoid bad 
company. You should always associate with the good. 
You should always join the group of students who are 
good in their speech, behaviour and actions. By doing 
so, you will reach the height of eminence. In Treta Yuga, 
Lakshmana closely observed Hanuman and reported 
to Rama: “Swami, Hanuman is virtuous and mighty. 
He serves Sugriva very competently. It is Sugriva’s 
good fortune to have the satsanga of Hanuman. The 
company of Hanuman will help Sugriva and remove all 
his sufferings.” In the same way, students should become 
good by associating themselves with good company. 
Going to Muddenahalli is what I always like. In the 
past, I frequently went there and saw those children and 
guided the teachers with timely advice. But the times 
have changed. Under these changed circumstances, I 
cannot go there so easily as I was doing in the past. Now 
hundreds of vehicles follow Me. It is very difficult to 
provide even a minimum hospitality to so many people. 
Why should I put those teachers to trouble unnecessarily? 
That is why I have reduced the number of these visits. 


Dedication And Devotion Of Gangadhara Bhat 


Let us talk about Alike now. Alike was also handed 
over to Me along with Muddenahalli school. It is not 
near but far from here. It is not possible to personally go 
there quite often. That does not mean that I don’t like to 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 57 


go there. They have been praying for My going to Alike 
for so many years. Especially on one particular occasion, 
Gangadhara Bhat pressed Me so much that I had no 
option but to yield to his intense prayers. He, in fact, said, 
“Swami, we are getting old. Once at least You should 
come to our village. You are our Redeemer. You have to 
grant us salvation.” He prostrated and intensely prayed 
to Me. I finally yielded to his feelings and emotions. 
At once I rented a helicopter and went there. You must 
know why I had to hurry to Alike. Gangadhara Bhat’s 
prayer came straight from his heart. 


Even now, except Gangadhara Bhat, there is no 
one who can shoulder that great responsibility and lead 
the institution towards progress. That is why I said to 
him, “Gangadhara Bhat, you must stay there only. You 
remain there as My reflection. For every action, there is 
a reflection, reaction and resound. You have to conduct 
yourself in such a way that your words should reflect 
My views. You must have a feeling that the places you 
go about are the ones Swami has already trodden. While 
carrying out your duty, do it with a feeling that it is in 
fact Swami personally doing it. You must not leave the 
institution.” After I told him firmly, Gangadhara Bhat 
took up the assignment as per Swami’s command and 
marched along by putting his heart and soul in all the 
duties he performed. Right now both the institutions are 
making good progress. Seeing them itself gives Me great 
pleasure and happiness. Now they are developing at a 


58 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


quick pace. What you saw there yesterday, you will not 
see itnow. Growth is rapid there. It has become possible 
because of the efforts of the dedicated teachers. 


Understand The Real Meaning Of Educare 


Our schools and colleges (Prasanthi Nilayam, 
Brindavan, Anantapur) have also shown considerable 
progress. As the growth is inward, it is not possible 
for all to recognize it. This inner growth is educare. 
Educare brings out our latent sacred values. Values are 
not to be taught but manifested. Mere accumulation 
of information from various books is not educare; it 
is education. Educare is the blossoming of the Divine 
Lotus in our heart. Educare enables us to be not just 
receptors but vibrators and radiators of values to all 
creation. Values are to be translated into action. That 
means, both precept and practice are equally important. 
How to put the principles of educare into practice? Many 
modern boys and girls have no knowledge about these 
principles. It is absolutely necessary that every student 
should know all about educare and its importance. The 
latent powers in each student have to be brought out. 
These powers must play their part in all his activities 
as reflection, reaction and resound. Thus, the process 
of education has to work in such a way as to transform 
the students into reflections of their latent powers. They 
are to be moulded properly and shaped beautifully. Our 
institutions bring out ideal students and present them 
to the world. 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 59 


Sathyannasti paro dharma. ( There is no Dharma 
greater than adherence to truth). “You shall not tell 
anything but truth. What has happened should be 
reported truthfully. What all you have done, you should 
say it exactly.” This is what most people say and believe 
when they give the meaning of truth. But this is only one 
dimension of the vast interpretation of truth. Similarly, 
you must understand that Educare has much deeper 
meaning. In fact, Sathya (truth) is educare; Dharma 
(righteousness) is educare. It is truth and righteousness 
which protected India from all dangers. Sathya and 
Dharma do not come from outside. All that comes from 
outside is not permanent. Today it comes, tomorrow it 
goes. But what comes out from one’s heart is permanent. 
Educare comes from the heart and it has to go to other 
hearts only. 


Recently, Vice Chancellors of 25 famous universities 
of India came to our Institute to take part in a Seminar 
on Value Education. They were all very eager to know 
about educare. They also wanted to know the workable 
method for introducing it into their curriculum. 
“Vidyannasti parodharma.” (There is no Dharma greater 
than Vidya). Therefore, one has to acquire real Vidya. 
Heart is the source of real vidya. Mere accumulation 
of information is not vidya. Vidya is eternal bliss. Real 
vidya is educare. But head is the source of education. 
Educare starts from the source of the heart and comes out 
through buddhi (intellect) whereas education is merely 


60 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


bookish knowledge emerging from the mind. Educare 
is Buddhigrahyamateendriyam (Educare transcends the 
senses and can be grasped only by the intellect). 


Saturate All Your Actions With Love 


Whatever activities you do, love should be their 
foundation. There is no Prana (life) without love. Life 
without love is of no use at all. Education system should 
be so transformed as to develop love principle in one’s 
heart. Sathya (truth) and Dharma (righteousness) are 
the reflections of Prema (love). They give you the much 
desired Prasanthi (supreme peace). If love springs out 
from your heart, itis enough. It will give you salvation. 
In Dwapara Yuga, Gopikas said to Krishna, “Lord! 
Kindly pour down the nectar of love on our barren 
hearts. Sow the seeds of love. May the flood of love 
flow from our hearts!’(Kannada poem) They earnestly 
prayed to Krishna to fulfil their heart’s yearnings. If 
the world is to prosper, the rain of love should pour 
on it. The sacred land of Bharat has been laying great 
emphasis on the importance of devotion and surrender 
since ancient times. It has set lofty ideals for mankind 
in all spheres of life. 


Every being has love in his heart. If we do not 
have love, we are not human. Love is with us from our 
birth. We have got this body because of the merits of our 
previous births. The body becomes sacred only if it is 
saturated with love. So, you must cultivate love principle. 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 61 


Then your life becomes holy. You must cultivate love 
towards all beings regardless of what they are or what 
they do. It is natural for children to show love towards 
their parents. But it is important that they should be so 
moulded that they develop love for the entire mankind. 
Love comprises all aspects of Vidya. 


The knowledge that the students acquire in schools 
and colleges is only information-oriented. Mere bookish 
knowledge is not of great importance. Expansion 
of love is very important. Your thoughts have to be 
purified. Only pure hearts comprehend God. Intellectual 
reasoning does not help you to realise God. Pure thought 
is another name for pure life. Love is God. God has no 
form except love. I wish that you all install love principle 
in the deep recesses of your heart. 


Love is your Prana (life). It is enough if you have 
love. Love redeems all. Love wards off all suffering, 
hardships, pains and agonies. Love is nectarous in form. 
“Srunvantu viswe amrutasya putrah” (Oh, the children 
of immortality! Listen). You are amritaputra, not 
anritaputra (sons of untruth). Do not weaken yourself 
by considering yourself as sons of untruth. Feel that you 
are amritaputra. Then the tree of love will grow in your 
heart and give you the fruit of atmic bliss. 


Do not be attached to the body. Get rid of body 
attachment. You have to realise the atmic principle. 
Immerse yourself in the ocean of atmic consciousness. 


62 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


As long as you have body attachment, you will not 
understand the atmic principle. You have to do self- 
inquiry “Who am I? From where have I come? Whither 
am I going? How long will I be here?” The entire 
spiritual inquiry begins with these questions. When you 
feel that you are the Atma, you start contemplating on 
the atmic principle. “What is Atma, what is Atma?”, you 
think seriously about it. By making such an inquiry, you 
will understand the atmic principle. 


All objects have both name and form. But the 
atma has no name or form. If you understand the atmic 
principle, you will understand the Paramatma principle. 
That is parama thripti (supreme satisfaction), parama 
asha (supreme hope), parama gamya (supreme goal), 
parama sathya (supreme truth). In order to realise 
amruttwa (immortality), you have to become the 
embodiment of love. You have to radiate love. You have 
to treat everyone as your brother and sister. Whether 
others talk to you or not, you have to consider them as 
your own brother. If you are able to put it into practice 
in all walks of life, love will grow in your heart. You 
may have some enemies. You think that they hate you. 
Don’t consider them as your enemies. Don’t hate them. 
Instead whenever you happen to meet them talk to them 
lovingly and ask, “How are you, brother?” Then their 
feeling of enmity will suffer defeat in an instant. Their 
extreme dislike towards you will vanish and love will 
spring forth from their heart. Naturally, you will become 
friends. When love occupies your heart, jealousy, hatred, 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 63 


etc., cannot enter it. You will get absolute peace. People 
say, “We want peace, we want peace.” Peace does not 
fall from heaven. It has to come from love. Love is the 
royal path to realise God. 


What is the purpose of your birth as a human being? 
It is not just eating, loitering and merry-making. You 
must understand that you are born to realise the love 
principle. If love blossoms in your heart, you yourself 
will become Paramatma (God). You need not look for 
God here and there. He is in you. He is in the form of 
love. There is no escape from dualism as long as man 
does not recognize his inherent divinity. You should 
expand your love. Live in love. 


Selfless Service Is Real Penance 


At this juncture, I would like to say something 
more about Gangadhara Bhat. He was Narayana Bhat’s 
trusted follower and a dependable person. He was 
verily his right hand. Once Narayana Bhat said to him, 
“Gangadhara Bhat! Serve sincerely for the well-being 
of the institution. Whenever you run into difficulty, 
pray to Bhagawan Sathya Sai. Then He will personally 
take care of you all.” From that day onwards till today 
Gangadhara Bhat has fully depended on Swami. He has 
unshakeable faith in Swami. Swami is his Paramatma. 
He firmly believes that Sai Paramatma will lead him. He 
has such a feeling of surrender. He performs his duties 
with devotion and dedication. He is working sincerely 
for the progress of both Alike and Muddenahalli 


64 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


institutions. In fact, they have flourished under his honest 
leadership. I went to Alike two years ago (in 2002). I 
was wonderstruck on seeing the total transformation of 
Alike. When I went to Alike for the first time in 1979, 
there were only a few small buildings. Now Alike has 
become a town. That itself is not greatness. Its greatness 
lies in its inner strength. Mere buildings will not suffice. 
People construct expensive houses and tall buildings 
in towns and cities. They consider their houses as 
everything. They don’t have purity of heart. Their hearts 
brim with evil thoughts and evil schemes. Such men 
do not understand the love principle. Purity in thought, 
word and deed is a basic requisite for man. 


Thus, Gangadhara Bhat has been running the 
organization braving all hardships and unpleasant 
situations. Once he said to Me, “Swami, it is not 
possible for me to manage all the affairs effectively. 
I am getting old. It requires both physical and mental 
strength. Swami, I request You earnestly to appoint any 
good person who will manage everything very well.” 
As a matter of fact, all are good in My view. No one 
is bad. People think that they are bad. That is all. It is 
their feeling only. Badness exists in our thoughts. As 
love is in everyone, all are good. I said to Gangadhara 
Bhat: “Don’t leave your post. You remain in the same 
position. Do not worry. I will always help you and lead 
you. I will look after everything.” 


My words gave him courage and confidence. He 
has been continuing his work with enthusiasm. Where 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 65 


can he go if he relinquishes the post? He will have to 
go somewhere else and do Thapas (penance). What is 
penance? Simply spending time, doing nothing is not 
penance. Simply sitting at a place and reciting “Rama, 
Rama, Krishna, Krishna” is also not penance. Real 
penance lies in doing good work constantly, having 
good thoughts always and developing good qualities 
in oneself. Leaving one’s home, going to forest, doing 
shirshasana (standing on one’s head) and publicising, 
“T am doing penance’, is not at all penance. It is indeed 
false penance. Foster love in your heart; talk lovingly; 
do all work with love. Be in love. This is real penance. 
The teachers of Alike and Muddenahalli are doing real 
penance. (loud prolonged applause). This is how these 
schools produce students with purity of heart. I am 
happy to see all these students who have come here for 
the function. Today small children came to the dais and 
spoke beautifully. They gave a beautiful description 
of the Atma. Especially one high school boy spoke 
with heart full of love. What a sincere feeling he has! I 
am really delighted. That is real Vidya. I often tell the 
authorities of our Institute to give topmost priority to the 
boys of Alike and Muddenahalli while making selection 
for our colleges. Sometimes, these students may lag 
behind a little in Jagath Sathya (worldly knowledge). But 
they know Atma Sathya (atmic knowledge) very well. I 
am always telling everyone here not to leave them. Here, 
a little boy spoke with feeling of love. He expressed his 
love for Me in beautiful words. I am very much pleased. 


66 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


It is what I want. I do not want that you come forward 
to offer the whole world to Me. I want your love. Give 
me your love. This is enough for Me. The seed of love 
should sprout in the field of your heart. Later on, it will 
grow into a kalpavriksha (wish-fulfilling tree). Then the 
world will flourish. 


Students! 


You have to follow the instructions of your parents. 
Mathru devo bhava, Pithru devo bhava (Revere your 
mother and father as God). You have come from your 
parents. Mother is the maker of your fortune. She is 
responsible for your progress. Don’t act against her 
wishes. Don’t oppose her words. Treat your mother with 
love. Then you will get your mother’s grace. Mother 
is Lokamatha (mother of the universe), Jaganmatha 
(mother of the world). Don’t think that she is related to 
your body only. She is the Jaganmatha who has come 
in the form of your mother. Gangadhara Bhat served his 
mother tenderly and lovingly. As a result of his sincere 
service to his mother, he got Swami. That is why Swami 
has kept him so near and dear. (loud applause) 


Our Narasimha Murthy (now Warden, Brindavan) 
came to Prasanthi Nilayam and took charge as Warden. 
One day, he came to Me and said, “Swami, my mother is 
serious. She has cancer.” I asked him, “Foolish boy! You 
are telling me, mother is serious. Which mother? That 
is your body’s mother. Body’s mother is not permanent. 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 67 


You take hold of the permanent mother, eternal mother.” 
After some days, he came to Me again and said, “Swami, 
mother passed away.” I comforted Narasimha Murthy 
and said, “Narasimha Murthy, stay here itself. Don’t 
leave Puttaparthi. This is your birthplace. Swami is 
your mother. I will look after everything.” Narasimha 
Murthy’s mother was a noble soul. She would often say, 
“Narasimha Murthy, even in adverse situations, don’t 
go away from Swami. Stay with Him always.” (loud 
applause). All mothers are suffused with love principle. 
They pray to so many gods and goddesses for the well- 
being and progress of their children. Try to understand 
your mother’s selfless love. All should look after their 
mothers lovingly. 


[Discourse in Kannada, Silver Jubilee Celebrations 
of Sri Sathya Sai Loka Seva Institutions (Alike and 
Muddenahalli) 27-1-2004, Prasanthi Nilayam] 


5 


Concentration Of Mind On The Divine 
Is Real Sadhana 


ACHIKETA, son of Vajasravas, prayed to 

Lord Yama to teach him Atma vidya. Then, 
Lord Yama said, “Oh, the son of immortality! Listen. 
First establish your link with the source from which you 
have come into the world.” He also advised Nachiketa 
that since the body was perishable like a water bubble 
and the mind was fickle and unstable, he should transcend 
both and realise the fundamental truth. 


The Lord of Kailasa has manifested his Divine 
form with the crescent moon adorning his head, 
the cool water of the Ganga flowing between the 
matted locks, with his radiant eye in the middle 
of the forehead and the purple neck gleaming 
like the sheen of a blackberry. He wears serpent 


70 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


bracelets and a snake belt, his entire body is 
smeared with Vibhuti, his forehead is adorned 
with a Kumkum dot, his ruddy lips glow with the 
juice of the betel, diamond-studded gold earrings 
dangle from his ears and his whole swarthy body 
glows with divine effulgence. 

(Telugu poem) 


“Nachiketa! You need not search for Lord Easwara, 
for He is very much present in you”, said Lord Yama. 


Comprehend The Transcendental Reality 
Dear Students and Devotees! 


You have to understand the true significance and 
philosophy underlying the festival of Sivarathri. First 
realise that you are not the physical body which is 
perishable and impermanent. You have to look at this 
objective world with jnana chakshu (the eyes of wisdom), 
not with charma chakshu (physical eyes). The animals, 
insects, birds and beasts look at this world with their 
physical eyes. If you also look at this objective world 
with physical eyes, then what is the difference between 
you and other living beings? If you remain at animal 
level, then how can you realise your true nature? You 
have to comprehend the transcendental reality which is 
beyond the body and the mind. This is possible only with 
the help of jnana chakshu (eyes of wisdom). The body 
is like a water bubble. It will disappear one day or the 
other. You are not the body that has birth, growth, decay 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 71 


and death ultimately. Therefore, Lord Yama exhorted 
Nachiketa to realise the atmathathwa that has no birth 
and death. 


Then, the question arises as to what is the Atma? 
The Atma is formless, infinite, indescribable and 
immeasurable. 


Nirgunam, Niranjanam, Sanathana Niketanam, 
Nitya, Shuddha, Buddha, Mukta, Nirmala Swarupinam 
(Atma is attributeless, pure, final abode, eternal, unsullied, 
enlightened, free and embodiment of sacredness). 


Such an atmatattwa is immanent in every individual, 
nay, in every being in the form of consciousness. Your 
life as a human being will acquire a meaning and purpose 
only when you realise the conciousness. Enquiries 
relating to worldly matters are meaningless and an 
exercise in futility. Lord Yama exhorted Nachiketa to 
realise that principle, having realised which he would 
have realised everything else. The body has birth, growth, 
decay and death. But the Atma is not subject to all these 
changes. It is the eternal witness of everything in the 
universe. You have therefore to realise the atmatattwa. 
Thus taught Lord Yama to Nachiketa. 


The Atma is eternal without birth or death. It has 
no beginning, middle or end. It is omnipresent 
and eternal witness. 

(Telugu poem) 


Look! Several electric bulbs are shining here. 


72 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


Though the bulbs are of different sizes, colours and 
capacity, the electrical energy manifesting as light 
through them is one and the same. Similarly, the 
same divine power is present in every living being 
and makes it function. That is atmatattwa. | often 
refer to the terms Sathya (Truth), Dharma (righteous 
conduct), Santhi (peace) and Prema (love). Sathya is 
the electricity, Dharma is the wire through which the 
electric current passes. Santhi is the bulb and Prema is 
the light. If you want to attain atmananda (atmic bliss), 
you have to follow Sathya and Dharma. That is why 
the ancient culture of Bharat laid great emphasis on 
Sathyam vada (speak truth), Dharmam chara (practise 
righteousness). In contrast to this noble principle, what 
is happening today? Sathyam vadha (truth is being 
killed) and Dharmam chera (righteous conduct is being 
imprisoned). No, No. This is not humanness. Speak truth 
and observe righteousness. 


Lord Yama told Nachiketa, “This human body 
which is like a water bubble is bound to burst one day 
or the other. Therefore, realise that atmatattwa which 1s 
real and eternal”. You can recognise that atmatattwa, not 
by your charma chakshu (physical eyes) but by jnana 
chakshu (eyes of wisdom). Then, the question arises as 
to what is Jnana (wisdom)? Is it physical knowledge 
or secular knowledge or knowledge relating to the 
objects of Nature? No, none of these. Experiencing 
the principle fo non-dualism is true wisdom (advaita 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 73 


darsanam jnanam). Atma transcends the name and form. 
Lord Yama, therefore, exhorted Nachiketha to attain 
atmajnana. 


Today, people are going mad in search of spiritual 
knowledge. They adopt umpteen number of practices and 
bodily postures and call it spiritual sadhana. But, none 
of these can help to attain Atmajnana. What is important 
is prema (love) which is the undercurrent of all forms 
of spiritual sadhana. Realising the perishable nature of 
this deha (body), one has to realise the indweller (dehi), 
who is none other than the eternal Atma. 


Give Up Attachment To Body 


The body is made up of five elements and is bound 
to perish sooner or later but the indweller has 
neither birth nor death. The indweller has no 
attachment whatsoever and is the eternal witness. 
Truly speaking, the indweller who is in the form 
of the Atma is verily God Himself. 

(Telugu poem) 


The true and eternal atmatattwa is immanent in 
one’s own body. It can be realised only by the jnana 
netras (eyes of wisdom). You have to gradually give 
up dehabhimana (attachment to the body) and cultivate 
atmabhimana (love for the atma). You think you are the 
body and develop attachment to it. So long as the process 
of inhalation and exhalation continues in the body, you 
consider it as yours. Once the process comes to a halt, 


74 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


you will not know what is happening around. 


The human body, though of perishable nature, 
teaches one great lesson, namely, ‘SOHAM’ (you 
are nothing but the eternal atmatattwa). When you 
inhale, your breath, you make the sound ‘So’ and while 
exhaling you make the sound ‘Ham’. The inhaling 
process represents life and exhaling represents death. 
If you wish to overcome life and death, one moment is 
enough. You have to give up body attachment, which I 
am demonstrating right before you day in and day out. 
This body which I have taken upon Myself is undergoing 
several types of suffering. Just as you suffer from 
physica ailments, this body also suffers. But I do not 
attach importance to this suffering. Several students 
and devotees have expressed anxiety and concern that I 
might undergo a lot of suffering while the Linga emerges 
from My body. No doubt, your apprehensions are true; 
but, I do not feel any suffering. In fact, it is only when 
I identify Myself with the body I undergo pain. Since I 
am not the body, I do not suffer any pain. 


For example, this is a handkerchief (Bhagawan 
holding a handkerchief in His hands) As long as you 
consider this kerchief as yours, you pick it up, wipe your 
face and carefully put it back in its original place. Just 
because the kerchief is yours, do you accept it if there 
is dirt on it? No, never. You at once discard it. In the 
same manner, you should realise that you are different 
from the body. You should not attach any importance to 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 75 


the suffering of the body. All those objects which you 
consider as yours have to be discarded one day or the 
other. When you do not consider something as yours, 
you do not feel any pain in discarding it. This body 
underwent several types of suffering, the recent one 
being a fracture in the hip bone. 


The body is after all a conglomeration of indriyas 
(senses). Whatever has happened 1s only to the body and 
not to Me. When you adopt this attitude, you will get 
peace. For example, when you find an ant crawling on 
your hand, if you try to scratch it, you will have more 
pain. After all, why should you have to suffer so much on 
account of a small insect like an ant crawling over your 
body? It is only because you are under the illusion that 
you are the body. The eye sees something. But what it 
sees may not be real since it is bound to undergo change 
after some time. What the ears have heard may undergo 
change after some time. In the same way, the food we 
eat will also undergo change after a few hours. There 
is nothing that is permanent in this world. You have to 
realise this truth. You have to enquire as to what it is that 
remains unchanged in the past, present and future. If I 
teach you this simple truth by quoting Sanskrit slokas 
and mantras, you may not be able to understand. If 
this is related to your day-to-day experience, you will 
understand it better. 


Some time back, when My hip bone got fractured, 
I was taken to the hospital. The doctors were planning 


76 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


for performing a major orthopaedic surgery. I told them, 
“You can do whatever you wish to. This body is yours. I 
am not the body. I am not under the control of the body. 
Iam I.” The doctors performed a major operation on this 
body. But I did not suffer any pain. Whatever pain was 
there, only the body suffered, not Me. If you also adopt 
a similar attitude, you will not feel any pain. Therefore, 
reduce your Dehabhimana (attachment to the body) 
gradually. 


Cultivate Pure And Selfless Love 


All of you are undertaking some sort of sadhana. 
What exactly is the real meaning of sadhana? Give up 
body attachment and try to experience atmic bliss. How 
do you attain that bliss? It can be attained only through 
prema (love). If only there is pure love, all your suffering 
will be removed. Therefore, cultivate pure and selfless 
love. Supposing, you came across a person on the road 
who is inimical to you. If you hate him and move away 
from him considering him as your enemy, the distance 
between you and him increases further. On the other 
hand, if you greet him lovingly saying “Hello! how are 
you?”’, naturally he would respond with love. Thus, when 
you both greet each other lovingly, there will be no scope 
for hate persisting any more. As is your feeling towards 
others, so is their feeling. The same idea is contained 
in the Vedic declaration: Yadbhavam Thadbhavati (As 
is your feeling, so shall you become). Today, we are 
directing all our negative feelings on others. We should 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 77 


not however bear any ill-will against anybody. Whatever 
nagative feelings are there, they are just passing clouds. 
They come and go. The sun may not be visible when it is 
covered by thick clouds. The moment the clouds move 
away, the sun is visible. Similarly, when your negative 
feelings scatter away, what remains is pure love. You can 
achieve anything in this world with love. In fact, you 
can get the entire world under your control through love. 
People say they are sitting in meditation, both morning 
and evening. But, what kind of meditation is going on? 
What benefit are they deriving out of it? How long is 
its effect lasting? Not even a moment. Remember, all 
worldly matters are like passing clouds. Therefore, do 
not enagage yourself much in them. 


Once Chaitanya Mahaprabhu was walking through 
the market place, chanting the divine name. In fact, he 
was dancing in ecstasy. Some people on seeing him 
thought he was a madcap. They snatched away his 
mridanga. But, he did not resent for this. He started 
chanting the divine name while beating the cymbals. The 
irate onlookers took away the cymbals also. Even then 
he was not bothered. He thought perhaps God did not 
like his beating the cymbals. He resolved not to touch 
the cymbals which he tought were not to the liking of 
God. He consoled himself saying whatever musical 
instruments were taken away from him, were not to 
God’s liking. God’s will prevails ultimately. Such was 
his faith. From then onwards, he gave up all worldly 


78 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


attachments and concentrated on prematattwa (principle 
of love), which none could take away from him. One 
has to aspire for that which cannot be taken away by 
others. That is pure love. A printed matter on a piece of 
paper cannot be separated from it. Likewise, your heart 
should be like a pure white paper and love the printed 
matter. These two are inseparable. Cultivate such love. 


Love is your sole refuge wherever you may be, in 

a forest, in the sky, in a city or a village, on the 

top of a mountain or in the middle of deep sea. 
(Telugu poem) 


Wherever you may be, divine love will protect 
you always. Cultivate such type of love. That is the real 
sadhana. Sadhana is not something that is associated 
with dhana (money). Sadhana stands for salokya, 
sameepya, sarupya and Sayujya (perception of the 
Divine, proximity to the Divine, identity with the Divine, 
merger with the Divine). Unfortunately, today people do 
not understand the real meaning of sadhana. 


Students! You are reading big books written by 
elders. However, mere reading will not help. When you 
read a pustaka (book), whatever is contained in it will 
enter your mastaka (head). This means both the pustaka 
and mastaka become one. You should not stop at that, 
Whatever has been stored in the mastaka must get into 
the heart, where it will remain for ever. 


Embodiments of Divine Atma! 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 79 


Atma is divine. Never forget this aspect. Some 
people find happiness in physical sadhana. But, the 
pleasure they derive out of it is only physical and 
temporary in nature. All that is associated with time is 
bound to disappear one day or the other. You have to 
attach yourself to that which is permanent, eternal and 
real. God’s love is beyond all description. It is supreme. 
On the other hand, the physical love is momentary and 
is associated with physical relationship. Whatever is 
associated with the body comes and goes. But, pure 
and selfless love which emerges from the heart comes 
and grows. You have to cultivate such love. It will 
never diminish. You need not have to beg for this from 
somebody. You cannot purchase this from the market 
either, since it is not a saleable commodity. God is the 
only source from whom love flows. It is available only 
in His shop. Therefore, find out a way to reach Him. 
Unfortunately, today people do not aspire to acquire 
such pure love in spite of being very near to the source 
of such love. They do not even realise that this invaluable 
gift is available right in front of them. People crave 
for worldly favours and objects, thinking there is great 
happiness in possessing them. No. They can never give 
real happiness. The happiness arising out of worldly 
things is only momentary. Only God’s love is eternal 
principle. Therefore, love such Divine Love. You cannot 
get it from anywhere else except from God. 


God has neither birth nor death. He has neither 


80 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


beginning nor end. He is present in all beings as 
the eternal witness. 
(Telugu poem) 


Renunciation Leads To Liberation 


God’s love is the only truth. It will never change. 
Worship such changeless Truth. Seek refuge in that 
Truth. That is the only real sadhana for attaining 
liberation. What is meant by ‘moksha’ (liberation)? Is 
it living in some palatial building with air-conditioned 
rooms, located in heaven above? No, not at all. To get 
rid of moha (attchment) is true moksha (liberation). You 
have to give up body attachment in the first instance. 
Once you get rid of body attachment, you will naturally 
develop vairagya (renunciation), which will ultimately 
lead you to liberation. Love is the only path that can 
lead you to liberation. 


You might have heard the story of Mandana Misra, 
a scholar of great repute. His wife, Ubhayabharathi, too, 
was a great scholar. When Adi Sankara was proceeding 
on his victory march, he met Mandana Misra and 
entered into a scholarly debate with him. It was decided 
that Mandana Misra would take to sanyasa if he was 
defeated in the debate. Ubhayabharati was chosen to be 
the adjudicator of the contest. Will anyone accept such a 
proposal wherein the rival’s wife acts as the adjudicator? 
But Adi Sankara had no hesitation to accept her as the 
adjudicator, for he knew that Ubhayabharati strictly 
adhered to the principle of truth in letter and spirit. She 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 &1 


was impartial in her judgement and declared Sankara 
to be the winner. Mandana Misra took to sanyasa in 
accordance with the terms and conditions of the debate. 
Ubhayabharathi, being his ardhangi (better half), 
followed suit. 


Ubhayabharathi lived in a hermitage near the bank 
of the river Ganga. Many women became her disciples. 
Every day in the morning, they used to go to the bank 
of the Ganga to have a bath. On the way, there lived 
a sanyasi, whom people considered as Brahmajnani 
(knower of brahma). He had renounced the world to 
attain true wisdom. However, he was very much attached 
to a dried bottle-gourd in which he used to preserve 
water. One day he was lying down, using it as a pillow, 
lest someone should steal it. Ubhayabharathi observed 
this and asked her disciples as to who he was. One of 
the disciples said that he was known as Brahmajnani. 
Then Ubhayabharathi remarked, “Though he is one 
of wisdom, he is attached to his bottle-gourd which 
he is using as his pillow.” The so-called Brahmajnani 
heard their conversation and became angry. When 
Ubhayabharathi and her disciples were returning from 
the Ganga, he threw away the bottle- gourd on the road, 
just to show that he was not attached to it. Seeing this, 
Ubhayabharathi at once remarked, “I thought there was 
only one defect in him - abhimana (attachment). Now 
I realise that he has another defect also - ahamkara 
(ego). How can one with ahamkara and abhimana be a 
jnani?” Her comment was an eye opener for the sanyasi. 


82 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


Immediately, he fell at the feet of Ubhayabharathi and 
prayed to her to teach him true knowledge. 


Seeing multiplicity is ajnana (ignorance); seeing 
unity in multiplicity is jzana (wisdom). Ubhayabharathi 
imparted such sacred teachings and transformed the 
individuals. As she understood the principle of unity, 
she ultimately attained liberation. On the other hand, 
Mandana Misra could not attain liberation as he was 
immersed in worldly feelings. Ubhayabharathi started 
preaching and propagating the path of wisdom. She 
became the guru of one and all. A true guru is one who 
dispels the darkness of ignorance and lights the lamp 
of wisdom. That which remains changeless in all the 
three periods of time is true wisdom. People accepted 
Ubhayabharathi as their guru because her thought, word, 
and deed were in complete harmony. Manasyekam 
vachasyekam karmanyekam mahatmanam (Those whose 
thoughts, words and deeds are in perfect harmony are 
noble ones) 


Manonashanam (annihilation of the mind) is what 
you should strive for. You should have desire for God 
and nothing else. You should not get entangled in the 
worldly relationships. That is true wisdom. 


The teachings of Ubhayabharathi spread far and 
wide and she became highly reputed for her wisdom. 
Even today there are many such people of wisdom. 
Without men of merit and wisdom, how can there be 
light in the world? However, wisdom cannot be acquired 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 8&3 


from individuals. It can be acquired only by developing 
love for God. A beggar who comes to our doorstep begs 
for alms saying “Bhavati bhiksham dehi’”’. He addresses 
dehi (indweller) and not deha (physical body). In this 
manner, you can learn profound spiritual truth even 
from a beggar. 


Be A True Devotee By Fixing Your Mind On God 


One may acquire a high academic qualification 
such as M.A. and B.A. and attain exalted 
position, 

One may amass wealth, perform acts of charity 
and attain name and fame, 

One may have physical strength and enjoy a long 
and healthy life, 

One may be a great scholar studying and 
preaching the Vedas, 

But none can equal a true devotee of the Lord. 

(Telugu poem) 


No doubt, worldly education is also essential to 
eke out a livelihood, but it cannot impart true wisdom. 
Only Atmavidya (knowledge of the Self) can grant you 
everlasting happiness. However, secular education is 
also essential to take care of your physical needs. You 
should not give it up altogether. Worldly education is 
Negative and spiritual education is Positive. Both are 
essential for happiness here and hereafter. 


Students! You should become masters in both forms 


84 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


of knowledge, secular and spiritual like Ubhayabharathi. 
But always remember that only atmic knowledge is 
true knowledge. Once you acquire it, you would have 
acquired everything else. 


Last night, I came to Sai Kulwant Hall at 1 0’ 
clock. It is during this auspicious time that the divine 
lingas emerge from Kailasa. The /ingas emerge of their 
own accord at the Divine Will. I saw several students 
and devotees singing bhajans with great devotion. But 
who are the real devotees? I observed that only a few 
people were singing with real devotion and a pure heart 
constantly contemplating on the Divine name. There 
were thousands of people particpating in the bhajans. 
But not all of them are real devotees. Their body was 
present in the hall but their mind was not fixed on God. 
They were mechanically participating in bhajans. This 
is not real devotion. Wherever you sit, whether in the 
prayer hall, or elsewhere, if your thoughts are fixed on 
God, then you are a true devotee, and you will attain 
His grace. If you feel sleepy, you can sleep. There is no 
objection. However, even in sleep, may your thoughts 
should be fixed on divinity. 


Is it not because of your love and devotion towards 
God that you came all the way to Prasanthi Nilayam to 
participate in Sivarathri bhajans? 1 can understand your 
devotion. A true devotee does not need any conveniences. 
He does not wish any type of comforts. Wherever you 
go, keep the mind under your control and direct all your 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 85 


thoughts towards God. That is real devotion. That is 
what Ubhayabharathi taught to her disciples. If you also 
cultivate such devotion, your lives will be sanctified. Do 
not divert your attention on physical comforts. Always 
chant the Panchakshari mantra, “Om namah sivaya”. 
If you merely chant with lips it will merge into wordly 
sounds. On the other hand, if you chant the divine name 
silently with full concentration of your mind, it will 
spread all over the world. Chanting of the divine name 
with full concentration by the mind is real sadhana. 


[Sivarathri, 19-2-2004, Prasanthi Nilayam] 


6 
Realise The God Immanent In You 


Good and bad coexist. None can separate them. 
But one with Sraddha (steadfast faith) will always 
experience goodness. What else is to be conveyed 
to this august assembly? 

(Telugu poem) 


Embodiments of Love! 


ODAY marks the beginning yet another new 

year. Many new years have gone by but your 
old habits have not changed and life remains the same. The 
reason is that man is not making efforts to experience the 
principle of divinity which is present in all in the form of 
love. Love is the true form of God. It is your foremost 
duty to recognise this eternal principle of love. 


Do Not Forget Your Innate Divinity 


Today you are in search of divinity. Where is the 


88 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


need to search for that which is everywhere at all times? 
You are in search of God even when you are unaware 
that God is always with you and in you. You are trying 
to have the vision of God through meditation. However, 
you should not be satisfied by merely performing such 
spiritual practices. What is meditation? Adherence 
to truth is true meditation. The eternal, immortal, 
wonderful and blissful principle of divinity is present 
everywhere. You should make efforts to realise this truth. 
This is the royal path to attain the goal of life. 


People are making efforts to realise truth but their 
efforts are not yielding the desired result. Divinity is 
the very embodiment of eternal bliss and is present in 
all of us. How can you visualise it? Firstly, you should 
understand that there is nothing superior to truth in this 
world. Your foremost duty is to recognise the principle 
of truth that is present in you. But you are forgetting 
your innate divinity. You are undertaking a number of 
sadhanas (spiritual practices) to experience divinity. In 
fact, you do not need to perform any special sadhana 
to have the vision of God who is always with you, in 
you, above you, around you. There is no need to search 
for Him. 


Embodiments of Love! 


It is a sign of ignorance to search for God who is 
all-pervasive. People perform various spiritual practices 
such as yama, niyama, asana, pranayama, pratyahara, 
dharana, dhyana and samadhi to experience divinity. 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 8&9 


What is meant by samadhi? It should be termed as 
sama-dhi, meaning equanimity in all situations. Such 
an equanimous intellect is in fact present in every 
individual. It is a misconception to think that only 
those who perform sadhana are capable of attaining 
this state. 


Embodiment of love! 


Do you go about searching for yourself in the 
outside world? Such a person can only be called foolish. 
If you want to see yourself, you should turn your vision 
inward. Unfortunately, you are moving away from your 
own sacred self by indulging in various practices with 
worldly outlook. You are endowed with the sacred 
principle of love. This divine love is your inherent 
nature. It neither comes nor goes. Divinity has neither 
birth nor death. It is always present in you. Instead of 
spending your time in various types of sadhanas, realise 
the truth that ‘I am I’. One who realises this truth need 
not perform any sadhanas. Where does this ‘I’ come 
from? It is in you. Not realising this, you search for this 
divine self in the outside world. You have to realise that 
this divinity is very much in you. But because of illusion, 
you identify the principle of ‘I’ with your body. Infact, 
‘you’ are different from the body. You should understand 
this truth and act accordingly. He is a true sadhaka who 
realises that God is present within. Some people sit in 
a corner, close their eyes and try to contemplate on 
divinity. One does not need to search for his shadow 


90 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


which is always with him. Similarly, the divinity that 
you are searching for in the outside world is very much 
present in you. 


Several people made efforts to fathom the true 
nature of Lord Krishna and undertook several types of 
sadhanas in that regard. But, ultimately none of them 
could realise the Krishna tattwa. In fact, where is 
Krishna? Where is God? He is present in one’s own self. 
The person who cannot realise this truth and goes about 
searching for Him in the outside world is an ignoramus. 
Once Krishna told Arjuna, “I am yours and you are 
mine. I and you are one.” Not realising such unity, it is 
foolish to search for God in the outside world. The boy 
who spoke earlier said that he was doing sadhana to 
attain the vision of God. One need not search for God 
in some distant corner. 


Sarvata Panipadam 

Tat Sarvatokshi Siromukham, 
Sarvata Sruthimalloke, 
Sarvamavritya Thishthathi. 


(With hands, feet, eyes, ears, heads and mouth 
pervading everything, He permeates the entire 
universe). 


Where is the need to search for God when He is 
present everywhere? Whatever you see is permeated 
by God. There is no place or form in which God is not 
present. 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 91 


God is love and love is God 
You can connect yourself with 
God only through love. 
Develop love and achieve 
the supreme state of equanimity. 
(Telugu poem) 


Therefore there is no necessity to engage in a 
separate search for God. God is present everywhere 
as truth. Why should one search for such truth? Some 
people are under the misconception that Lord Krishna 
was born at such and such a place, left His mortal coil at 
such and such a place. No! This is not a correct concept. 
Krishna is present in all places at all times. Whatever 
you see and whomever you come across in this objective 
world is the very form of Lord Krishna. Only the names 
change; God is only one. It is foolish to search for 
such an omnipresent God. Instead of searching for God 
outside, try to realise the God who is immanent in you. 
You enquire into yourself who you are. Leave aside 
the body consciousness. Do not identify yourself with 
the body. It is only when you identify yourself with the 
body, the question of ‘I’ and ‘you’ arises. When this 
‘I’ and ‘you’ merge into one, there will be unity. But 
unfortunately, today people are unable to forget their 
egoistic ‘I’. Wherever you see, it is only one ‘I’ principle 
that is present in all. Once you realise that the same atma 
pervades every individual body, the differences of ‘I’ and 
‘you’ vanish. But you are unable to give up your false 
identification with the body. Right from your birth, you 


92 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


are accustomed to identifying yourself with the body. 
The ‘I’ Priniciple Is Fundamental To All 
Embodiments of Love! 


Whether it is love or truth or peace or divinity there 
is no duality. They are all one. Only when you fortify 
the spirit of unity, will you be able to realise the truth. 
Love is not something that is acquired from outside. It 
emerges from within. When you share such love with 
everybody, you will be able to realise the truth that all 
are one. (Showing His handkerchief, Bhagawan said) 
It is made up of thread, which in turn, is made out of 
cotton. Similarly, mind is also made up of the threads of 
sankalpas and vikalpas (resolutions and aberrations) 


Embodiments of Love! 


You have to enquire yourself as to what extent 
you have understood the principle of love which is 
uniformly present in all; differences arise because of 
our perception and feelings. Right from the beginning 
man is carried away by his identification with the body 
and, therefore, he perceives diversity in creation. In fact, 
it is unity alone that permeates the apparent diversity. 
Whatever differences are there, they are only the 
creations of the mind. If one wants to eliminate these 
differences and realise the principle of unity in diversity, 
one has to realise his true nature. It is only whey you 
turn your perception away from this fact of unity will 
you experience diversity. Therefore turn you cognitive 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 93 


faculties on the principle of unity. I am not this body, 
I 

am I, the same I is present in every individual. When you 
identify Me with the physical form, you become separate 
from Me. It is only these differences in feelings that 
create differences between individuals. The principle 
of ‘I’ is the only fundamental principle that is present in 
every being. Each person is like a mirror and the same ‘T’ 
is reflected in all. Mirrors are different but the reflection 
is the same. You have to realise this reality of unity. 


Embodiments of Love, 


Students! God has no specific form. All forms are 
His. But, wise men describe divinity in different ways. 
That is why it is said Ekam Sath viprah bahudha vadanti 
(Truth is one but wise men call it by many names). To 
visualise unity as diversity is a misperception. This 
misperception arises out of maya (illusion). The truth is, 
there is only unity everywhere, not diversity. What you 
have observed as diversity is your illusion only. Forget 
this diversity and contemplate on divinity. 1.e. unity. You 
may ascribe any name or form to divinity, but, God is 
only one. At one time, Radha the most ardent devotee 
of Krishna had realised that both Krishna and herself 
were one from the atmic point of view. But she slipped 
away from such feeling of unity and considered herself 
as different from Krishna on account of deha bhava 
(body attachment). 


Embodiments of Love! 


94 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


Whatever you see, whomever you come across, 
consider every form as nothing but the manifestation 
of divinity. Do not give scope for differences of ‘I’ and 
‘you’. Wherever you see in God’s creation, everything is 
reaction, reflection and resound. You look into a mirror 
and say that you are in the mirror. In fact, you are not in 
the mirror. It is only your reflection that appears in the 
mirror. When you go behind the hill and shout “Oh!””, you 
will immediately notice that someone is shouting at you 
with the same intensity. In fact that voice belongs to you 
only and to no one else. Thus, man today is immersed in 
such a mistaken impression. Whatever you see outside is 
the reflection of your inner being. You consider unity as 
diversity and make a mistake. Unfortunately, nowadays, 
people are unable to understand their own true nature. 


Once, a young cowherd took his cattle to the forest 
for grazing. While the cattle were grazing, he began 
singing loudly. The song echoed from the hills. The 
innocent boy thought that someone was imitating to 
make fun of him. He grew angry. After he returned home, 
he complained to his mother about the incident saying, 
“Mother! I will not take the cattle to the forest tomorrow. 
There is someone in the forest who is imitating whatever 
I sing. I hate him.” The mother said that she would 
accompany him to the forest the next day. He took her 
behind the hills and started singing loudly. Again, a 
resound of the same song was heard. Then the mother 
said, “Son, it is not that someone else is repeating your 
song to make fun of you. Whatever you sing, its resound 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 95 


is being heard by you.” Like the foolish cowherd boy, 
the present day man is swept away by the reflection, 
reaction and resound. 


If you want to see God, you should firmly believe 
that you are not the body. To identify yourself with the 
body is but an illusion. Students should try to understand 
this clearly. All that is seen outside is only a reflection 
and is not the reality. You see Sai Baba in front of you. 
You identify Sai Baba with the body. But I am not the 
body. I and you are one. Once you understand this truth 
clearly, there will be no difference whatsoever. If you 
slap someone on the cheek, it amounts to slapping your 
own self. If you abuse others, it amounts to abusing 
your own self. You are bound to face the consequences 
of your actions. You are the cause of your happiness 
or suffering. Others are not responsible for it. In fact, 
there are no others. All are one. How can we say this? 
Consider for example, you have prepared 5000 laddus 
and distributed to others. Laddus may be different, but 
sugar is the same in all. Likewise, the same principle 
of atma is present in one and all. You should make 
efforts to understand your true identity. You are the very 
embodiment of Love. The principle of love is one and 
the same in all. You share your love with your children, 
parents and spouse. The feeling towards each of them 
is different but the fundamental principle of love is 
the same. Atma is the fundamental truth. It is one only 
without a second. 


Embodiments of Divine Atma! 


96 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


The Atma is one, not two. Once you recognise 
the truth that the same Atma is present in all, you 
will be free from all differences and conflicts. Develop 
firm faith that “you” are present in all. Understand this 
principle of unity. All the students have immense love for 
Me. They are happy that Baba loves them. Understand 
that it is only Baba who loves all. You see differences 
in individuals; but, in My view, all are one. I and you 
are one. Have firm faith in this unity. Only then can you 
transcend duality. When you enquire deeply, you will 
be able to understand this truth. Have patience. Do not 
feel disappointed that you are unable to have the vision 
of God. When you understand the principle of unity and 
hold on to it firmly, you become Sai Baba yourself. You 
are divine. But you are unable to realise it as you are 
intoxicated with the ‘deep wine’ of worldly desires. All 
are the embodiment of divine. I am not different from 
you and you are not different from Me. We are one. 
Understand and experience this unity. 


[Ugadi, 21-3-2004, Prasanthi Nilayam] 


Manifestation Of The Vedas 
In Human Form 


Sweeter than sugar, tastier than curd, sweeter in- 
deed than honey is the Name of Rama. Constant 
repetition of this sweet Name gives one the taste 
of divine nectar itself. Therefore, contemplate on 
the Name of Rama incessantly. 

(Telugu poem) 


HE Vedas are the quintessence of profound, 

immeasurable and infinite wisdom. In 7reta 
Yuga, the four Vedas assumed physical form and incar- 
nated as Rama, Lakshmana, Bharata and Satrughna. 
While Rig Veda assumed the form of Rama, Yajur 
Veda, Sama Veda and Atharvana Veda manifested 
in the forms of Lakshmana, Bharata and Satrughna, 
respectively. 


98 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


Divine Power of Mantras 


Rama symbolized Rig Veda. He was Mantraswarupa 
(embodiment of mantras). Lakshmana was Mantradrasta 
(one who contemplated on the mantras) and he put the 
teachings of Rama into practice. He followed Rama 
faithfully. He considered Rama Nama as the taraka 
(liberating) mantra. He, in fact, considered Rama as 
everything - mother, father, Guru and God. Bharata was 
the embodiment of Sama Veda and chanted Rama Nama 
incessantly with bhava, raga and tala (feeling,melody 
and rhythm). While Bharata was engaged in nirguna 
worship (worship of formless God), Lakshmana 
rejoiced in saguna worship (worship of God with form). 
Atharvana Veda manifested itself as satrughna who 
followed his three elder brothers and conquered not only 
the secular world but achieved victory over the kingdom 
of senses also. The vedas thus incarnated in Treta Yuga 
to impart the most precious message to mankind. The 
two great sages Vasishtha and Viswamitra declared to 
the world that the four Vedas had taken birth in human 
form as Rama, Lakshmana, Bharata and Satrughna. As 
a consequence of great merit earned by Dasaratha, the 
four Vedas incarnated as his sons. If anyone asked Sage 
Viswamitra any questions about the Vedas, he replied, 
“All the four Vedas have incarnated as the four sons of 
Dasaratha to set an ideal to the world.” Hence the Vedas 
are not formless; they have a form. 


The mantras contained in the Vedas are of immense 
significance. When Sage Viswamitra realized that the 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 99 


rakshasas (demons) wanted to stop the chanting of 
Vedic mantras and destroy righteousness and truth on 
earth, he sought the help of Rama and Lakshmana who 
symbolized the divine forces that descended on earth to 
destroy the demonic forces and establish peace in the 
world. With the power of mantras taught to them by 
Sage Viswamitra, Rama and Lakshmana annihilated the 
rakshasas. This incident signifies the fact that with the 
power of Vedic mantras man can destroy his demonic 
qualities. By engaging themselves in the chanting of 
the mantras, the people of Treta Yuga annihilated their 
demonic qualities. Symbolising the divine powers of 
the Vedas, Rama, Lakshmana, Bharata and Satrughna 
destroyed demonic forces and fostered divine forces 
in the world. The four brothers thus established the 
supremacy of the Vedas as manifestation of the aspect 
of God with form. Each mantra has a form. It has also 
its own inner significance. When chanting is done with 
contemplation on form, it leads one to the path of self- 
realisation. The Vedic seers declared: Vedahametam 
Purusham mahantam Aditya varnam tamasah parastat. 
(I have seen the Divine Being who shines with 
the splendour of a billion suns beyond the realm of 
darkness). The seers and sages transcended the darkness 
of ignorance and visualized the effulgence of the Divine. 
They chanted the mantras, contemplated on the form 
of the Divine, performed Yajnas and attained peace 
and bliss. They made use of mantra, tantra and yantra 
in the performance of yajnas which ensured peace and 
prosperity of the people in Treta Yuga. With the help of 


100 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


the mantras, they quelled the rakshasas and established 
the reign of gods. 


Namasmarana for Man’s Liberation 


But the people of Kali Yuga have forgotten these 
mantras with the result that Kali Yuga has verily 
become Kalaha Yuga (the Age of discord and conflict). 
Even brothers quarrel with each other. They live and 
eat together in the same family, yet there is hatred 
and conflict between them. Different means for man’s 
liberation have been prescribed for each of the four 
Yugas. While meditation was prescribed as the primary 
means of liberation in Krita Yuga, performance of Yajnas 
and chanting of mantras forms the means of liberation in 
the Treta Yuga. Similarly, archana (worship of God) was 
the chief means of liberation in Dwapara Yuga. But it is 
namasmarana that is the main means of man’s liberation 
in Kali Yuga. As the people of Kali Yuga do not have the 
strength and capability to carry out rigorous sadhana, 
they have been advised to do namasmarana. 


Harernama Harernama Harernamaiva 
Kevalam; kalau nastyeva nastyeva 
Nastyeva _ gatiranyatha. 


(In Kali Yuga, there is no other means more 
effective than the chanting of Divine Name for man’s 
liberation). 


The Ramayana is not an ordinary story. It contains 
the direct message of the Vedas. Rama symbolizes the 
wisdom of the Vedas. Rama married Sita who represents 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 101 


Brahmajnana (knowledge of Brahman). When Sita is 
taken away by demonic forces, Rama and Lakshmana 
search for her desperately. The Ramayana contains 
thousands of slokas. As it was not possible to remember 
all the s/okas of the Ramayana, the sages recommended 
the chanting of the name of Rama. When the disciples of 
Vasishtha asked him what divine name to chant, the sage 
said, “It is enough if you chant the name Rama. The name 
of Rama will make you free from raga (attachment) and 
roga (disease)’”. As I often tell the students, the name 
Rama has two syllables, ‘Ra’ and ‘ma’. These two 
powerful syllables are derived from the names of Vishnu 
and Siva. The syllable ‘Ra’ comes from the ashtakshari 
(eight syllabled) mantra ‘Om Namo Narayanaya’. It 
is the life-breath of the ashtakshari mantra. Similarly, 
‘ma’ is the very soul of the panchakshari (five lettered) 
mantra ‘Om Namah Sivaya’. The astakshari mantra 
‘Om Namo Narayanaya’ and the panchakshari mantra 
‘Om Namah Sivaya’ become meaningless when ‘ra’ and 
‘ma’ are, respectively, removed from the words of these 
mantras. Without ‘ra’ the ashtakshari mantra becomes 
‘Om Namo Nayanaya’ which is meaningless. In the same 
way, the panchakshari mantra without ‘ma’ becomes 
‘Om Nah Sivaya’ which is inauspicious. The name Rama 
is the life-breath of both the Vaishnavites and Saivites 
(worshippers of Vishnu and Siva). 


In Treta Yuga when the sages and seers were 
engaged in the chanting of the divine name of Rama, 
Ravana, Kumbhakarna and other demons tried to put 


102 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


hurdles in their way. They thought that if they abducted 
Sita, who symbolized Brahmajnana, Rama would lose 
His power. The name would lose its potency without 
jnana just like sugarcane loses its sweetness without 
rasa. Hanuman resolved to bring this rasa back to 
Rama and rejoiced in drinking ramarasa (ambrosia 
of Rama’s name). The people of 7reta and Dwapara 
Yugas considered the name Rama to be the essence of 
all sweetness and enjoyed its nectarous taste. Instead of 
tasting the delicious spiritual sweetness of the name of 
Rama, people today devour worldly sweets, and expose 
themselves to the risk of becoming diabetics. Worldly 
sweets cause diseases whereas the delicious sweet of 
Ramanama rids one of all diseases. In ancient India, 
even the cowherds and shepherds chanted the divine 
name while tending their cattle and sheep. There were 
not many diseases in ancient times. Rama, Lakshmana, 
Bharata and Satrughna propagated the glorious power 
of Vedic mantras to free the world from diseases and 
suffering. 


Never Neglect The Teachings Of The Vedas 


Mandodari, the queen of Ravana, strived hard to 
save her husband. She gave wise counsel to him but 
Ravana paid no heed to her. When husband takes to evil 
ways, a virtuous wife acts as his wise minister to put him 
on the right path. Mandodari was one such wife. Bharya 
(wife) is not the one who provides worldly pleasures to 
her husband; she is the one who does good to him by 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 103 


leading him to the path of wisdom and righteousness. 
Mandodari was a true Sati (wife) who tried to mend 
the ways of her Pati (husband). Sita also tendered wise 
counsel to Rama and advised Him not to destroy all the 
demons. She suggested that only those who committed 
the evil deeds should be punished. Justice does not lie 
in destroying the entire clan. Women are great because 
they show the right path to men. They are, in fact, the 
light of wisdom in the world. They, therefore, deserve 
protection and reverence. Sita symbolizes Jnanatattwa 
(principle of wisdom). Sita told Rama that goodness was 
universal, irrespective of caste, creed and community. 
It is because of women like Sita that men have made 
progress in life. 


There are numerous species in this world. Every 
one of them has a definite purpose to fulfil in God’s 
creation. Some of them may appear more beautiful 
than others. One cannot say whether a cow is more 
beautiful or a bull. But virtues are more important than 
physical beauty. Observing the good and bad in the 
world, the students should develop discrimination to 
choose the former. They should strive hard to cultivate 
virtues. Right from early age, they should inculcate 
good qualities and develop good character. Wherever 
you go, character is of utmost importance. When the 
students develop good character, the entire country will 
become good and great. It is virtues that lend greatness 
to any person. Rama shines in the Ramayana because 
of His sterling virtues. Virtues are more important than 


104 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


bookish learning. 


In spite of his education and intelligence man 
does not give up his mean-mindedness and 
evil qualities. He has no knowledge of the Self. 
Modern education leads to argumentation, not 
to total wisdom. (Telugu poem) 


Students - Boys and Girls! 


You should try to attain total wisdom. You should 
make right use of your eyes, ears and tongue which God 
has gifted to you. Whoever is able to control these three 
will achieve greatness. One should therefore cultivate 
right vision, right hearing and right speech. Always 
speak sweetly and softly. One who cultivates these three 
virtues will verily become divine. This is the primary 
objective and fundamental basis of all your education. 
Those bereft of these virtues are virtually demons. This is 
the essence and the message of the Ramayana. The four 
Vedas and other scriptures exhort man to follow these 
principles. Dear students! Never neglect the teachings of 
the Vedas. They are for the emancipation and redemption 
of mankind. Put them into practice in your life. 


[Rama Navami, 30-3-2004, Prasanthi Nilayam] 


8 


Uphold Truth Under 
All Circumstances 


The Effulgent Lord who shines in every atom 
and pervades the entire universe will protect you 
always. He is the Omnipotent Lord of Parthi who 
will grant you Bhakthi (devotion), and will certainly 
help you in all your endeavours. What else is to be 
conveyed to this assembly of noble souls? 
(Telugu poem) 


Embodiments of Love! 


OD does not need anybody’s support or help. 
He takes care of everything of His own 
accord and bestows His grace on all. 


Humanity Cannot Exist Without Divinity 


Devotees! Do not think that God is confined to a 
particular place and that you have to search for Him. 


106 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


It is a sign of ignorance to search for God who is 
everywhere at all times. First and foremost, you should 
enquire and understand who God is. He is the one who 
pervades in every particle and every atom of Prakriti 
(Nature). Nature is the direct manifestation of God. 
There is nothing that God cannot accomplish. He sees 
everything at all times. Without recognizing the divine 
power of God in Nature, it is a mistake to think that 
God does not respond to your prayers and come to your 
rescue. Devotion and divine grace are interrelated and 
interdependent. Man is unable to understand the divine 
power of God because of maya (illusion). 


Whatever God does is for the welfare of the world. 
Not a single act of God is without a purpose. Man gets 
confused as he is unable to understand the inner meaning 
of God’s actions. The earth rotates on its axis at the 
speed of one thousand miles per hour causing day and 
night. Rising and setting of the sun as well as waxing 
and waning of the moon promote all activity on earth. 
Not merely that, the earth revolves around the sun at 
the speed of 66 thousand miles per hour, giving rise to 
various seasons. The seasons benefit man in many ways. 
Formation of clouds and occurrence of rainfall help man 
to grow food. In this manner, the earth provides food 
and sustenance to all beings. Can a human being or a 
government for that matter accomplish such a mighty 
task? No, no. Without recognizing these beneficial acts 
of God of such enormous magnitude, man wastes his life 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 107 


in delusion and doubt. If you enquire deeply, you will 
know that divine power is at work at all times. Every 
kana (cell), every kshana (moment) and every Yuga 
(aeon) is governed by Divine Will. God is everywhere 
and is in the form of Nature. Unable to realize this 
truth, people develop doubts regarding the existence 
of God. Everything is supported and sustained by God. 
There can be no Manavatwam (humanity) without 
Daivatwam (Divinity). Your life will be sanctified when 
you understand this truth. 


Offer All Your Actions To God 


God does not waste even a single moment. All the 
time He is engaged in action for the welfare of all. He is 
the sole refuge of all at every moment of time. Nothing 
is impossible for God who permeates anda, pinda and 
Brahmanda (terrestrial, celestial and cosmic planes). 
Every second of our life is dependent on the Divine Will. 
Every breath of our life is governed by God. We cannot 
take even one breath without His Will. People are 
unable to recognize such omnipresent, omnipotent God 
and waste their time in vain argumentation regarding His 
existence. They do not experience even an iota of joy 
due to their lack of faith in all-powerful God. 


Once Arjuna asked Lord Krishna, “Swami! What 
is the reason that You are always engaged in action?” 
Krishna replied, “Arjuna! I perform karma (action) in 
order to demonstrate an ideal to the people to emulate. 


108 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


When I perform action, people follow My example. The 
entire world will come to a standstill if I do not perform 
action. The value of action is beyond all description.” 


Na Me Parthasthi karthavyam 
Trishu lokeshu kinchana, 
Nanavapathamavapthavyam 
Vartha eva cha karmani. 


(Oh Partha! There is no action that I need to perform 
in all the three worlds. Nor is there anything worth 
attaining unattained by Me, yet Iam constantly engaged 
in action). I do not perform actions for My sake nor do I 
gain anything out of them. There is nothing that I need 
to achieve by performing actions. Whatever I do is for 
the welfare of the world. You should understand this and 
emulate My example. God is teaching you everything 
not merely by precept but by practice. Only through 
proper enquiry can you understand this truth. You should 
enquire with sincerity and steadfast faith. If you lack 
faith, you cannot understand anything, however long 
you may try. Each step of Mine has a definite purpose. 
Each act of Mine reflects a certain facet of dharma. 
Nothing can happen in the world without My sankalpa 
(will). But you are unable to understand My sankalpa 
and dharma. God has incarnated not for His sake but for 
the sake of all beings. God is the reality and the world is 
its reflection. It is natural that the reflection follows the 
reality. Whatever God does is for your welfare. Likewise, 
whatever you do should be pleasing unto Him. 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 109 


Morality Earns Divine Grace 


You may proclaim in public that all your actions are 
meant to please God. But that does not mean that He is 
really pleased with you. God will be pleased only when 
you cultivate papa bheethi, daiva preethi, sangha neethi 
(fear of sin, love for God, morality in society). Bereft of 
morality, you cannot be called a human being in the true 
sense of the term. Morality is the hallmark of a human 
being. That which adheres to neethi (morality) is true 
manava jathi (human race). First, you should develop 
love for God. Daiva preethi gives rise to papa bheethi 
which in turn develops sangha neethi. Hence, daiva 
preethi is the basis on which the mansion of human life 
rests. Humanity can progress only when there is morality 
in society. But modern man has no clear understanding 
of the term morality. Even birds and animals adhere to 
the code of conduct prescribed for them. But man is 
not following the rules of morality. If only he adheres 
to morality, God will certainly bestow His grace on 
him. Morality is not something that you should force 
upon yourself. It is your natural quality. Therefore, first 
and foremost develop morality. Only then will divinity 
blossom in you. The entire world will prosper when man 
adheres to morality. Only then can man lead a happy life. 
Wherever you are, whatever you do, consider morality 
as the basis of your life. Morality is, in fact, your true 
reputation. You can earn divine grace when you have 
morality. 


110 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


Truth Is The Real Name Of God 


What is true worship? It is not merely offering 
flowers to God and performing some rituals. You should 
implicitly obey the divine command and strictly adhere 
to morality in your daily life. That can be termed as 
true worship of God. Today people think that they are 
praying to God and singing His glory. But God does 
not need all this. You pray to God only for your sake 
and not for His sake. You undertake various spiritual 
practices such as japa, thapa, yoga, etc., only for your 
satisfaction. In fact, you need not do all this to worship 
God. It is enough if you discharge your duty properly. 
Then, God will certainly bestow His love and grace on 
you. If you do not do your duty sincerely, how can you 
expect to be the recipient of God’s love? God thinks 
of your welfare every moment. Where is God? He is 
everywhere. Wherever we are, there God is. Sarvata 
panipadam tat sarvatokshi siromukham, Sarvata sruti- 
malloke sarvamavirtya tishthati (With hands, feet, eyes, 
head, mouth and ears pervading everthing, He permeates 
the entire universe). 


It is sheer ignorance to think that God is confined 
to a particular place. As Mukundan (an earlier speaker) 
has said, truth is God, God is truth. Hence, we have to 
safeguard truth. Sathyam vada, Dharmam chara (speak 
truth, practise righteousness). Truth and righteousness 
are the two main pillars on which the entire world rests. 
If we protect truth and righteousness, they will in turn 
protect us wherever we go. Truth is the source of all 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 lil 


happiness. If you do not adhere to truth, how can you 
expect to attain happiness? Truth is the fundamental 
principle of life. But today man’s thoughts, words and 
deeds are tainted with untruth and unrighteousness. That 
is the reason why he is unable to enjoy happiness in life. 
The culture of Bharat teaches, Sathyam bruyath, Priyam 
bruyath, Na bruyath sathyamapriyam (speak truth, 
speak pleasantly and do not speak unpalatable truth). 
God protects those who protect Sathya and Dharma. 
There is nothing superior to truth in this world. Truth 
pervades the entire universe. But people ignore such all- 
pervasive principle of truth. They try to suppress truth 
and indulge in falsehood. Consequently, unrighteousness 
is on the rise in the world. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Truth is your life. There is no God other than truth. 
Only truth can protect you always. Since ancient times, 
the culture of Bharat has been emphasizing on the need 
to follow truth and righteousness. I am pleased to note 
that the devotees of Kerala are leading their lives in an 
ideal manner by cultivating love for God, fear of sin 
and morality in society. If you have love for God, you 
can achieve anything in life. Once you put Sathya and 
Dharma into practice in your life, every moment of your 
life will be filled with happiness. Those who are unable 
to experience everlasting happiness should come to Me; 
I will show them the path to happiness. If you uphold 
truth and righteousness, God will be with you always 


112 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


to protect you. What is truth? Trikalabadhyam sathyam 
(Truth is that which transcends the three periods of time). 
That which undergoes change with the passage of time 
cannot be called truth at all. But today children are not 
being made aware of the real significance of truth and 
righteousness. Small children do not understand the 
correct meaning of truth. It is not enough if you teach 
them to adhere to truth in their speech and conduct. 
We should teach them that truth is God and that it is 
truth alone that can protect them. Without teaching the 
correct meaning of truth and its importance, how can 
we expect the children to adhere to truth? Our entire 
life is based on truth and righteousness. There can be 
no Dharma without Sathya. Sathyannasti paro dharma 
(There is no dharma greater than adherence to truth). 
Truth is the root, righteousness are the branches and 
sub-branches and happiness is the fruit of the tree of 
life. Hence, we should lead our life keeping truth and 
righteousness as the basis of all our actions. 


Many people perform ritualistic worship of God 
with great pomp and show. I feel like laughing at their 
ignorance.These are not the true spiritual practices. 
How can such sadhanas (spiritual practices) lead to 
sakshatkara (vision of God)? Instead, you should put 
Sathya and Dharma into practice in your life. Without 
Sathya and Dharma, all that you do is mere show. Truth 
is changeless and eternal. It transcends time, space 
and circumstances. It should form the basis of all your 
actions. If your actions are not based on truth, they 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 113 


become artificial. Truth emerges from your heart and it 
should be put into practice. We should pray to God with 
purity of thought, word and deed. You should never give 
up truth at any time and under any circumstances. Only 
then will you be protected by truth. 


Body Consciousness Is The Cause Of Your 
Delusion 


Embodiments of Love! 


There is no point in adhering to truth and 
righteousness with a negative attitude. It is like building 
castles in the air! Whatever you do with a negative 
attitude is bound to yield negative result. Hence, 
develop positive attitude. Fill your life with love. Man 
has accomplished mighty tasks, but what is the use? He 
is unable to understand the importance of Sathya and 
Dharma. In fact, there is none superior to man. There 
is divinity in humanity. But man is unable to realize 
his innate divinity because of the influence of maya 
(allusion). Man should make efforts to recognize his 
divinity. Only divinity can redeem humanity. Instead of 
realizing his innate divinity, man is getting entangled in 
worldliness. What is that we have to experience today? 
It is divinity, divinity and divinity alone. It is eternal and 
is always with you wherever you go. You should never 
forget this positive power even for a moment. Give up 
negative feelings and develop faith in the positive power, 
i.e., divinity. It is very much present in you in the form 
of conscience, guiding you and guarding you. If you 


114 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


take to wrong ways, your conscience will immediately 
caution you. It shows you the right path. It is impossible 
to experience divinity if you ignore the dictates of your 
conscience. 


All that you see is only God, and nothing else. You 
may point to an individual and say, “I see him as another 
person. How can he be God?” Wherefrom has he come? 
He has come from God. Everything is God. How can 
you have the vision of God if you see multiplicity in 
unity? In this world, wherever you see, there is unity 
and unity alone. Truth is only one. It cannot be two. 
Likewise, God who is the embodiment of truth, is only 
one. Ekam Sath viprah bahudha vadanti (Truth is one, 
but the wise refer to it by various names). You may call 
Him by any name, worship Him in any form but always 
remember that there is only one God. You may call Him 
Allah, Jesus, Rama or Krishna but He is one. Once you 
understand this principle of unity and get established in 
it, you will certainly attain divinity. 


You should always speak truth. Truth is the real 
name of God. If you want to pray to God, it is enough if 
you say, “Sathyaswarupaya Namah” (salutations to the 
embodiment of truth). All other names are His duplicate 
names. Truth is God. This truth is installed in your heart. 
If you realize this truth, you can achieve the ultimate goal 
of life. It is possible to realize this truth in a moment. 
The same divine principle is present in all in mother, 
father, child, etc. But you have forgotten this divine 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 115 


principle. You think that God appears only in a specific 
form. In fact, God has no specific form. Wherever you 
see, He is there. All are His forms. Conduct yourself 
with such sacred feeling. That is true devotion. 


Give up body attachment. Whomever you come 
across, right from a child to an old man, consider 
everyone as the embodiment of God. When you develop 
such a sacred feeling, your devotion will become steady. 
If you do not give up body attachment and if your mind 
wavers every moment, you will end up in utter confusion. 
Body consciousness is the cause of your delusion. 
Hence, get rid of body consciousness and develop God 
consciousness. Do not be carried away _ by the illusory 
world. Develop love for God. Then gradually you will be 
able to overcome body consciousness and your devotion 
will become strong and steady. What is the reason that 
people lack steady devotion? They do not contemplate 
upon one name and one form. Your devotion becomes 
steady when you install one name and one form in your 
heart. When you do Laksharchana, you chant many 
names such as Kesavaya namah, Madhavaya namah, 
Narayanaya namah.... (salutations to Lord Kesava, 
Madhava, Narayana....). You may chant any number 
of names but you worship only one God. Keeping such 
principle of unity firmly established in your heart, you 
should pray to God. 


Wherever you see, only God exists. Never doubt 
that God is here and not there. Wherever you search for 


116 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


Him, He is there. (Telugu poem). When you contemplate 
incessantly upon the Atma, you will see divinity 
everywhere. Hence, make efforts to recognize unity, 
realize it and become one with it. If you want to realize 
divinity, it is enough if you hold on to the principle of 
truth. Truth has a name and a form. Hold on to it firmly. 
Follow it implicitly. Only then will divinity reveal itself 
to you. 


Everything Is The Manifestation Of God 


Do not get deluded by names and forms. The youth 
of today lack steady mind because they are carried away 
by names and forms. Have firm faith that God is one, 
truth is one. Consider God as your sole refuge. Then 
wherever you go and whatever you see, you will find His 
manifestation. Wherever you see, He is there. He is not 
confined to one place. He is everywhere. What happened 
to the wicked Kamsa who followed the Pravritti Marg 
(path of worldliness)? Whenever he uttered the name 
‘Krishna’, He was there. But he thought it was a mere 
illusion. He could not realize the divinity of Krishna 
because of his body attachment. You can have the vision 
of the Divine only when you develop atmabhimana 
(love for the Self). Atma is one and only one. Consider, 
for instance, the three words - Dehatma, Jeevatma and 
Paramatma. Atma is common in all. You should always 
contemplate upon atma. Develop firm faith that atma 
is God. Atma is always with you, in you, around you, 
above you and below you. Other than the atma, there is 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 117 


no other entity in this world. 
Embodiments of Love! 


Do not waste time. You waste not only your 
kalam (time) but also your Kayam (body). You may 
be performing spiritual practices but you are unable to 
overcome worldly illusion. Consider everything that 
you see as the manifestation of God. Even a mosquito 
is a form of God. An ant is a form of God. That is why 
Saint Thyagaraja sang thus, “Oh Rama! You pervade 
everything right from a Cheema (ant) to Brahma. You are 
in Siva and Kesava as well. Please come to my rescue.” 
(Telugu poem). There is divinity even in an ant. You 
all know very well what the pain is like when an ant 
bites you. Not merely that, ants build big anthills which 
become the dwelling places for snakes. If not for the 
presence of divinity within, how can a small insect like 
an ant be endowed with such power? Divinity pervades 
everything, right from microcosm to macrocosm. Never 
disregard microcosm since divinity is all-pervasive. 


Modern youth do not understand what divinity is. 
This is the effect of their age. In youth, one’s blood is hot 
and mind is unsteady. How can one understand divinity 
with a wavering mind? First, you should keep your mind 
steady. Only then can you realise divinity. Truth is the 
best friend of love, and righteousness is related to both 
truth and love. The terms such as truth, love, righteous- 
ness, etc., may be different but the underlying principle 
of divinity is one and the same in them. 


118 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


Embodiments of Love! 


Today three thousand youth have come from 
Kerala out of their immense love for Swami. Develop 
such love day by day. Consider love as God. Only 
love will come to your rescue in times of need. When 
Surdas, a blind devotee of Lord Krishna, was travel- 
ling in a dense forest, Krishna came to his help in the 
form of a small boy. He told him, “Surdas! I am going 
to Brindavan. Hold My hand. I will take you with Me.” 
When he heard the name Brindavan, Surdas’s joy knew 
no bounds. The boy had told him to hold His hand. 
Being under the influence of maya, Surdas held the stick 
which Krishna had in His hand. With Krishna’s Divine 
Will, gradually the stick became smaller and smaller. 
Consequently, Surdas’s hand was about to touch Krish- 
na’s hand. It was then that Krishna revealed His identity. 
He told him, “Surdas! God is your sole refuge wherever 
you may be, in a forest, in the sky, in a city or a village, 
on the top of a mountain or in the middle of deep sea. 
That is why I have come to your rescue.” No sooner had 
Surdas’s hand touched Krishna’s hand than he attained 
divinity. Till then he was speaking to Krishna and was 
listening to His sweet words but he had not touched 
Him. The moment he touched Krishna, he became ec- 
static and called out loudly, “Krishna! Krishna!” It is 
said, Darshanam papa nashanam, Sparshanam karma 
vimochanam, Sambhashanam sankata nashanam (Ni- 
sion of the Lord destroys all sins, His touch destroys the 
bondage of karma, conversation with Him destroys all 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 119 


troubles). God incarnates to grant darshan, sparshan 
and sambhashan to His devotees. Krishna came to 
Surdas in order to show him the way to Brindavan. Then 
He started conversing with him and ultimately granted 
him His sparshan and thus relieved him of the bondage 
of karma. Hence, darshan, sparshan and sambhashan, 
all the three are essential. You should not be satisfied 
with mere darshan. You should aspire to attain all the 
three. 


Treat everyone as the form of God. It means that 
every individual is the embodiment of divinity. All 
names and forms are His. Here you are able to see 
thousands of forms of God. How lucky you are! It is a 
sign of ignorance to consider yourself weak, forgetting 
your innate divinity. Truly speaking, you are not a mere 
mortal, you are the embodiment of immortal divinity. 
God Himself is playing the role of a human being in this 
cosmic drama. Daivam manusha rupena (God assumes 
the form of a human being). Hence, develop firm faith 
that all are divine. Then you will lose your individual 
consciousness and become one with Divinity. Seeing 
multiplicity in unity is due to maya (illusion). When you 
understand unity, your jeevatwa (individual self) will be 
transformed into daivatwa (Divine Self). 


[Sadhana Camp for Kerala Youth, 11-4-2004 
Brindavan, Bangalore.] 


120 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


9 
Develop Love To Experience Divinity 


All names and forms are but the manifestations 
of the Supreme Being who is the embodiment 
of peace and auspiciousness. He is Existence, 
Knowledge, Bliss Absolute and non-dual. He is 
Sathyam, Sivam, Sundaram (Truth, Goodness, 
Beauty). 

(Telugu poem) 

Embodiments of Love! 


ANY describe at length the power of Sai, 

the love of Sai and the truth and peace 

that He embodies. But, do they really practise Sai’s 
teachings? The answer is an emphatic no. That is why 
I do not feel like giving discourses these days. People 
are heroes in giving speeches but zeros in practice. 
What is the use of speaking to those who do not put 
My teachings into practice? People are interested in 


122 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


acquiring bookish knowledge but not in practising what 
they have learnt. No benefit accrues by merely learning 
the teachings by rote. You only strain your throat when 
you do not practise what you preach. Different people 
have different opinions about the path of spirituality. 
However, spirituality can neither be described in words 
nor be understood by merely listening to discourses. 
Spiritual teachings cannot fill your heart with bliss unless 
you put them into practice. 


Krishna Permeates Every Atom Of The Universe 


It was the time of the Mahabharata war. One day, 
Abhimanyu approached his mother Subhadra with the 
request to grant him permission to enter Padmavyuha 
(lotus-shaped military formation). He prayed to his 
mother to bless him so that he could vanquish the 
enemy and emerge victorious. Subhadra said, “My dear 
son, I will certainly bless you to emerge victorious but 
ultimately it is God’s Will that prevails. Everything 
depends on His grace. How can I permit you to enter 
Padmavyuha knowing fully well the danger involved 
in it? Padmavyuha 1s not an ordinary formation. It has 
been devised by the great military genius Dronacharya 
himself. Moreover, your wife is in the family way. We 
do not know whether the time is favourable for us or 
not. Your father Arjuna and uncle Krishna are also not 
here to give you necessary guidance and support. Hence, 
give up the idea of going to the battlefield.” Abhimanyu 
replied, “Mother, there is no place where my uncle 
Krishna is not present. He is everywhere.” Bestowing 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 123 


her blessing on her son, Subhadra said, “Krishna is the 
embodiment of love. Every atom of the universe bears 
the touch of His love. His love can be experienced 
through love only; there is no other way to experience 
His love. But, my dear son, how can you experience it 
in the battlefield? You see Lord Krishna everywhere. 
But do not act out of ego. Do not think that your views 
have divine sanction.” 


Lord Krishna permeates every atom of the universe. 
Sarvatah panipadam tat sarvathokshi siromukham, 
Sarvatah sruthimalloke sarvamavruthya tishthati (with 
hands, feet, eyes, head, mouth and ears pervading 
everything, He permeates the entire universe). He is love 
personified. One can experience Him only through love. 
You can earn His grace only through love. Love can be 
conquered only through love. When there is love, the 
question of war does not arise at all. Love confers peace, 
prosperity, success, auspiciousness and bliss. They are 
not separate from each other; they are the various aspects 
of love. The principle of love is present in everyone in 
the form of atma. The atma is infinite and eternal. That 
is why the Vedas declared, Sathyam Jnanam Anantham 
Brahma (Brahman is the embodiment of truth, wisdom 
and eternity). Where is God? He is everywhere in the 
form of atma. He is present in all beings. All names 
and forms are His. He is the embodiment of truth and 
bliss. 


124 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


Everything Is Good In God’s Creation 


God’s ways are mysterious. People develop doubts 
as they are unable to understand His actions. You 
consider something as good and some other thing as 
bad but everything happens according to God’s Will. 
You say yes for good and no for bad but both are the 
manifestations of God. Man tries to judge something as 
good for him and some other thing as bad. It is impossible 
for man to make correct judgement. How can he know 
what is good for him? Good and bad happen according 
to Divine Will. Certain forms may not be pleasing to the 
eye but for God everything is Sathyam, Sivam, Sundaram 
(truth, goodness and beauty). How can you describe 
such a principle? There is beauty in whatever God 
does. But none can fathom His ways. From a worldly 
viewpoint, some things may appear bad to the eye but 
when you enquire deeply, you will understand the truth 
that everything is good. Since you have only external 
vision, you consider something as beautiful and some 
other as ugly. Whatever God creates is beautiful. But 
people are not able to appreciate real beauty because of 
their external outlook. If you enquire into the truth, you 
will know that everything in God’s creation is beautiful. 
To every mother, her child appears to be beautiful. None 
can deny this fact. A child may appear to be ugly to you 
but his mother sees only beauty in him. You have 
no right to dispute the judgement of the mother in this 
regard. Similar is the case with God’s creation. Then, 
how can you say that something is good 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 125 


and some other thing is bad? The entire world is full 
of beauty and charm. Can you show Me anything right 
from microcosm to macrocosm that is bad in this vast 
universe? It is impossible. You should accept everything 
as God’s Will with an open mind. Consider everything 
as good. You do not have any right to pass judgement 
on God’s creation or on what He does. The ways of God 
are highly mysterious and wonderful. 


The sankalpa (Will) of the Lord and His stories 
are most wonderful and sacred in all the three 
worlds. They are like sickles that cut the creepers 
of worldly bondage. They are most ennobling 
and elevating. They confer bliss on the sages and 
seers doing penance in forests. 

(Telugu poem) 


See Divinity In God’s Creation 


Prahlada was a great devotee of the Lord. He 
incessantly chanted the Divine Name of Narayana and 
consequently experienced his oneness with the Lord. He 
could see the entire world as the manifestation of Lord 
Narayana. God pervades the entire universe. Such being 
the case, how can you say that God is present here and He 
is not there? You see the world but you fail to recognise 
it as the form of God. In fact, everything is divine. Do 
not get deluded by whatever you see with your eyes. 


Man does not have any power of his own. It is 
divine power that makes him function. But man, out of 


126 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


his ignorance, is carried away by a sense of doership 
and develops ego. This is what we witness in the world 
today. Under these circumstances, it is not possible to 
differentiate between truth and untruth. It is better to 
consider everything as good. When God is all-pervasive, 
how can there be anything bad? Try to visualise God 
everywhere. Do not superimpose your feelings on His. 
It is impossible to understand the principle of divinity 
through the study of scriptural texts or worldly education. 
Even sages and seers of yore were unable to comprehend 
divinity. He is beyond the three worlds. How can anyone 
understand such divinity? What Ajit Popat (an earlier 
speaker) has said is true. But one should be realistic in 
one’s views. You say that you have seen the form of 
Lord Vishnu. How does He look like? You say that He 
has Shankha, Chakra, Gada and Padma (conch, discus, 
mace and lotus) in His four hands. Shankha, Chakra, 
Gada and Padma are only symbolic. Such a form does 
not correspond to reality. It is only a superimposition of 
your feelings but not the ultimate truth. 


Suppose, you find a snake in front of you while 
walking on a road. You think it is poisonous. Who is 
relatively more poisonous? Is not man more poisonous 
when all his thoughts, words and deeds are full of 
poison? In fact, he is more dangerous than the snake. 
Whatever is seen may not correspond to reality. You have 
to enquire deeply to know the truth. The Mahabharata 
is full of these teachings. He is a true human being who 
understands the teachings of the Mahabharata and puts 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 127 


them into practice. The sacred teachings of this epic 
are a great contribution of Bharat to mankind. With 
your limited understanding, you have no right to pass 
judgement on anything. True wisdom lies in accepting 
everything as good and following the path of truth. 


Embodiments of Love! 


There is love in each of you but you cannot 
experience it unless you give up body attachment. 


This body is a den of dirt, and prone to diseases; 
it is subject to change from time to time; it cannot 
cross the ocean of Samsara. It is nothing but a 
structure of bones. Oh mind! Do not be under 
the delusion that body is permanent. Instead take 
refuge at the Divine Lotus Feet. 

(Telugu poem) 


How foolish is it to develop attachment to such a 
transient body? The world appears to be permanent but 
in reality it is not so. What appears good to the naked 
eye may not be so in reality. To see bad in good is a 
great sin. You should try to see good even in bad. Never 
condemn anything as bad. Even if something appears to 
be bad, you should enquire deeply and try to visualise 
the positive aspect in it. You find innumerable forms in 
this vast world. However, all forms have emerged from 
the same source. They are the different aspects of the 
same divinity. All forms are essentially divine. Such 
being the case, how can you condemn something as bad? 


128 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


Everything is good. When you eat food, you consider 
it sacred. So long as the food remains in your stomach, 
you feel it is good. But when it comes out as waste, you 
cannot bear its sight and smell. If it is so disgusting, how 
could you keep it in your stomach earlier? Good and bad 
depend on your likes and dislikes. Leave aside your likes 
and dislikes. You have to keep in mind what God likes. 
Only God knows what is good for you. Hence, surrender 
to His Will and take refuge in Him. 


True Love Is Changeless And Eternal 
Embodiments of Love! 


The principle of love cannot be described in words. 
All descriptions will only reflect a part of the whole 
truth. So, instead of trying to describe it, make efforts 
to become deserving of God’s love. Love is the form of 
God. He may bestow His love on you in any form. Love 
is your ultimate goal. Only love can sanctify your life. 
Hence, develop love more and more. Love alone will 
protect you. Love for the physical body is attachment. 
A child becomes a youth and a youth becomes old, and 
accordingly the physical body undergoes change and 
gradually loses its beauty and charm with the passage 
of time. But love remains constant at all times. The term 
prema (love) is not just a word; it has a form. There is no 
place where love does not exist. Love is all-pervasive. 
It encompasses anda, pinda and Brahmanda. Love is 
the basis of all our activities such as eating, talking, 
walking, etc. In fact, love sustains our life. People tend to 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 129 


forget such a sacred principle of love even after knowing 
its significance. How foolish they are! One should 
experience love, enjoy it and share it with others. 


Embodiments of Love! 


It is impossible to describe the principle of love in 
full. Love attracts all. Love of God has manifested in the 
form of Nature. Therefore, Nature attracts all. Karshati 
iti Krishna (Krishna is one who attracts). God attracts 
everyone and confers bliss on all. He is the embodiment 
of sweetness. People prepare various types of sweets but 
sugar is the same in all. Similarly, divinity is the same 
in all names and forms we see in this world. God cannot 
be limited to any particular form. Consider all forms as 
His. You may go anywhere, worship any form. All forms 
are divine. When you develop such love for and faith in 
God, you can see Him everywhere and experience His 
love. It is not possible to experience divinity without 
developing love. That is why the Gopikas prayed to 
Krishna thus: 


Oh Krishna, play Your sweet flute and sow the 
seeds of love in the desert of loveless hearts. 


Let the rain of love fall on earth and make the 
rivers of love flow. (Telugu 
song) 


The Gopikas yearned for Krishna’s love and 
nothing else. You are the drops of nectarous love. A 
number of drops join to make a stream which ultimately 
merges in the ocean. But today man is not able to 


130 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


understand what true love is. If he likes a particular 
object, he thinks he loves it. When you have likes, you 
will also have dislikes. But when you have love, there 
cannot be anything negative. Love is changeless and 
eternal. It is divine. It is truly the form of divinity. Ekam, 
Nityam, Vimalam, Achalam, Sarvadhee Sakshibhutam, 
Bhavateetam, Trigunarahitam (One without a second, 
eternal, pure, unchanging, the witness of all functions of 
the intellect, beyond all mental conditions and the three 
gunas of sattwa, rajas and thamas). 


It is not possible to describe love in worldly 
parlance. It is foolishness to think of love in a worldly 
sense. You cannot find a term equivalent to love. You may 
describe love in various ways for your own satisfaction. 
But none of them corresponds to the reality. Only love 
equals love. It is not possible to describe it in any other 
way. It is this divine principle of love which you have 
to understand and practise. 


Embodiments of Love! 


You may get immersed in love, experience it and 
enjoy it. But your hunger for love can never be satiated. 
Love can be experienced only through love. There is 
no other path to experience love. Love is love and that 
is all. Have firm faith that God is the embodiment of 
love. Love Him wholeheartedly. Do not superimpose 
your worldly love on God’s love. His is the only true 
and eternal love. Focus your love only on God. God 
is present everywhere in the form of love. You should 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 131 


never entertain doubts in this regard. The stream of love 
should flow in you incessantly. Only then can you have 
the divine vision. No doubt, you have the desire to see 
God but you are not expanding your love. If you are 
interested, I am ready to grant you the vision of God. 
But you can see Him provided you cultivate true and 
eternal love in you. 


Embodiments of Love! 


I always teach you love, love and love alone. You 
may try to describe love in various ways. It is impossible 
to do so. Love has only one form, i.e., the form of 
attraction. Love confers bliss and grace. Love is God, live 
in love. On some other occasion, I shall dwell further on 
the principle of love. Worldly love is but artificial. But 
man, out of his ignorance, thinks that there is happiness 
in it. All that man loves is negative. He should direct his 
love towards the positive principle. It never changes. 
Here is a small example. You have been coming here 
for a number of years. Do you ever feel satiated with 
Swami’s darshan? No. The same Swami whom you 
saw in the morning comes again in the evening. But 
you long to see Him again and again. The reason for 
this longing is love. 


[Divine Discourse, 15-4-2004, Brindavan, Bangalore] 


10 
Mother Is Your First God 


“When man emerges out of his mother’s womb 
He has no garland of any kind around his neck: 

Neither of pearls nor of gold, nor a necklace of 
topaz 

Or of rubies or other precious gems 

There is, however, one garland carrying the 
unbroken link of the consequences of the 
good and bad deeds of the past lives strung 
together. 

Brahma, the creator, strings together the 
consequences of his past deeds into a heavy 
garland and puts it around his neck at the time 
of his birth” 

(Telugu poem) 
Embodiments of Love ! 
VERY individual has four gurus in this 
world. The Vedas proclaim “Mathrudevo 


134 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


bhava, Pithrudevo bhava, Acharyadevo bhava, 
Athithidevo bhava’’, which means the mother, father, 
teacher and the guest are to be considered as God. 
Among the four, the mother is the first and the foremost 
guru. There are several inner meanings to the teachings 
of the mother. A true disciple is one who meticulously 
follows the mother’s instructions. The mother may 
appear to be an ordinary individual like any other, but 
when you delve deep into her teachings, you will realize 
that she is a great guru (teacher). But, those who are not 
on the spiritual path, may take all this lightly. 


Three Laudable Disires Of A Noble Mother 


Once, mother Eswaramma was returning from 
Chitravathi river with a vessel full of water. An old 
woman was walking along with her with great difficulty, 
unable to bear the burden of the vessel filled with 
water. Eswaramma enquired “Mother! Are you feeling 
difficulty in carrying the vessel full of water?” The 
old woman who was perspiring and unable to keep 
pace with her replied,“Yes, mother! I am unable to 
carry this vessel for such a long distance. But, I have 
no children to help me in this task. I myself have to 
carry this vessel full of water everyday”. These words 
of agony were imprinted on the mind of Eswaramma. 
After walking for some distance, she saw a small boy 
holding a slate and pencil in one hand and carrying a 
heavy load of books in a bag hanging round his neck. He 
was unable to walk, but he had to continue his journey to 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 135 


the Bukkapatnam School. Eswaramma enquired of the 
boy, “My dear son! What for are these slate and pencil? 
Why are you carrying such a heavy load of books?” 
The small boy replied “Mother, I am carrying these 
books so that I can note down all that the teachers teach 
me.” Eswaramma kept all these incidents in her mind. 
After walking for some more distance, she came across 
a frail lady carrying her infant child on her shoulders 
proceeding towards Bukkapatnam. Eswaramma again 
enquired of this lady, “you appear to be frail and weak, 
unable to carry the child. Why should you walk such a 
long distance up to Bukkapatnam?” The lady replied, 
“Mother! What else can I do? There is no doctor in 
this remote village who can give some medicine for my 
child. He is suffering from cold and fever. I have to take 
him to the Bukkapatnam hospital.” This incident also 
made an imprint on the mind of Eswaramma. 


There used to be a mother and small child in a 
remote village near Kolkata. As soon as the child was 
born, the father died. The mother somehow brought up 
the child with the meagre income she earned by doing 
some odd jobs. There was not even a lamp in the house 
for the boy to study during the night. He used to sit under 
the street lights and study. Thus, he continued his studies 
with great difficulty and earned a high degree. That 
little boy blossomed into the legendary Eswarchandra 
Vidyasagar. 


Once, a fair was being held in Kolkata. 


136 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


Eswarchandra’s mother also started out to visit the fair, 
wearing a worn out sari. He saw her pitiable condition. 
While everybody else was going to the fair wearing 
expensive clothes, Vidyasagar could not bear the sight of 
his mother going to the fair wearing a worn out sari. He 
asked, “Mother! Why are you going to the fair wearing 
such a worn-out sari?” The mother replied “My dear son! 
I am happy with whatever I have. Please do not worry. 
You continue with your studies and come up in life.” 


A few years after this incident, Vidyasagar 
completed his studies. He was able to secure a good 
job with a decent salary. He bought some good saris 
for his mother with his first month’s salary. Then, his 
mother told him, “I will not be really happy with these 
costly saris. If you help the poor people in our village 
and alleviate their suffering at least to some extent, that 
is enough for me.” She further expressed that she had 
three desires. Immediately, Vidyasagar fell at her feet 
and prayed, “Mother! It is my duty to fulfil your desires. 
It is the responsibility of a son to fulfil the desires of 
his mother and make her happy. Please let me know 
what your desires are.” The mother replied, “My dear 
son! There are several poor, uneducated and sick people 
in our village. Who will alleviate their suffering? I 
will be really happy, only when you can remove their 
difficulties. The children in this village have to walk long 
distances and go to the neighbouring village for studies. 
I am really moved at their pitiable condition. Should 
they have to undergo so many difficulties for the sake 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 137 


of education? I want you to build a small school in this 
village itself so that these children can comfortably study 
here.” Vidyasagar built a small school in his village as 
per the wishes of his mother and she was happy. 


On another day, Vidyasagar found his mother sitting 
in a pensive mood and enquired what the reason was. 
She told him, “My dear son! The people of our village 
are suffering a lot for want of drinking water. They have 
to fetch the water from long distances, walking all the 
way. The well in our village has completely dried up. 
How can old ladies like me fetch water from such a long 
distance? If you can arrange for the digging of a well 
in our village, it will be a great boon for them. This is 
my second desire.” Vidyasagar assured her, “Mother! 
I will certainly fulfil your desire. I will try to solve the 
drinking water problem in our village.” Initially, he got 
two or three bore wells sunk in the village, but they were 
not of much use. The bore wells were able to supply 
water only during the rainy season. During summer, 
they used to dry up, yielding not even a drop of water. 
Therefore, the mother advised him to find a permanent 
solution for the problem. Then, Vidyasagar arranged 
for digging a big well and solved the problem of water 
scarcity permanently. His mother was happy. 


Education Must Confer Humility 


After sometime, Vidyasagar got a promotion in 
his job. His salary also increased. Then, he approached 
his mother and enquired, “Mother! What is your third 


138 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


desire?” She replied, “My dear son! You have built 
a school. You have provided drinking water to the 
villagers. But, the mothers in our village are compelled 
to take their children whenever they fall sick, to the 
neighbouring village for treatment. I am unable to see 
their plight. Hence, I will be happy if you can arrange 
to build a small hospital in our village.” In accordance 
with his mother’s wish, Vidyasagar got a hospital built 
in his village. Thus, he fulfilled all the desires of his 
mother in due course. 


Gradually, he reached a high position in his career 
due to his good behaviour. His salary also increased 
commensurate with the high position. In spite of that, 
he continued to be humble and obedient and thereby 
earned a good name for himself. One day, his mother 
called him and advised him, “My dear son! I am happy 
that you have attained a very high position in life. But, 
do not become arrogant.” 


For some people, 


Excessive wealth gives rise to ego which in turn 
paves the way for many wicked qualities. When 
wealth leaves you, ego also vanishes and as a 
result the evil qualities disappear. 

(Telugu poem) 


However, this was not the case with Vidyasagar. He 
cultivated the quality of humility along with education. 
He earned a good name for himself as a great orator. 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 139 


Educated people in large numbers used to flock round 
him to hear his speeches. Once a meeting was arranged 
in a neighbouring town and Vidyasagar was to address 
the gathering. Vidyasagar started for that town. An ICS 
officer was travelling in the same compartment in which 
Vidyasagar was travelling. The officer was going to that 
town to hear Vidyasagar’s speech. However, he had 
only heard his name, but had never seen him before. As 
soon as the officer alighted from the train, he started 
shouting “Coolie! Coolie!” On seeing this, Vidyasagar 
approached him and enquired what luggage the officer 
had. The officer replied that he had only a small suitcase. 
Then Vidyasagar asked him, “Is it necessary for you to 
engage a coolie to carry this small suitcase? I will carry it 
for you. But, where are you going?” The officer replied, 
“T understand that a great scholar and orator by name 
Eswarchandra Vidyasagar is going to deliver a speech. 
I am going to attend his speech.” 


Vidyasagar then took the suitcase in his hands 
and started walking along with the officer. Both of 
them reached the venue of Vidyasagar’s lecture. There, 
Vidyasagar handed over the suitcase to the officer. The 
officer then took out his purse and enquired how much 
money he had to pay Vidyasagar as porterage charges. 
Vidyasagar politely refused his offer saying, “Sir! You 
have given me an opportunity to serve you. I don’t 
need anything more.” He silently walked away from 
that place. Considering Vidyasagar to be a madcap, 
the officer proceeded to the venue and sat among the 


140 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


audience. The organizers of the function were waiting 
to garland Eswarchandra Vidyasagar on his arrival. In 
a few minutes Vidyasagar arrived there, dressed in very 
simple clothes. He was accorded a warm welcome and 
profusely garlanded by the organizers of the function. 
The officer who was observing this welcome-ceremony 
realized to his utter astonishment that the person who had 
carried his suitcase from the railway station was none 
other than Eswarchandra Vidyasagar himself. He felt 
ashamed. He reverentially offered his pranams to this 
great, yet humble individual, in his heart of hearts. Then 
Vidyasagar began his speech. He explained that humility 
is the foremost quality of an educated person. He said, 
pride and arrogance are the result of excessive wealth 
and consequently such a person loses the fundamental 
quality of human nature. 


After the conclusion of the programme, the ICS 
officer met Vidyasagar and offered his sincere apologies 
for his mistake. He pleaded with Vidyasagar, “Sir, 
your speech was a great eye opener for me. I behaved 
arrogantly due to the pride that I am a highly educated 
person. Please excuse me.” 


In course of time, Vidyasagar’s reputation as 
a scholar and orator spread by leaps and bounds. He 
continued to do great service to the people. He got 
several poor students educated. He provided drinking 
water to several villages, where there were no such 
facilities. His mother felt very happy that her son was 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 141 


doing great service to the poor and needy. She prayed 
to God that every mother should be blessed with such 
noble children. 


Humble Wishes Of A Generous Mother 


Similarly, Sathya Sai has undertaken several 
community welfare activities in Puttaparthi like 
constructing residential houses for the poor, educating 
their children, providing drinking water to the villagers, 
etc., as per the wishes of His mother. What the mother 
expressed in those days were small desires. But, in course 
of time, they assumed the form of gigantic projects and 
created history. Mother Easwaramma was very happy 
at the great service rendered by Swami to the villagers. 
She expressed with satisfaction, “My dear son! You 
built houses for the poor, You solved the drinking water 
problem for the villagers, You provided electricity to the 
village which was miserable under darkness. Not only 
that, You have also built a school and a hospital. You 
have fulfilled all my desires.” She felt extremely happy 
that her son had undertaken and completed such great 
tasks. She used to tell the ladies gathering round her, “I 
requested Swami to build a small school in Puttaparthi 
village. But, Swami established a great educational 
institution in its place.” 


Thus, the humble wishes of the mother transformed 
themselves ultimately into great projects providing 
immense benefit to the humanity at large. What the 
country needs today 1s children who follow the teachings 


142 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


of their mothers. The teachings of the mothers may 
appear to be very simple and insignificant, but, in course 
of time, they provide great happiness. Easwaramma’s 
desires were very simple! She wanted drinking water 
to be made available to the small village of Puttaparthi. 
But, Swami provided drinking water to the entire district 
of Ananthapur. She wanted Me to build a small school. 
But, Sathya Sai built huge buildings and established 
great educational institutions. In those days, villagers 
used to suffer due to lack of basic medical facilities. 
Therefore, Mother Easwaramma requested Me to build 
a small hospital. But, Swami built great temples of 
healing, the Sathya Sai Super Specialty Hospitals, one 
in Puttaparthi and another in Bangalore. Thus, the small 
wishes of the mother resulted in the establishment of 
world class institutions. 


Embodiments of love! You need not follow 
anybody. It is enough, if you engage yourself in activities 
that would satisfy your mother. If your mother is happy 
and contented, that will confer great blessing on you. 
Whatever your mother says, obey her command willingly 
and sincerely. That is what is required today! Obey your 
mother and become recipients of her love. Then the 
whole world will progress. You need not undertake any 
other acts of merit. Sacrifice your entire life to satisfy 
your mother. It is only because Sathya Sai fulfilled the 
wishes of His mother and provided satisfaction to her, 
His glory has spread far and wide. 


Sathya Sai has built great Hospitals that provide 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 143 


expensive medical treatment absolutely free to everyone, 
right from the poorest of the poor to the richest. In 
the field of medical services, there are no institutions 
anywhere in the world which can be compared to Sathya 
Sai Institute of Higher Medical Sciences. In this hospital, 
medicines, operations, food everything is provided free 
of cost. Nobody is able to comprehend how we are able 
to provide all these things free of cost in the present day 
scenario of sky-rocketing costs. Unfortunately, people 
are not able to realize the great value of the services 
being rendered by our hospitals. Today, many hospitals 
advertise their facilities through electronic media, attract 
people and loot them of their hard earned money and 
even go to the extent of causing death to patients by 
negligence. This is not right. The poor people should 
be given free food, free education, free water and free 
medicine. There can be no greater service than providing 
all these services free of cost. I wish that all the students, 
past and present, should undertake such services. We are 
not collecting even a paisa from our students as fees. The 
Sathya Sai Educational institutions provide education 
totally free of cost. People have to spend huge amounts 
for acquiring higher education in other institutions. 
But, our students need not spend any money for their 
education here. I am providing totally free education 
from KG to PG to all the students who come here with 
love and great expectation. In fact, all our services are 
provided with loving care and free of cost. 


Serve The Society With A Spirit Of Sacrifice 


144 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


The Sikh student who spoke earlier, tried his best 
for a long time to acquire higher education. But, he could 
not pursue his higher studies due to paucity of funds. 
Hence, he took up employment on a meagre salary. Later 
on, he joined our college and earned his MBA degree. 
Now, he is contributing his services to the hostel as a 
grateful offering to Swami. There are several students 
like him, who are undertaking service activities in 
Swami’s institutions. The boy who spoke after him hails 
from Delhi. He also had a great desire to pursue higher 
education, but had no funds. He joined our Institute 
and qualified himself with an MBA degree in first class. 
All this is free of cost. Since then, he remained here in 
the service of Swami. He has decided to dedicate his 
life to the institution which produces such boys. Thus, 
all the students of the Sathya Sai institutions have been 
cultivating broad-mindedness and the spirit of service. 
All our students are broad-minded. You will not find 
any narrow-minded students here. They are filled with 
love and behave among themselves like brothers. It is 
My endeavour to train such ideal boys and girls. It is 
My wish that all our students should willingly undertake 
free service activities to the society with a spirit of love 
and sacrifice. 


Many of our students are working in highly paid 
jobs in big cities like Delhi and Agra. In fact, top 
companies in India are seeking the services of our 
students, offering them high-salaried jobs. Our students 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 145 


working in these places are also undertaking service 
activities like providing free tuitions to poor students. 
Wherever they are, our students are undertaking various 
service activities with a spirit of sacrifice and broad- 
mindedness. Education is not mere bookish knowledge. 
Developing broad-mindedness, spirit of sacrifice, 
sharing one’s resources willingly with fellow members 
of the society and making them happy-these are the 
true qualities of an educated person. There are several 
such students in Prasanthi Nilayam who are happy and 
contented by undertaking service to society. My main 
task is to prepare such boys and girls. I am providing 
everything that is required for them. I am even sending 
them abroad for higher education, if necessary. 


Dr. Padmanabhan who is sitting here may be 
known to all of you. He qualified as a doctor at a very 
young age and wanted to set up a small clinic here in 
Bangalore. I called him and told him, “Doctor! You 
must acquire higher degrees in medicine. You should 
not stop your education with the present degree. Your 
family circumstances may not be conducive to pursue 
higher education. But, I am with you. I will provide 
for your higher education”. One day, I called him for 
dinner and later sent him to Vienna for higher education 
in medicine. Accordingly, he went abroad and obtained 
higher degrees in medicine. After his return, he is now 
doing wonderful service in Brindavan. He is not money- 
minded. The great name he has acquired in Swami’s 
service is all that matters to him. Can there be greater 


146 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


wealth than a good name? He serves the poor. Even 
though he has undergone a heart surgery, he continues to 
serve the poor patients. Thus, Swami has moulded him 
as a loving, soft-hearted and selfless individual with a 
sacred heart and prompted him to serve people. 


Our students, in spite of being highly qualified, are 
very unassuming and without ego. They subsequently 
take up teaching jobs in our educational institutions. It 
is My firm resolve to foster such noble souls. 


There may be some minor ailments now and then 
to this body. However, they do not bother Me. They 
are natural to the human body. Last year, one boy was 
decorating the door with colour buntings, standing on 
an iron stool. Meanwhile, I opened the door and came 
out from My room. As soon as he saw Me, he became 
nervous and fell down from the stool. As he was falling, 
the iron stool got tilted and fell on Me. My hip bone 
was fractured. That is how it happened. It is not due to 
any past karma. | did not, however, mind My injury. 
Yesterday, as I was entering My room, I casually took 
the support of a brick projection from the wall. The 
brick, however, got loosened and fell down on the floor. 
Consequently I also fell down, landing heavily on the 
wrist. It was an accident. But, I had to perform My duty, 
come what may. Of course, accidents do happen due 
to past karma, but this incident is not of that kind. Such 
disruptions may happen now and then, but , no disease 
can ever afflict Me. I carry on My work unmindful of 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 147 


such incidents. 


There are seven boys here. All of them did 
their post graduation. They want to stay with Swami 
permanently, doing service here. I am looking after them. 
I told them, “My dear children! You must progress in 
your education. You need not depend on your parents 
for this. I will take care of all your requirements. You 
study well and come out with flying colours. Set an 
example to others.” Thus, I am making arrangements 
for their higher studies. I always help others and do 
not cause inconvenience to anybody. As for Myself, I 
will never be afflicted with any disease whatever. Some 
minor incidents may happen. But, I will carry on My 
work, unmindful of such incidents. Yesterday, when I 
fell down, there was a loud noise and people present 
there were very much afraid that some major accident 
had taken place. They thought to themselves - “What 
has happened to Swami! Till recently, He was not able 
to walk properly due to the hip fracture. Now He has 
sustained an injury to His hand. What a misfortune has 
befallen us!” But, I consoled them saying that nothing 
serious had happened and that they should not worry. 
The devotees had arranged a meeting here, in which I 
had to participate. I do not like to desist from performing 
My duty, whatever may happen to this body. Therefore, 
I agreed to come here. I put on My dress. The students 
arranged a shawl to cover My gown, so that I may not 
be inconvenienced with the bandaged arm. The doctors 
however advised Me not to move. They were right in 


148 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


their advice. But, I volunteered to come down against 
the doctor’s advice, with the help of two boys. Since I 
love My boys so much, they also love Me with the same 
intensity. They are constantly in attendance on Me and 
look after Me. 


(As per Swami’s instructions, some boys stood up. 
Showing them to the audience, Swami said). 


These boys have come from far off places like 
Delhi and other cities and studied here in Brindavan and 
Prasanthi Nilayam. They are all staying with Me and 
doing great service to Me. This problem is not something 
that can be cured with medicines. Their love itself is 
working as a great medicine for Me. Their love alone is 
protecting Me in different ways. 


(Again pointing towards a student...) 


This boy did his PhD. All these boys are highly 
educated. Still they would like to stay back and serve 
Swami. There are some more boys inside Swami’s 
residence. For example, Sathyajit and some other boys 
are constantly in attendance on Me like a shadow and 
are looking after Me. Such boys are My only property. 
Several people ask Me, “ Swami! How much is the 
value of your property? Where is it located?” I tell them, 
“My dear! I cannot say that the value of My property is 
this much. My students are My property. It cannot be 
evaluated in terms of money. Any amount of description 
of the love of My boys will be insufficient.” I cannot 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 149 


remain for a single day without this property. They also 
cannot live without the loving care of Swami. These boys 
are setting a great example to the world by their service. 
Seva (selfless and loving service) alone confers great 
value on the educated. I cannot describe the amount of 
service they render, so lovingly. No one can adequately 
estimate and express in words the loving nature of our 
students. No one can understand their broad-mindedness. 
Outwardly, they appear like any other students. But, 
each one of them is highly educated, with double post- 
graduate degrees. Such boys can render great service to 
the world. They are serving Me in various ways. 


Sravanam (listening), kirtanam (singing), 
vishnusmaranam (contemplating on Vishnu), 
padasevanam (serving His Lotus Feet), vandanam 
(salutation), archanam (worship), dasyam (servitude), 
sneham (friendship), and atmanivedanam (self- 
surrender) are the nine paths of devotion. 


These boys are expressing their total and 
unconditional love towards Me through those nine 
paths of devotion. 


The doctors advised Me bed rest. In spite of that, 
I decided to fulfil My commitment to My devotees. 
Having known My firm resolve, the boys stitched a 
shawl to cover My robe and brought Me down stairs. 
This service may appear to be a small and insignificant 
one. But, if you enquire into the matter deeply, you will 
understand that it is very difficult to get this opportunity 


150 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


to serve Swami in this way. It is only because of their 
loving care, that Iam able to come down without much 
inconvenience to speak to you. Is it really possible in 
My present condition? In fact, it is their pure love that 
brought Me down here. These boys have good character 
along with good education. The service rendered by the 
boys here or in the Primary School or Higher Secondary 
School or other institutions in Puttaparthi, is beyond 
description. Even little boys in these Institutions behave 
well. I am standing before you today to describe the good 
qualities of My students; otherwise, I had no intention to 
give a discourse. The students are doing great service to 
the society, as per My advice. I exhort the new entrants 
who join the Institution this year to cultivate noble 
qualities, be healthy and happy and humble like these 
boys and render good service to the society. I conclude 
My discourse with blessings to one and all. 


[Easwaramma Day, 6-5-2004, Brindavan, Bangalore] 


11 
The Form Of God Is Love 


Forbearance is the real beauty in this sacred land 
of Bharat. Of all the rituals, adherence to truth is 
the greatest penance. The most nectarous feeling 
in this country is the feeling of love towards one’s 
mother. 

(Telugu poem) 


Embodiments of Love! 


N this sacred land of Bharat, forbearance is 

the real beauty. The modern man has no idea 

of what forbearance is. He is not able to realise that 
forbearance is the real beauty in this sacred land. One 
bereft of forbearance is no human being at all. We should 
have sympathy and forbearance towards the poor and 
the physically challenged. But the modern man shows 
disgust towards such unfortunate people. In fact, sahana 
(tolerance) is the most valuable and sacred mantra of the 


152 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


Bharatiyas. But man, out of his ignorance, has given 
up such a sacred mantra and is carried away by yantra 
and tantra. 


The foremost quality expected of a devotee is 
forbearance. What is bhakti (devotion)? Several people 
are under the mistaken notion that worshipping some 
idols, observing certain vows and performing some 
rituals is bhakti. It is not as simple as that. The foremost 
duty of a devotee, especially of the Bharatiyas, is 
observing the quality of forbearance in practice. 


Adherence to truth is the real tapas (penance). Man, 
today, has gorgotten this principle. Forbearance is a 
quality which inspires people to undertake noble deeds. 
This noble quality is to be taught to others as well, to 
enable them to imbibe it. 


The nectarous feeling in this country is the feeling 
of love towards one’s mother. Today, people overlook 
the most important duty to look upon every woman as 
one’s own mother. There is nothing greater and sweeter 
than this motherly love in the world. One who has 
cultivated such noble feeling is most fortunate. It is not 
a quality that can be purchased or hired. This motherly 
feeling flows from the natural love that one has for one’s 
own mother. The people of Bharat are forsaking such 
noble qualities and are trying to imitate and cultivate 
alien cultures and traditions today. In fact, they are 
running after alien culture with excessive enthusiasm, 
treating it as their very life breath. 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 153 


Divine Love Permeates The Whole World 
Embodiments of Love! 


You cannot find anything more sacred than love in 
the world. Today, you will find worldly and physical 
love everywhere. But, it is very difficult to find love 
suffused with atmic bliss. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Love is not merely that which exists between 
two individuals at the physical level. True love is that 
which exists between two hearts. Bharatiyas today 
are neglecting such sacred and noble love. It is only 
the love towards God that has sustained and protected 
the people in this sacred land of Bharat since ancient 
times, just as the eye lid protects the eye. This divine 
love permeates the entire univese. Wherever you look 
for, itis present. There is nothing in the world, except 
divine love. All other types of love are only mere 
passing infatuation. Real love emerges from the depth 
of one’s heart. Cultivating such divine love and sharing 
it with others is most pleasing to Me. Today, you find 
worldly and physical love for achieving selfish ends 
everywhere. But, you cannot call it real love. Real love 
which is sacred, divine and selfless has to spring from 
one’s heart. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Cutivate and strengthen such divine love. When 


154 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


you cultivate such love, you will not be lacking in 
anything. Itis only when you cultivate such noble love, 
you will be entitled to be called “Embodiments of love”. 
God is omnipresent. Who is God? If fact, you are verily 
God. You must strive to attain that state. Though God 
is present everywhere, you should not forget the divinity 
immanent in you. Some people think that God exists 
separately in some distant place. 


Prahlada, the child devotee of Lord Vishnu 
declared: 


Never doubt that God is here and not there. 
Wherever you search for Him, He is there. 
(Telugu poem) 


This is the real culture of Bharat, which we are 
not able to preceive today. Everyone chants the name 
of God. But, where is God? In fact, you yourself are 
God. You and God are not separate. Man forgets the 
divinity latent in him and runs after trivial and mundane 
things. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Under all circumstances, do not give up love. Love 
is your greatest treasure. One who forgets this treasure, 
is not a human being at all! We love our father, mother, 
brothers, sisters, etc. All these relationships are but mere 
roles in the divine drama. You must try to apprehend true 
love. In fact, itis always inus. You need not search for 
it outside. Unfortunately, today we are going after things 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 155 


which are not real and permanent. (Showing a flower 
...) What is this? This is a flower. Everybody says so. 
But, the truth is, it is a manifestation of divinity. There 
are several petals in it which represent divinity. If the 
petals are taken out one by one, it cannot be called a 
flower. Similarly, if there is no love in a human being, 
he cannot be called an “Embodiment of love”. The 
source and sustenance for the entire universe is love. 
This quality of love takes different shapes in different 
individuals, say between father, mother, brothers and 
sisters, but you refer to it all as love. All these individuals 
together consititute a family. It is not enough if you limit 
your love to the family members. The entire universe 
must live like a family. Whomever you see, offer your 
pranams. Say “Namaskar! Namaskar!” Can you come 
across a nobler feeling than this? All the forms you 
come across in this world are embodiments of dinivity. 
There is nothing in this universe which is not divine. 
You consider the different objects in the universe as 
mere objects. No! No! Consider them as “Embodiments 
of divinity”. Unfortunately, today we have become 
foolish and are searching for God in some distant corner. 
Wherever you see, there is God. Therefore, it is the 
noblest feeling to consider everything in the universe as 
“Embodiments of divinity”. The unvierse is but a form 
of God! God is manifest in all forms. Consider such an 
omnipresent divinity as God. Do not give credence to 
the outward form of any object, but firmly believe in 
the divine power that is immanent in that object. We are 


156 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


not experiencing anything other than divinity in our day 
- to - day activities. For example, we are thirsty. Thirst 
is a fire manifest as divinity. We quench our thirst by 
drinking water, which is another manifestation of the 
divine. 


Thus all the five elements in the universe, the five 
senses, five sheaths and the five vital breathes in the 
body, are all manifestations of divinity. Today, we are 
misusing our senses. This is an act of grave sin. All the 
senses are pure, sacred and selfless. The senses have 
no distinction of caste, creed, religion, nationality, etc. 
Keeping such noble qualities in our own self, we are 
searching for divinity in the outside world. What a great 
pity! What do you think the human values are? They 
are nothing but divine qualities. God has no attributes 
separately. Divinity itself is the sole attribute. We are 
deluded to see the attributeless divinity as God with 
attributes. 


Love Is God’s Only Attribute 
Embodiments of Love! 


Whatever I speak, it is only love. I do not know 
any other word. There is no other quality greater than 
love. Hence, we have to love the quality of love, which 
is God. 


The different ways by which we describe God such 
as Nirgunam, Niranjanam, Sanathana Niketanam, Nitya, 
Shuddha, Buddha, Mukta, Nirmala Swarupinam (God 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 157 


is attributeless, pure, final abode, eternal, unsullied, 
enlightened, free and embodiment of sacredness) are 
only for our satisfaction. They cannot, however, describe 
God in full. In fact, God is beyond description. The only 
word by which we can describe God is “love”. Nothing 
better can describe Him. 


Embodiments of Love! 


You are all the “Embodiments of love”. Your 
form is love. God’s form is also love. I am very much 
distressed to see those physcailly challenged children 
seated on the tricycles. They are, in fact, “Embodiments 
of divinity”. To look down upon those divine children 
with contempt is a great sin. In fact, there are no lowly 
people in the world at all! That low thinking is in us 
only. It cannot be attributed to God. God has only 
one attribute, which is love. That is His form. When 
someone converses with Me lovingly, My joy knows 
no bounds. If people employ empty rhetoric without 
love to describe My qualities, I am not at all pleased or 
impressed. Talk to Me with a loving heart. Pray to Me 
with a love - filled heart. Whatever you pray for with a 
loving heart, I will readily respond. You call Me “Sai” 
with love; I will readily respond saying “Oyi’. Any 
amount of prayer devoid of love cannot move Me. Ifyou 
call Me with love, I will respond immediately, wherever 
Iam. There is nothing greater than love. Therefore, if 
you wish to have the darshan of God and experience 
Him, pray to Him lovingly. You may have any amount 


158 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


of wealth and virtues, but they are no match to the quality 
of love. The sweetness inherent in the word prema is 
not to be found anywhere else in the world. The more 
you cultivate and practise it, the sweeter will be your 
personality. Therefore, cultivate love as the foremost 
quality in you. 


Love is your sole refuge wherever you may be, in 
a forest, in the sky, in a city or a village, on the 
top of a mountain or in the middle of deep sea. 

(Telugu poem) 


Love is not confined to any particular place or 
residence; it is universal. Therefore, cultivate such 
universal love. Such a universal love cannot be purchased 
with any amount of money. It can only be attained with 
a heart filled with intese love. Man has, therefore, to 
cultivate such pure and selfless love. In order to cultivate 
such pure love. bhakti (devotion) is prescribed as a 
means. Bhakti is not somewhere in some distant corner. 
Prema (love) is bhakti (devotion). Devotion without love 
is deep ocean. And how is that ocean? It is full of salt 
water, whereas devotion with love is like sweet water. 
Love is a nectarous feeling. Love is verily bliss. Love 
is a wonderful feeling. It is unfathomable. Therefore, 
such a nectarous, sweet, blissful and unfathomable love, 
you should never give up. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Instead of making hollow claims of bhakti, keep 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 159 


prema as your goal to be attained. There is nothing 
greater than this sadhana. There is nothing that can 
liberate you easily than pure and selfless love. There 
are four words - mukti (liberation), bhakti (devotion), 
rakti (attachment) and anurakti (attachment or love 
towards God). But, love is the undercurrent in all these 
things. On this auspicious occasion of Guru Purnima, 
love is the most vaulable gift I hand over to you. This is 
my most precious gift to you. Devoid of love, whatever 
other gifts I may give, they will be of no use. My love 
is pure, sacred and most precious. You also cultivate 
such love. 


[Guru Purnima, 2-7-2004, Prasanthi Nilayam] 


12 
My Students Are My Wealth 


One may acquire a high academic qualification 
such as M.A., B.A., MBA and MFM and 
attain exalted position, 

One may amass wealth, perform acts of charity 
and attain name and fame, 

One may have physical strength and enjoy a long 
and healthy life, 

One may be a scholar, but if he lacks human values 
all his achievements will prove futile. 

(Telugu poem) 


Students! Boys and Girls! Teachers! Patrons of 
Education! 


Y mere acquisiton of wordly education man 

cannot attain exalted position in life. All 

human efforts will be in vain without divine grace. 
There are many in this world who are highly educated, 


162 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


but are they rendering any service to the nation? No. In 
this respect, the unlettered people appear to be better 
human beings than the highly educated. In spite of his 
education and intelligence, a person who does not know 
his true Selfis but a fool. One may be highly intelligent 
and educated, but bereft of human values his life is 
meaningless. In fact, one devoid of human values is 
no human being at all! There is little use in acquiring a 
number of degrees without imbibing human values. 


Character Is The Prime Objective Of Education 
Embodiments of Love! 


To know and recognise a truly educated individual, 
you have to look closely at our students. They are not 
satisfied with mere acquisition of degrees. They utilise 
their knowledge for the benefit of society. Education 
which is not useful to society serves no real purpose. 
Our boys are highly virtuous and are endowed with the 
wealth of character. They consider virtues as their very 
life. Men of eminence who come here from all over the 
world learn many things from our students. Some of 
our students remain here and serve as teachers after the 
completion of their education. | am very happy about it. 
We need not be worried about getting good and noble 
teachers from elsewhere for our Institute. Our own 
students, after their studies, take up the responsibility 
of teaching. In other academic centres students are 
interested in pursuing higher studies for their own selfish 
ends, but our students are not interested in accumulating 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 163 


degrees, but in disseminating their knowledge for the 
benefit of others. 


One cannot acquire such character and nobility 
from mere education. The education they received here 
is not limited to textual knowledge alone. It develops 
virtues which originate from the heart. Our students are 
incomparable. They are taking up the roles of teachers 
all over the world and are helping society by moulding 
ideal students and men of character. Character is the 
prime objective of education here in our Insititute. A 
person of such education and character, can rule over 
the entire world. Education without character is useless. 
I am very much pleased to have such students who are 
virtuous, energetic and intelligent. Our MBA students 
have all the noble qualities that are expected of them. In 
addition to their studies, they learn various languages. 
Students from Kerala have gained proficiency in various 
languages, such as, Tamil, Hindi, English, Telugu, etc. 
They speak all these languages with such fluency that it 
is very difficult to identify their mother tongue. For such 
talented students, it is not difficult to learn the language 
of the Atma. They give talks even in Sanskrit. But they 
also adhere to our samskriti (culture). Samskara is not 
imbibed by learning Sanskrit, it comes from adherence to 
samskriti. One who adheres to samskriti will be able to 
attain all types of wealth and be an ideal to others. When 
I asked one of the students which place he belonged 
to, he said, “Swami, I belong to Puttaparthi.” That 
boy speaks Sanskrit very fulently. He has also learnt 


164 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


various other languages. Students who have studied in 
Puttaparthi are spreading Swami’s message in various 
countries, such as, America, Japan, Germany, Italy, etc. 
Students who have such dedication and devotion are 
very rare these days. But here are many such students 
in our institutions. It gives Me great joy to heave such 
students here. We need such students. I wish that these 
students, after completion of their education, share the 
knowledge they have acquired here with fellowmen 
in society and transform them. Men of eminence like 
the President of India, the Prime Minister and Chief 
Ministers are all praise for our students. They extol our 
students whenever they visit this place. 


In our Institutes, students are provided education 
totally free of charge. In addition to this, scholarships 
are provided to deserving students. If you ask what is 
Swam1i’s property, I say, “Students are My property.” 
Without the students, I will not be able to do anything. 
They are looking after Swami with utmost love and care. 
In fact, they are responsible for all the development that 
we find in our educational and other institutions. 


The culture of Bharat is based on the Vedas which 
are in Sanskrit language. Here students chant the Vedic 
mantras both in the morning and in the evening. You 
cannot get such students even if you do intese penance. 
They can certainly bring about progress in society. There 
is no language that our students do not speak; they are 
very versatile in all kinds of skills. You may be under 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 165 


the impression that Swami is taking great pains to mould 
the character of students. There is no pain whatsoever. 
In fact, students are of great help to Swami. They are 
spreading the ideals of Sai to the rest of the world giving 
hai (joy) to one and all. There is aneed to establish more 
similar institutions in order to mould such ideal students. 
Parents themselves are not aware of the innate potential 
of their children. Our students are filled with noble 
thoughts and sacred feelings. They give top priority to 
the service of their parents. They treat their friends and 
realtives with love and affection. They have no desire 
for accumulating wealth. Their sole aim is to obey 
Swami’s command and work for the progress of society. 
I do not want any other property than My students. With 
the help of these students, many educational institutions 
can be developed. Unlike students elsewhere who wake 
up very late in the morning, our students get up in the 
early hours at the crowing of the cock. They observe 
moderation in food and habits. Such discipline can not 
be found amoung student community elsewhere. They 
are attentive in classes and learn their lessons well. They 
ae obedient to their teachers. They take part in sports 
and games, such as, Badminton, Tennis, Volleyball, etc., 
in the right spirit. They take good care of their health 
too. They are all very strong in physique and spirit. You 
do not find anyone weak and afflicted with diseases. 
Such students who take care of themselves are capable 
of taking care of the country as well. Our institution is 
fortunate to have students of such calibre. If there are 


166 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


another five institutions of this quality, they will be able 
to raise the happiness level of the whole country. In fact, 
other colleges are trying to emulate our institution. 


Our students are like diamonds. They are obedient 
to elders, courteous towards relatives. Seeing their good 
conduct and listening to their sweet words, the guests 
who visit their houses are highly impressed. They are 
creative in their thinking and shine as role models. We 
do not wish to praise the qualities of our own students. 
But when dignitaries who visit this Institute talk high 
of our students, I feel very happy. 


(Here Bhagawan referred to the hip bone fracture 
He suffered last year.) I am not suffering from any 
disease or any ailment. Last year, one boy was hanging 
colour buntings on the door while standing on an iron 
stool. Meanwhile, I opened the door and came out of My 
room. As soon as he saw Me, he became nervous and fell 
down from the stool. As he was falling, the iron stool got 
toppled and fell on Me. He too feel on Me. That was 
the time when My hip bone was fractured. Doctors tried 
their best to set it right. They felt sorry that it would be 
difficult for Swami to walk. I told them, “No one needs 
to feel sorry for Me. My students will take good care of 
Me. They will follow Me like shadow wherever I go.” 
My students have become My doctors. It is because 
of them that I am able to move around. Our students 
tell Me, “Swami, we don’t need to be worried about 
anything when we are with You. We want to sanctify 
our lives in Your service. With such love and faith, 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 167 


hundreds of students have remained with Swami after 
the completion of their education, performing various 
duties assigned to them. They do not want to go outside 
for a job. You may find it hard to believe if I tell you 
about the work they do. Once someone from outside 
came here and took two of our boys for emloyment. 
They were given a salary of 50,000 to 60,000 rupees 
per month. They utilised the money to serve the poor 
children. Later on, they resigned their jobs and came 
here as they could not bear the separation from Swami. 
Our students have transformed Prasanthi Nilayam into 
a big workship. They are able to handle various types of 
instruments and equipments very efficiently. They are 
striving hard for the development of hospitals. It is not 
possible for anyone to understand the sacred feelings 
of our students. 


(Swami asked one of the boys who was sitting 
near Him to get up.) This boy did his Engineering and 
then completed his MBA degree in our Institute. Many 
people from all over the country requested him to join 
their companies. But he decined their offers. 


What is he doing at present? He is spreading 
Swami’s message all over the world through Radio Sai 
Global Harmony. Even his parents tell Me, “Swami, 
please keep him with You always.” When he was with 
his parents, though they would force him to eat more, 
he did not put on weight. But after coming here, he has 
gained 18 kg. even without timely intake of food. Now 


168 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


he is always with Me attending to My needs. At the 
same time, he does not keep his office work pending. 
He attends to it at night. 


(Swami asked another boy to get up.) What do 
you think of this boy? He hails from a backward area 
in Orissa. His father has three sons. Now, all the four 
of them are working in Puttaparthi. These boys have 
completed their M.Sc. and MBA. They do not want to 
undertake any job outside. All of them have remained 
here serving Swami. They are satisified with the salary 
they are paid here. In this manner, all the boys who 
are working here are full of virtues and are leading a 
life of sacrifice. For the last few months, our boys are 
taking good care of Me. I do not have any pain. I do 
not require any medical treatment. I do not need to 
be worried about anything. It is because of the loving 
service of My students, I am spending My time blissfully 
without any inconvenience or suffering whatsoever. 
They are always ready and eager to serve Me. They 
carry out My instructions meticulously. There are 200 
such students around Me in Parasanthi Nilayam. They 
do not sit idle; they discharge their duties diligently. It 
is not possible to describe the magnitude of work they 
do. They attend to all jobs. If there are such students 
everywhere, the nation will certainly prosper. They 
help everyone. I want to make them totally self-reliant. 
They should depend on the work they do and not on 
anybody else. They will certainly be able to lead their 
lives in that manner. I am telling all this today so that 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 169 


you will know the noble qualities of our students. They 
are gunavanthlu (virtuous), balavantulu (energetic) 
and also dhanavantulu (wealthy). They earn their own 
money. They do not take even a paisa from their parents. 
Sometimes, the parents may come and ask, “Do you 
require anything? They reply, “Swami has provided 
everything. He is taking care of us very well.” 


In future, many great events are going to take 
place. The country need not fear. Bharat will certainly 
become a land of plenty and prosperity. Our students 
will contribute a lot to the development of the nation. 
They are the future leaders. It is a matter of great joy 
for Me to see the students as future leaders. 


[Divine Discourse, 21-8-2004, Prasanthi Nilayam] 


13 


Do Constant Namasmarana For Mental 
Peace 


Oh man! You struggle hard in life merely for the 
sake of filling your belly. You acquire myriad 
types of knowledge from various fields. Examine 
and enquire for yourself what great happiness 
you have achieved by spending all the time from 
dawn to dusk in acquiring worldly knowledge 
and earning wealth, while forgetting God. 
(Telugu poem) 


Embodiments of Love! 


HETHER a pauper or a millionaire, one has 
to eat. But, having attained the sacred human 
birth, itis unseemly of man to spend his entire life merely 
for the sake of filling his belly. Why don’t you spend 
a few minutes in the contemplation of God, instead of 
spending your entire life just to earn a living? There 


172 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


are of course a few people in this land of Bharat, who 
are sanctifying their time and their environment in the 
contemplation of God, but the vast majority are wasting 
their births in vain pursuits. 


Human Birth Is Meant To Experience Divinity 
Embodiments of Love! 


It is not only in Srikakulam district, but in many 
other places all over India, there are people who are 
struggling and straining to eke out their livelihood. In 
spite of all the effort, they are unable to attain peace, 
happiness and comfort. Only those who are spending 
their time in the contemplation of God are able to 
experience peace and happiness. Those who forget God 
and spend all their time and energy in mundane pursuits 
are bound to suffer. Till this day, nobody has been able to 
enjoy mental peace and physical comfort in full measure. 
The body is like a water bubble. It is nothing but a bag 
full of bones. Mind is like a mad monkey. It is a mistake 
to strive for the happiness of such a physical body and 
wavering mind. So long as one is alive, one should 
make efforts to keep the body healthy, so that one may 
not cause inconvenience to others. There are many who 
spend their entire life for the sake of physical comforts 
and pleasures. It is only a few who are not concerned 
with their mind and body, but are centred on eternal 
peace and happiness. Human birth is meant to experience 
divinity and not to crave for fleeting pleasures. Human 
body is a divine gift, which is being put to improper use, 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 173 


instead of its proper purpose of adoring God. Do not be 
under the mistaken notion that body is meant for eating 
and enjoying physical pleasures only. Certain duties 
have been assigned to man by performing which he will 
be able to experience happiness at the level of the body, 
mind, senses and the spirit. One should enquire what the 
purpose of human birth is? The goal of human birth is to 
work for release from the cycle of birth and death. This 
body is a den of dirt, and prone to diseases; it is subject 
to change from time to time; it cannot cross the ocean of 
samsara. The body should be used as an instrument to 
rise from the level of humanness to divinity. Human life 
is sanctified only when we experience divinity. There are 
many people who are making efforts in this direction. 
But only a few are able to realise the truth and achieve the 
goal. One may undertake any type of activities, but one 
should always aspire to attain peace of mind. Without 
peace of mind whatever enterprise that man undertakes 
will only add to his restlessness. 


God Is Your Sole Refuge 
Embodiments of Love! 


You are really fortunate to have come here all the 
way from Srikakulam in spite of your financial constraints 
and various other difficulties. Swami is very well aware 
of your aspirations. You have come here to experience 
divine bliss. You were feeling sad that Swami has not 
spoken to you a word even after two days of your stay 
here. In fact, last night you were all praying intensely. 


174 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


In response to your sincere prayers, I have decided to 
address you this morning. It is not My intention to 
satisfy you with just a discourse. I am ready to extend 
all the help required to fulfil your aspirations. Many of 
you are facing problems due to shortage of water. Some 
of you do not have even proper food to eat. Food and 
water are very essential for everyone. Do not give room 
to worry and anxiety. God is not stone-hearted. He will 
certainly take care of your needs. His heart is filled with 
compassion. Swami’s concern for you is hundred times 
more intense than the concern you have for yourselves. 
You need not be worried at all. Develop the feeling that 
difficulties and suffering are for your own good. Even 
insurmountable difficulties will vanish like thin mist 
when you have firm conviction. Hence, do not be unduly 
perturbed about your problems. Difficulties come and 
go. Not only the poor, even a millionaire cannot escape 
from difficulties. Swami confers His blessings on you 
so that you will be relieved of your suffering soon. 


You may consult the elders of your villages and take 
the help of those who are willing to cooperate with you. 
I will see to it that there is plenty of water available in 
your mountainous area. Do not be depressed or bogged 
down by difficulties. Having put on the vesture of the 
human body, one cannot escape from difficulties. The 
physical body may undergo suffering, but you should 
make efforts to attain peace of mind. Mind is the basis 
for happiness for everyone. All physical comforts will 
be of little use without peace of mind. Only through 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 175 


contemplation of God can you attain peace of mind and 
not by any other means. Hence, chant the name of God 
incessantly unmindful of the difficulties that come in 
your way. It is because of contemplation of God’s name 
that you have been able to experience peace in spite of 
the innumerable difficulties you faced. God is the refuge 
for the poor and the forlorn. He is always with them 
through all the vicissitudes of life. Do not think that God 
is in some distant land. God is by your side always. In 
fact, He is present in the inner recesses of your heart. 
Never think that God is away from you at any point of 
time. Neither friends nor relatives can come to your 
rescue. God is your sole refuge. He will protect you 
under all circumstances. In spite of numerous difficulties, 
Bharatiyvas never swerved from the Godward path. If 
Bharat occupies a pivotal position among all nations, it 
is only because of Bharatiyas’ one-pointed devotion to 
God. There are many affluent countries where people 
lead a luxurious life, but they are unable to attain peace 
of mind. It is the good fortune of Bharatiyas that they 
are able to enjoy peace of mind. Their devotion to God 
is responsible for this. Since ancient times, the culture of 
Bharat has been protecting the Bharatiyas in all respects. 
Its glory and grandeur defy all description. One who has 
peace of mind will have moral strength. Hence, chant the 
divine name constantly. Yesterday you went round the 
entire village singing the glory of God and entered the 
portals of Prasanthi Nilayam; you experienced peace of 
mind. It is not possible to experience peace by any other 


176 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


means. Hence, never forget God. Sanctify your time by 
chanting His Name. Contemplation of God should be 
man’s constant endeavour. There may be some jealous 
people who will try to dissuade you from chanting God’s 
name. They say, “What is the use of chanting God’s 
name? It will not help us to eke out our livelihood. We 
have to work hard for our survival. So, stop chanting 
God’s name.” Do not pay heed to such narrow-minded 
people. Never forget God’s name. You may not be 
aware; people all over the world in all villages are facing 
hardships. They are suffering from physical ailments 
and mental agitations. Only Bharatiyas are able to enjoy 
peace of mind because of their devotion to God. There is 
no happiness greater than experiencing peace of mind. 


Mental peace can be obtained only by constant 
contemplation of God. This cannot be purchased from the 
market. It is only by constant contemplation of God that 
mental worries can be overcome. This is the experience 
of people all over the world. Contemplation of God alone 
can bring about mental peace and happiness. No other 
means can achieve this. 


To be born is a worry, to be on the earth is a 
worry, world is a cause of worry and death too; 
entire childhood is a worry and so is the old age; 
life is a worry, failure is a worry; all actions and 
difficulties cause worry; even happiness too is a 
mysterious worry. (Telugu poem) 


Namasmarana Will Obviate All Difficulties 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 177 


Contemplation of God is the right royal path that 
would remove all types of worries. Therefore, do not 
try other means for achieving mental peace and get 
into trouble and worry. March on along the divine 
and glorious path. All the karmas in the spiritual field 
are meant to bring peace and happiness to us. They 
are not intended to trouble us. Mental peace can be 
achieved only by performing one’s own duty, not by 
any other means. Karma brings about a result; and that 
result brings happiness and peace. Even when you are 
undergoing difficulties, always think that they are meant 
to bring you happiness. Every human being undergoes 
difficulties, only to enjoy happiness later. However, 
he does not realise this during the period of suffering. 
But, in course of time, when suffering ends and happy 
days arrive, he would realise the truth. Hence, always 
remember the truth that sorrows and difficulties are 
prelude to happy days ahead. In fact, real happiness 
comes out of suffering only. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Love is the only property that always grows — the 
more you spend, the more it grows; it never diminishes. 
Supposing you go up a hill and sing the glory of God; the 
divine vibrations will reach a large area and the people 
hearing the namasmarana even from a distance will 
feel very happy. Divine music can confer solace even to 
children and animals. By hearing namasankirtan, even 
the heart of a stone-hearted person will melt. We have 


178 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


heard of several instances in Indian history where great 
devotees of God, by their namasankirtan, could bring 
about complete transformation in die-hard criminals. 


Suppose you are digging a pit; the soil in that is 
taken out and stacked by its side becomes a mound. You 
need not feel anxious that the pit is becoming deeper and 
deeper. The soil that is dug out of the pit and the soil that 
is piled up next to the pit are the same. Similarly, along 
with the difficulties you undergo, you will experience 
happiness also in abundant measure. When you fill in 
the soil that is piled up (namely happiness) in the pit 
of sorrows and difficulties, you will attain a state of 
equanimity. This is what you have to realise today. You 
need not feel sorry, “Oh! I have fallen into this pit of 
sorrows and difficulties. How can I come out of this? 
How am I to bear this?” The soil of happiness stacked 
next to the pit of suffering may be filled into the pit. 
You will attain a state of equanimity. You have to do 
this sadhana. 


Embodiments of Love! 


You have come here with love-filled hearts, undergoing 
lot of difficulties and physical strain. It is your love and 
devotion to Swami that brought you here. Go back to your 
places with the same intensity of love and devotion. Continue 
to enjoy the moments of joy and happiness you experienced 
in the presence of Swami. 


Pleasure and pain, good and bad co-exist, none 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 179 


can separate them. You cannot find pleasure or 

pain, good or bad to the exclusion of the other. 

Pleasure results when difficulties fructify. 
(Telugu poem) 


Thus, happiness and sorrow come to teach us 
equanimity. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Love is the only wealth that can never diminish. 
That is the property of God. Therefore, cultivate pure 
and selfless love. God’s love will always follow you 
wherever you are and will protect you at all times. Do 
not ever consider that money alone is your property. In 
fact, love is your real wealth. The wealth of Love always 
grows (expands), never diminishes. Those who realise 
the Paramatma will be able to understand this truth 
better. My heart is overflowing with love and joy on 
account of the namasankirtan you have done yesterday 
in the streets of Puttaparthi. Continue this namasankirtan 
wherever you are throughout your life. Especially, 
when your spirits are down with sorrow, sing the glory 
of God full-throated. Never feel diffident to sing the 
glory of God, thinking that others may make fun of you. 
Irrespective of what others may think or say against you, 
continue this sacred activity of namasankirtan. Only 
then will you be charged with divine power. 


Embodiments of Love! 


I am very happy that you are all gathered here. I 


180 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


always wish joy, happiness, comfort and peace for all of 
you. Today, 8000 devotees from your place have come 
here to share the happiness of Swam1’s divine presence. 
All of you, please go to the canteen and partake of 
Swami’s prasadam happily. Swami’s prasadam will 
become akshaya (never diminishing) and will remove 
all your sorrows and difficulties. Everything that is 
granted by Swami is suffused with love. Whatever is 
granted by Bhagawan is always free. God will never 
succumb to monetary considerations. Wherever any 
service activity is associated with money, it is tainted. 
The entire property of Swami consists of Love only. 
Such divine love must become your very life-breath. 
All your past karmas will become extinct, if only you 
cultivate that pure love. 


All of you go to the canteen and have food, as 
Swami’s prasadam. Thereafter, you can go to your 
respective villages, happily. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Having come here from such a long distance, 
fill your hearts with love. Sometime ago, there was a 
singer by name Saluru Rajeswara Rao. He used to visit 
Swami, regularly. He remained absorbed so much in 
music that he would sing while walking in the streets, 
unmindful of what others thought of him. Today, his 
son has come here to sing some devotional songs in 
the divine presence of Swami. These devotional songs 
fill the hearts of people with overwhelming joy. Late 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 181 


Rajeswara Rao used to sing a particular song on Sri 
Krishna melodiously “Challagaalilo Yamunathatipy 
Shyama Sundaruni Murali ...” (Shyamasundara is 
melodiously playing His flute on the banks of the 
Yamuna, while the cool breeze is blowing). His voice 
as well as his feelings were sweet. Both Rajeswara Rao 
and another devotee Adi Narayana used to come here 
regularly. They were the people who composed the “Sai 
Charita” and sang those songs melodiously. They may 
be anywhere; the lives of such pure-hearted devotees 
are sanctified. Those, who sell their God-given talents 
and make a living out of it, can never be truly happy. 
Rajeswara Rao and Adi Narayana never made business 
out of their musical talents. They always sang to their 
heart’s content, with love and devotion. The glory 
of such devotees, whether dead or alive, will remain 
forever. There was another well known devotee by 
name Ghantasala Venkateswara Rao. He also underwent 
many difficulties. But, he was always devoted to God. 
Whenever he was in difficult situation, he used to sing, 
“Oh! God! Won’t You pull me out of these difficulties?” 
Even when he was sick and was hospitalised, he used 
to sing lying in the hospital bed, “Oh! Lord! How long 
have I to suffer this agony! Won’t you relieve me of this 
pain? “Once I went to the hospital to see him. I consoled 
him saying, “My dear Ghantasala! Never think of these 
difficulties and suffering. These things happen to test 
your faith in God. You will come out successful in this 
test, by constant namasmarana.” A devotee like him 


182 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


who is constantly engaged in namasmarana under all 
circumstances, will become immortal. Namasmarana is 
the only property that lasts forever. Therefore, you also 
undertake this sadhana, as a lifelong activity. Whether 
your voice is good or not, continue to sing the glory of 
God by constant namasmarana at least in your heart. 
Thereby, you will acquire merit that will protect you 
throughout your life. If you do this sadhana, God will 
always be with you, in you, around you. Whenever you 
take food, do namasmarana before partaking of the 
food. By doing so, the food will be sanctified and will 
become prasadam (gift) of God. Your heart also will be 
purified. That is why, our ancestors prayed thus before 
partaking of food: 


Brahmarpanam Brahma havir 
Brahmagnou Brahmanahutam 
Brahmaiva thena ganthavyam 
Brahma karma samadhina. 


When you pray in this manner before you partake 
of your food, God immediately responds thus: 


Aham Vaishvanaro bhutva 
Praninam dehamasrita 
Pranapana samayukta 
Pachamyannam chaturvidham. 


(My dear! I am present in you in the form of 
Vaishvanara digesting the food that you partake of) 


The prayer thus made invokes an immediate 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 183 


response from God. That is reaction, reflection and 
resound. Therefore, constantly engage yourself in 
namasmarana, which will confer bliss on you. 


[Divine Discourse, 23-8-2004, Prasanthi Nilayam] 


14 


Divine Love Alone Can Save 
Us From Sorrows 


Oh man! You struggle hard in life merely for the 
sake of filling your belly. You acquire myriad 
types of knowledge from various fields. Examine 
and enquire for yourself what great happiness 
you have achieved by spending all the time from 
dawn to dusk in acquiring worldly knowledge 
and earning wealth while forgetting God. 
(Telugu poem) 


Embodiments of Love! 


Hi thirst, pleasure and pain, are quite 
natural to man. One follows the other. Food 
is essential for man. But filling the belly is not the be 
- all and end - all of human existence. Man is born not 
for the sake of ahara (food) but to experience ananda 
(bliss). One who is oblivious to ananda and spends his 


186 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


time and energy in the pursuit of ahara will ultimately 
fritter away his life. The purpose of celebrating festivals 
is to experience bliss and not merely to partake of 
delicious food. No doubt the body requires food, but 
life 1s not meant for food alone. Unmindful of this truth, 
man is treading the path of unrighteousness for the sake 
of food and physical pleasures. The body is made up 
of five elements and is transitory. The mind is a mere 
bundle of thoughts and desires. We should not be unduly 
attached to the body and the mind. We should strive to 
experience bliss. 


Sanctify Your Time With Sacred Actions 
Embodiments of Love! 


Human body has emerged out of love. Hence, we 
should lead a life for divine love and not for food. But 
man has not understood this truth. He struggles hard from 
dawn to dusk for the sake of filling his belly. He is not 
utilising the gift of the body for the purpose it is assigned 
to. This body is a den of dirt, and prone to diseases; it is 
subject to change from time to time; how foolish it is to 
develop attachment to such an impermanent body and 
strive for its pleasures? 


Embodiments of Love! 


We should lead our lives in such a manner to 
redeem ourselves. We should love God and aspire only 
for Him. Your love should be directed only towards God, 
not for the body. Our speech, actions and the life-breath 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 187 


itself are meant to experience the Atma. Sometimes the 
body may be afflicted with ailments, but they are like 
passing clouds. Man is born to attain the eternal truth 
of the atma. Life is meant for atmaanveshana (quest for 
the atma) and not for annaanveshana (quest for food). 
Annaanveshana gives cause to physical ailments. They 
come and go like passing clouds. How foolish it is to 
be depressed about such ‘passing clouds’? We should 
never forget the truth that we are born to experience the 
eternal bliss of atma. 


Embodiments of Love! 


You have come here all the way from Kerala to 
celebrate the holy festival of Onam and experience joy 
and bliss in the divine presence of Swami. We should not 
allow trivial matters to dampen the spirit of enthusiasm. 
We should march forward with courage and conviction, 
unmindful of any hurdles and inconveniences in the 
way. A few minutes ago, when all of you were blissfully 
immersed in the celebration, all of a sudden My nose 
started bleeding. I went inside, wiped the blood and 
came out cheerfully as if nothing had happened. How 
can we discontinue the celebration of a sacred festival of 
this kind on account of such trivial matters? We should 
not lose our self-confidence on such minor physical 
discomforts. They are transient in nature; you should not 
get distracted by them. Ailment and suffering are but 
natural to the physical body. Sometimes even the sun is 
covered by clouds. But can the clouds ever diminish the 
effulgence of the sun? No. Just as the sun is not affected 


188 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


by the clouds, you too should remain unaffected by 
ailment and suffering. When you develop such courage, 
conviction and determination, you will not be depressed 
or dejected by any suffering. 


Embodiments of Love! 


We should sanctify our time by performing sacred 
actions. This is the spiritual lesson we have to learn 
today. We can experience transcendental bliss only when 
we overcome the difficulties and suffering that come in 
our way. Never be afraid of difficulties; face them with 
courage. Only then humanness will blossom in you. 
Once you experience the bliss of the atma, difficulties 
and suffering will no longer bother you. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Amidst the joyous celebration of the festival, My 
slight physical discomfiture has caused anxiety to you. 
You should never give scope for anxiety or worry. In 
order to allay your fears and anxiety and to give you joy 
I came back immediately. In this world, many difficulties 
come in our way. Truly speaking, they merely cause 
anxiety in you; they cannot harm you. 


Transcend The Mind 


Onam is the most sacred festival of Kerala. You 
have to understand the significance and message of this 
festival and put it into practice. Onam is an occasion 
to share our joy with others. You cannot experience 
happiness without undergoing difficulties. Na sukhat 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 189 


labhate sukham (one cannot derive happiness out 
of happiness). Happiness gains value in the face of 
difficulties. Even insurmountable difficulties will 
vanish like thin mist when you face them with courage 
and self-confidence. The problems may appear to be 
mountainous in nature, but you should not give scope 
for fear or anxiety in your mind. Mind is like a mad 
monkey. It easily gets swayed by difficulties. Hence, 
you should brush aside the difficulties that come in your 
way. Never allow them to get the upper hand. Mind is 
the veil of maya (illusion) that stands as an obstacle in 
your path to spirituality. You should not become a slave 
of the mind; you should conquer the mind. Only then 
can you attain divinity. But you are carried away by the 
vagaries of the mind which is nothing but maya. You 
should ignore the dictates of the mind. We consider the 
mind to be the most important aspect of humankind. 
However, it can lead you to dangers and difficulties if 
you are carried away by its whims and fancies. Hence, 
do not submit yourself to the mind. 


Embodiments of Love! 


One who has control over the mind is a true 
manishi (human). One who lacks control over the mind 
is no human at all. How can you call yourself a human 
being if you are fickle-minded and depressed over 
trivial problems? You should make efforts to overcome 
problems posed by the mind without being unduly 
worried about them. In this world, there is nothing 


190 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


greater than God’s love. Hence, we should transcend the 
mind that stands as an obstacle in the Godward path. 


Embodiments of Love! 


You are born out of love and sustained by love. You 
should sanctify your life by leading a life suffused with 
love. Treat love as the very basis of your life. You are 
not fit to be called a human being if you submit yourself 
to trivial problems. Even tiny ants are able to overcome 
obstacles that stand in their way. Problems are not limited 
to human beings alone; even birds, beasts and insects 
have problems. 


Saint Thyagaraja sang, 

“Oh Rama, You pervade everything right from 

a cheema (ant) to Brahma. You are in Siva and 

also in Kesava. Please take care of me.” 
(Telugu poem) 


The same divinity that is present in an ant is also 
present in man. Likewise, difficulties are also common 
for all. The suffering that an ant undergoes is similar 
to that of man. When such a tiny creature like an ant 
is able to withstand suffering, why is it that man is not 
able to do the same? He is influenced by his food and 
habits and thus has become a slave to his mind. That is 
the reason he is unable to withstand suffering. We should 
face the challenges of life with fortitude and brush aside 
the difficulties. Never be cowed down by difficulties. 
You can attain God only when you face difficulties with 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 191 


courage and overcome them. 
Focus Your Mind On God 
Embodiments of Love! 


You should not seek anything other than divine 
love. There is nothing superior to love in this world. You 
consider gold, silver, diamond, etc. as most valuable. 
In fact, all these so called valuable things are meant 
to delude man. We should not care for such worldly 
possessions. Instead, we should focus our mind on 
God. Perform your daily activities keeping God as your 
goal. Only then will your human birth find fulfilment. 
We should strive to attain the grace of God and not 
be deterred by difficulties and losses. When you have 
God on your side, you can achieve anything. All your 
difficulties and suffering will vanish in a trice. When 
such omnipotent divinity is within us, why should we be 
worried about trivial matters? Love is the divine power 
that bestows on us the courage to overcome difficulties. 
Anything can be achieved with the power of love. We 
should be afraid of sin, and not difficulties. We have to 
develop daiva preeti, papa bheeti and Sangha neeti (fear 
of sin, love of God and morality in society). Instead of 
developing fear of sin, we are enslaved by sin. Instead 
of seeking refuge in God, we are submitting ourselves 
to difficulties. Morality in society will lead to love of 
God which will in turn lead to fear of sin. Hence, we 
should uphold morality in society and dedicate ourselves 
to God. 


192 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


Thyagaraja once prayed, “Oh! Lord, I am deeply 
concerned about the fear of sin. am unable to surrender 
to your love. Please grant me the strength of conviction 
to bow down before your divine love. Please give me 
the strength to overcome the fear of difficulties.” What 
did we achieve in our life? What is the purpose of 
constant contemplation of God? One who is constantly 
contemplating on God should be able to keep himself 
away from sinful acts and develop love for God. There 
can be no greater fortune than having love for God. 
One must strive to achieve that great treasure. One 
should not be deterred by sorrows and difficulties in 
that sadhana. 


Embodiments of Love! 


You have all gathered here to attain that great 
fortune of love for God. One should never be subdued 
by sorrows and difficulties. Sorrow and sin are obstacles 
in the path of spirituality. They are like the waves. When 
one gets into the water and attempts to swim, the surging 
waves must be pushed aside, so that one may move 
forward. Similarly, in the stream of life, if one wants to 
move forward, one has to push aside the surging waves 
of sorrow and sin. From a child to the adult, everyone 
has to strive to attain the love of God. This struggle for 
God’s love, moulds the personality of a human being. 
What is meant by personality? Does it mean height, 
weight and a strong body? No, it is a mistake to think 
so. Undeterred by the sorrows and difficulties, one has 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 193 


to march forward with courage to attain God’s love. 
That is the real meaning of personality. In fact, God 
has already granted such personality to every human 
being. Unfortunately, we fail to realise this truth. The 
word ‘Person’ implies a great divine force that is granted 
by God to Man. Our ancestors called this divine force 
as ‘Persona’. This is a great gift of God, granted to 
every individual. We are unable to safeguard this great 
treasure. These sorrows and difficulties are like passing 
clouds that come and go. Why should we be afraid of 
them? We have the eternal Divine principle immanent 
in our personality. Therefore, there is no need at all to 
be afraid of anything as long as we are constantly aware 
of our latent divinity. March forward with courage and 
conviction and achieve your life’s goal. It is only to instil 
this feeling of courage in you and reinforce your faith 
in God that you are subjected to face certain anxious 
moments. 


Be Rooted In The Atmatattwa 
Embodiments of Love! 


I am aware that you are very anxious about the 
physical discomfort that Swami underwent, a few 
moments ago. You are very worried about this physical 
body. Understand and be convinced by the fact that the 
body is after all physical in nature. It is like a water 
bubble; the mind is like a mad monkey. You need not 
be afraid of this mad monkey. You should not worry 


194 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


about these passing clouds. They are like visitors who 
come and go. We have to be firmly established in the 
Atmatattwa, which is nothing but divinity. Develop full 
faith in the Atmatattwa. That alone will protect you in 
every way. 


Embodiments of Love! 


God can do anything by His divine will. Why 
should you fear when such all powerful God is always 
with you, in you and around you? Develop such courage 
and conviction and march on. There cannot be a more 
powerful force than faith in God in this world. 


Embodiments of Love! 


All these children have gathered here to spend some 
sacred moments in the divine presence of God. They 
are really fortunate. Their good fortune is the result of 
the merit acquired by their parents. Here is a small girl 
(pointing towards a girl). She participated in a group 
dance programme a short while ago. While doing so, she 
was constantly observing the steps made by other girls in 
the group. She developed so much concentration in this 
activity that she was constantly maintaining her steps in 
tune with the steps of other girls. (Swami created a gold 
chain and put it round her neck.) 


Embodiments of Love! 


I will be very happy, if all of you can become 
children once again. A child will never have the bad 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 195 


qualities of anger, passion, jealousy, conceit and ego. 
Jesus Christ was always appreciative of the quality 
of innocence in children. Once, he lifted a small child 
from the lap of her mother in the crowd and said “I like 
this small child very much; she has all the qualities of 
divinity. She is pure, selfless and is in perfect bliss”. 
Children in general are divine in nature. As they grow 
up they develop bad qualities like excessive desires, 
attachments, anger, jealousy, etc. Along with advancing 
age, sorrows and difficulties will also increase. Therefore, 
one should strive for attaining control over one’s desires. 
That is ceiling on desires. If you can develop this control, 
you will come under the influence of divine power. 
Otherwise, you will be deluded by the power of desires 
and get into that vortex from which you can never come 
out. A child like simplicity, purity and innocence, is the 
road to divinity. 


Embodiments of Love! 


I wish you should become children at least for one 
minute a day. You should emulate those noble qualities, 
which are characteristic of children. Supposing you are 
troubled with desires, chase them away as unbecoming 
of your noble personality. Only then can you hold your 
head high. A few minutes ago, My nose was bleeding 
profusely. If I were to submit Myself helplessly to 
this bodily ailment, it would have aggravated further. 
Therefore, I decided to defy this bodily discomfiture 
and stand erect with firmness, unmindful of what is 
going to happen to the body. I washed My face and came 


196 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


back immediately. After all, this body and the blood 
circulating therein are nourished and nurtured only by 
the food we partake of. If we cannot control our own 
body, what is the purpose of our living? Wherever we 
are, we must keep the body in our control. Only then 
we become real human beings and can move closer to 
divinity. The more you control your body and mind, the 
nearer you move to God. 


The Message Of Onam Is Love 


In fact, love is the only quality that takes you 
nearer to God. There is nothing greater than love. It 
is a divine attribute. Love is God. Live in Love. When 
you cultivate this noble quality, you deserve to be called 
a human being. This divine love is like the blood that 
circulates in every human being, nay, every living being. 
If we can cultivate this universal love, you can love not 
only every human being, but all living beings. Love is 
God and God is Love. Therefore, take every individual 
lovingly to your heart. Do not ever show anger or hatred 
towards anybody. 


Embodiments of Love! 


The quality of love that permeates every human 
being is one and the same. There are no differences 
whatsoever in this regard. When you cultivate such 
universal love, it becomes your very life-breath, which is 
dearer to God. Therefore, cultivate such pure, unsullied 
and selfless love. Love your neighbour’s child as your 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 197 


own child. All are embodiments of love. The message 
of this sacred festival Onam is Love. This festival is 
observed to spread this message of Love among all 
human beings. In fact, we are born to cultivate this 
sacred love and share it with others. If we fail in this 
endeavour, our whole life becomes a waste. 


When My nose was bleeding a few minutes ago, 
some doctors advised Me that I should take complete 
rest and not to go out to give a discourse. I asked them 
why? The doctors explained that if I started talking, 
the bleeding might recur. Then I replied, “Ok! Let Me 
see!” Thus I faced the problem squarely with courage 
and confidence. Thus, when we encounter a difficult 
situation, we should not feel sorry and dejected. We 
must face it with courage. Only then can we overcome 
the situation. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Whenever you encounter suffering either bodily 
or mentally, do not lose your cool. Do not get dejected. 
Instead, face the problem squarely and undertake 
activities that will instil a sense of courage and confidence 
in you. No doubt, situations do arise in life when we have 
to undergo sorrows and difficulties. When our loving 
parents depart from this world, we are in deep sorrow. 
Instead of losing our poise in such difficult situations, it 
is advisable to face the ordeal with courage, expressing 
gratitude to our parents for granting us the gift of this 
body. 


198 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


Embodiments of Love! 


I hope I am not causing inconvenience to you 
by speaking at length. It is only to instil courage in 
you that I am giving this long discourse. When I was 
suffering with a bleeding nose, all our children were 
anxiously waiting in the adjacent room in an anxious 
mood. I told them, “Do not feel worried. I will go out 
and administer a strong dose for this ailment. Such is 
My courage and confidence in facing difficult situations. 
In fact, this courage is My real strength. Come! Let us 
go!” The children collected all the blood-soaked towels 
and felt very distressed on seeing them. If those clothes 
are washed, the blood stains will vanish in no time. 
Likewise, only God’s love can wash our sorrows off! 
Therefore, cultivate such divine love. All your sorrows 
and difficulties will be removed.’ 


[Onam, 28-8-2004, Prasanthi Nilayam] 


15 


The Lord Accepts Only A Pure Heart 


Oh Krishna! You don t eat what I give You, 
You don t eat our home-food, 
You go to the houses of the cowherds, 
And eat butter stealthily, 
You spoil Your good name, my dear! 
(Telugu poem) 


hus, mother Yashoda expressed her anguish 

one day, having been vexed by the complaints 
of the neighbours. She chided Him saying, “Oh 
Krishna! I have to face a lot of trouble on account of 
Your mischievous pranks. You don’t have taste for 
the food prepared in our house. You always like the 
items prepared in the neighbouring houses. How shall 
I manage with You?” True, people develop a taste for 
food in the neighbouring houses. A sweetmeat shop 


200 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


owner sitting in his own shop, all the while enjoying the 
sweet smell of the laddus, develops a taste for puffed 
rice from another shop. 


The Vamana Avatar 


Kashyapa, a great devotee of the Lord had 
completely surrendered himself at the Lotus Feet and 
was totally lost in divine bliss. One day, his wife, Aditi, 
approached him and advised him, “My dear! We do 
not have children. You have surrendered everything of 
yours to the Lord. Why don’t you pray to Him to bless 
us with a child?” 


Emperor Bali, in Krita Yuga, performed many 
yajnas. After completion of one hundred and seven 
yajnas, he made arrangements for performing the one 
hundred and eighth yajna known as Viswajit. As he was 
performing this yajna, Lord Vishnu appeared before him 
as Vamana in the guise of a dwarfish Brahmin. Vamana 
asked for three paces of land in charity from Bali, which 
he was about to give. In the meanwhile, Emperor Bali’s 
preceptor Sukracharya came there and tried to dissuade 
Bali from giving this gift of charity. He advised Ball, 
“Please do not give anything in charity to this short 
Brahmin, much less the three paces of land. Do not 
underestimate him. He is not an ordinary Brahmin. He 
is an avatar of Vishnu. He is born to Sage Kashyapa, in 
fulfilment of the boon granted by Lord Vishnu to him.” 
But Emperor Bali did not pay heed to the advice of his 
preceptor. He asked Lord Vamana, “Sir, What can I do 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 201 


for you?” Vamana replied, “Oh King! I do not need 
anything. Just give me three paces of land.” Sukracharya 
again pleaded with Bali, “Oh King! You consider this 
person as an ordinary Brahmin. No. No. He is capable 
of filling the entire universe. It is not wise on your part 
to grant his request.” But, Emperor Bali turned down his 
advice saying that he could not go back on his promise, 
as it was a great sin not to stand by one’s word. 


In those days, people considered death preferable 
to going back on one’s word. But today in Kali Yuga, 
people make promises and break them at will. Emperor 
Bali was of pure heart. Once a promise was made, he 
fulfilled it, come what may! 


He said, “I gave a word to this Brahmin boy. Iam 
prepared to face any eventuality in fulfilling my promise. 
I will offer the fruits of all the yajnas I have performed, 
including the one I am now performing to this Brahmin 
boy. So saying, he put the garland of the fruits of 108 
yajnas performed by him round the neck of Vamana and 
prostrated before him. (As He said this, Swami created 
a necklace of 108 gold coins.) 


Vamana covered the entire land given in charity 
by Bali under one foot. He grew in size and filled the 
entire universe with his second foot. There was no 
further space to put his third foot. Then Sukracharya 
said, “Oh emperor! You did not pay heed to my advice. 
You underestimated this Brahmin boy and got yourself 
tricked by his innocent looks.” 


202 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


Vamana received the offering of Emperor Bali 
and praised his large-heartedness and blessed him. 
Vamana was short in stature, but he could fill the entire 
universe. Being an avatar, He was aprameya (beyond 
all limitations, indescribable and immeasurable). Human 
beings have limitations, but not an avatar. 


The Universe Functions As ordained by The Lord 


The sunrise and sunset happen according to a 
predetermined divine command. It happens regularly, 
uninterrupted. The sun, the moon and the stars follow a 
definite pattern of schedule. All the five elements in the 
universe discharge their duties regularly as ordained by 
the Lord. Even God Himself observes the rules that He 
lays down for all. Everything in God’s creation goes on 
according to a predetermined order and divine command. 
Nothing in the universe, including the five elements, 
has an independent existence. But, unfortunately, man 
is unable to recognise this divine force that regulates 
the functioning of the universe. Scientists are making 
unstinted efforts to discover this divine force. The stars 
shining brightly in the sky at night are, however, not 
visible during daytime. 


The sun rises in the morning and sets in the 
evening with utmost regularity everyday. The 
stars glitter beautifully in the sky at night and 
hide themselves during the day. The wind blows 
incessantly and sustains the living beings without 
taking rest even for a moment. The rivers make 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 203 


gurgling sounds as they flow perennially. 
(Telugu poem) 


What could be the reason for this phenomenon? 
Scientists probed into this aspect and concluded that 
the stars were not visible during daytime because the 
sun was shining brilliantly in the sky during that period. 
Similarly, they tried to explain the divine force in ever 
so many ways. 


The moment the umbilical cord is cut and the child 
is separated from the mother, it cries. Why? Nobody 
could explain and explore this secret. The moment a drop 
of milk or honey is put on the tongue of the newborn 
child, it sleeps happily. This means ever since a human 
being comes out of his mother’s womb, he struggles to 
satiate his hunger. 


Oh man! You struggle hard to acquire various 
types of knowledge in order to fill your stomach. 
In spite of all your hard work and acquisition 
of knowledge, you are unable to experience 
everlasting happiness. Instead, why dont you 
contemplate on the Lord and seek refuge in Him? 
He will certainly show you a way to overcome 
your misery. 

(Telugu poem) 


Every human being thinks that he is born merely for 
filling his belly. He constantly struggles to acquire food. 


204 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


There is another interesting phenomenon in nature. 
The branches of a tree rub against each other due to the 
wind and fire is born out of that friction between two 
pieces of wood. How does it happen? Though there is 
fire in the wood of a tree, it is not burnt away. Why? No 
scientist could ever discover this secret so far. There are 
several such inexplicable phenomena in nature. With a 
view to recognise and understand such phenomena, man 
is constantly engaged in the quest for divinity. However, 
one need not search for God, who is omnipresent. 


Oh man! You struggle hard in life merely for the 
sake of filling your belly. You acquire myriad 
types of knowledge from various fields. Examine 
and enquire for yourself what great happiness 
you have achieved by spending all the time from 
dawn to dusk in acquiring worldly knowledge 
and earning wealth, while forgetting God. 
(Telugu poem) 


Everything in this universe moves strictly according 
to the Divine Will and force. Man, of his own accord 
cannot achieve anything. The divine force manifests 
itself in several ways in this universe, in the form of 
various types of energy. People think they are created 
by somebody. Strictly speaking, nobody has created 
them. They are natural phenomena that manifest out of 
divine will. For example, when two pieces of stone are 
struck against each other, fire is born. It means, there is 
fire latent in the stone, but does not manifest outside. 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 205 


Thus, all the powers are latent in nature. 
Pure Devotion Of Suguna 


A few minutes ago, one boy spoke about Nanda and 
Yashoda, the foster parents of Lord Krishna. In those 
days, there was no electricity. People in the village used 
to go to the house of Nanda (since he was the chief of 
the village) and lighted their oil lamps from the lamp 
lit up in Nanda’s house. People were of the belief that 
they would attain plenty and prosperity if they lighted 
their oil lamps from the lamps lit in the houses of well- 
to-do-people. A newly married daughter-in-law by name 
Suguna arrived in that village. Her mother-in-law told 
her to go to the house of Nanda and get her lamp lighted 
from theirs. When Suguna went to the house of Nanda 
and lighted the lamp, she could visualise Krishna in that 
flame. On having this divine vision, she lost her body 
consciousness. She fixed her gaze on that beautiful form 
of Lord Krishna and was lost in bliss. She could not 
even realise that her fingers were being burnt, having 
come into contact with the flame. She was in total bliss. 
In the meanwhile, other ladies from the neighbouring 
houses also came there to light their own lamps. They 
were wonderstruck on witnessing this scene. They could 
notice that Suguna was not moving away from the flame 
even though her fingers were being burnt. They then 
realised that she had the vision of Krishna in that flame. 
They sang a song describing this incident. (Swami sang 
a Telugu song, the meaning of the first few lines is as 


206 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


follows ...) 


It seems Suguna had a vision 
Of Gopala in the house of Nanda 
She saw Krishna in the flame! 


On hearing this song, Yashoda came there literally 
running. She saw Suguna’s fingers getting burnt in the 
flame. While all the Gopis were dancing in ecstasy, 
Yashoda went near Suguna and pulled her hand away 
from the flame. She chided her saying “Oh! Suguna ! 
Did you not notice your fingers being burnt on coming 
into contact with the flame? Do you wish to bring a bad 
name to us that if anyone goes to Nanda’s house, their 
fingers will be burnt?” Suguna’s mother-in-law was 
by nature a short-tempered woman. On hearing about 
this incident, she came running to the house of Yashoda 
and made a big issue of this incident. She ordered her 
daughter-in-law not to go to the house of Nanda again 
in future, for getting the lamp lighted. 


Several miracles happened in the house of Yashoda. 
After Krishna left for Mathura, the Gopis could not bear 
His separation and were pining for His Darshan. In 
such a moment of yearning, Krishna appeared in Gokul. 
However, neither Nanda nor Yashoda could see Him. All 
the Gopis gathered at the house of Nanda and prayed 
that they may be allowed to have Krishna’s darshan. 
They started complaining, “Nanda and Yashoda! you 
have kept Krishna away from us. Please tell us where he 
is.” But, Krishna did not make his appearance in public. 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 207 


He appeared to some Gopis individually in answer to 
their prayers. 


A few minutes ago, a student of our University 
narrated an incident wherein Swami had appeared 
before him in answer to his prayers. No one else could 
see Swami. Then, the boy prayed again, “Swami! What 
is the use of giving darshan to me alone? Please give 
darshan to all the students; otherwise, they will not 
believe my words and will make fun of me.” I replied, 
“Does not matter. Let people think whatever they wish 
to. This is your prapti (deservedness), only you deserve 
to see Me”. So saying, I disappeared. 


God Likes Only Pure Hearts 


Once, Yashoda reprimanded child Krishna saying, 
“Oh! My dear Krishna! You don’t eat the food I prepared 
for you. You go to the houses of the milkmaids and 
stealthily eat the butter stored in their houses. You are 
creating problems for me. Is it that the butter suffused 
with mother’s love does not taste good for you?” So 
saying, she tied Krishna to a mortar with a rope. It is 
everybody’s experience in the world that we do not like 
the food cooked in our own house. The items cooked 
in others’ houses will appear to be tasty. This is quite 
natural. However, Krishna did not steal the butter from 
others’ houses for its taste. There is an underlying 
message in this /eela. Here, butter symbolises a pure 
heart. Wherever such a pure heart is available, Krishna 
takes it. Such a pure heart will be soft and sweet. The 


208 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


hearts of Gopis were ripened with devotion. They were 
pure, soft and sweet. Hence, Krishna had gone to their 
houses to steal their hearts. 


Krishna is referred to as “chora” (thief). What 
does He steal? He steals the butter-like hearts of the 
Gopis, hearts which are pure, soft and sweet. If you 
address someone as chora (thief), he will be annoyed. 
But if you call Krishna as “chiththa chora” (stealer of 
the heart), He will enjoy this appellation. That is why, 
devotees sing in praise of the Lord most endearingly 
“Chiththa chora Yashoda Ke Bal! Navaneetha chora 
Gopal! Gopal, Gopal, Gopal! Govardhanadhara 
Gopal!” (“Oh! Yashoda’s little Krishna! Oh! Gopala! 
Stealer of butter! Oh! Gopala! Lifter of the Govardhana 
mountain!”). The song thus sung melodiously with 
bhava, raga and thala will be liked by everyone. Great 
Singer-saints like Thyagaraja made sweet offerings 
to God in the form of kirtanas suffused with bhava 
(feeling), raga (tune) and thala (beat) and won His grace. 
There is so much sweetness in such devotional songs. 
God’s grace can surely be obtained by such devotional 
singing. You cannot win the grace of God by empty 
rhetoric. It is only through devotional singing suffused 
with bhava, raga and thala, that divinity can be attained. 
God will be moved by such sankirtan. Even the Vedas 
have extolled the efficacy of devotional singing. Even 
by chanting the Vedas, God cannot be attained. There are 
several hymns in praise of God in the Rig Veda, Yajur 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 209 


Veda, Sama Veda and Atharvana Veda . But, not even 
a single individual chanting those hymns could obtain 
divine darshan. However, when these hymns are set 
to tune and sung with devotion, they could experience 
divine love. That is why God is extolled as ‘ganalola’ 
and ‘ganapriya’. Therefore, you pray to God with 
devotional singing. You can easily win the grace of God. 
Some people may have a doubt, “We cannot sing well; 
we have not learnt the art of singing. How can we please 
God?” Do not worry. You may not have knowledge of 
music or a mellifluous voice. It does not matter. Sing 
the glory of God with intense love, in some tune which 
you know. That is enough to move the heart of God. 
What is music? It is not necessary to make a special 
effort to learn music. A simple song with intense love 
and yearning will move God. For example, you recite 
a poem, “Rama! Nannu Kaapadu” (Oh! Rama! Please 
protect me). There will be no sweetness in the poem. It 
is simply a literary rendering of your feelings. Similarly, 
if you make an appeal to God saying “Rama! Nannu 
Kaapadu”’, it becomes an empty repetition of words. 
The same feeling, if it is expressed in a song set to a 
beautiful tune, “Rama ...! Nannu Kaapadu...”’, it will 
be so sweet and endearing to divinity. There is so much 
sweetness in music. Therefore, if you want to attain God, 
you have to do it only with devotional singing. 


210 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


Sing Soulful Songs 


You need not be disappointed if you have not learnt 
music. Why disappointment? If there is an appointment, 
there will be disappointment. Therefore, do not make 
an appointment, in the beginning itself. You sing the 
glory of God in your own way. That is the easiest way 
to attain God. The divine bliss enjoyed by the gopis 
in Krishnavatar in Dwapara Yuga is unparalleled. 
Therefore, remember that divine bliss and try to please 
God with your love and devotion. 


In no avatar devotees have merged in the divine love 
to such a great extent as in Krishnavatar. Thousands of 
devotees have merged in Sri Krishna during His avatar. 
Hence, if you want to merge in divinity, devotional 
singing is the only means. God is said to be ganapriya 
(pleased by devotional singing). Krishnavatar is the best 
example for this statement. One simple name ‘Krishna’ 
sung by a devotee is enough to move Him. The /ee/as, 
mahimas and the miraculous deeds performed by Lord 
Krishna during His avatar are unparalleled. 


Dear students! You are singing several bhajans. 
All of you are participating in the bhajans. But, each 
one is singing in his own way. This is not proper. If 
all of you sing in one voice and one tune with divine 
feeling, God will surely install Himself in your loving 
heart. Krishnavatar is the only avatar that had granted 
darshan to different people in different ways, clarified 
their doubts about His divinity and merged them in His 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 211 


own Self. Krishnavatar is the only avatar that made 
everyone happy and blissful by His sweet and loving 
words. 


Embodiments of Love! 


There is nothing superior to devotional singing. 
What a great joy and happiness you derive by singing 
the song “Nanduni Yinta Gopaludanta Deepaana 
Kanipinchenanta”’ (It seems Gopala has appeared in 
the flame in the house of Nanda). Therefore, sing such 
soulful songs with bhava, raga and thala to please God 
and obtain His grace. You may sing any number of 
bhajans and songs, but it is only when they are suffused 
with intense love, devotion and sweet and soft feeling 
(bhava) you will derive immense happiness and joy. 


[Krishnashtami, 6-9-2004, Prasanthi Nilayam] 


16 


God Protects Those Who Protect Sath- 
ya And Dharma 


No visit to any pilgrim centre, no penance, no 
Yogic practice, no study of sacred texts nor 
charitable acts will help you in crossing over the 
ocean of Samsara, but the service rendered to the 
noble. (Sanskrit s/oka) 


Embodiments of Love! 


OU would have read in sacred texts that 

Ravana was a master of four Vedas and six 
Sastras. Having learnt these sacred texts, was there 
any transformation in him? No. Instead of developing 
daivatva (divine qualities), he developed danavatva 
(demonic qualities). 


214 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


Practise What You Preach 


The ten heads of Ravana symbolised four Vedas 
and six Sastras. In the decisive battle, Rama severed 
Ravana’s heads since he did not put into practice the 
knowledge he had acquired. Mere learning of sacred 
texts and chanting of Vedas will not bring about any 
transformation. In order to drive home this message, 
Rama cut off with his arrows Ravana’s ten heads. It is 
only right at the end. Just before his spirit left his body 
Ravana did recognise his faults and repented for them 
and became sacred thereby. All that God preaches is 
for the benefit and welfare of humanity. Therefore, it 
is enough if one puts into practice at least one of the 
teachings of the Vedas. It should be a natural trait for 
everyone to put into practice the divine teachings. 


In Prasanthi Nilayam, you find that even the 
Primary school children join the senior students in 
chanting Vedas. They know all Vedas, but they do not 
have the required knowledge to put them into practice. 
Mere recitation of the Vedas is of little use. 


Only God exists everywhere and at all times. The 
world is but an illusion. The sacred teaching that God 
exists everywhere should be propagated to everyone. 
You find many sadhakas (spiritual aspirants) chanting 
and teaching the Vedas. Consider this example: a cassette 
tape or a disc merely plays, but does not experience the 
melody. It would be fruitless if one does not practise 
what he preaches. So, one should recognise, understand 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 215 


and practise the sacred teachings. Lord Krishna put 
into practice what He propagated and also insisted that 
everyone should follow suit. You find many elders in the 
Mahabharata who were great scholars themselves, but, 
failed to put into practice the knowledge they acquired. 
The same is the position today. God has no preferences 
or dislikes whatsoever. All are equal for Him. But, He 
watches to see how much a person puts into practice 
what he has learnt. Many people study sacred texts, go 
on pilgrimage, perform penance, repeat God’s name, 
but what is the use? Many ask Me for a japamala 
(rosary). Is it to adorn your neck for publicity or is it for 
spiritual experience? One hand is enough for one who 
wants to practise this sadhana. (At this point, Swami 
demonstrated with His hand as to how one should do 
namasmarana.) The five fingers of the hand contain 
nine aksharas (letters) which are further divided into 
twelve Brahmas and this makes up to hundred and eight 
beads of the rosary. Chanting the name of Rama nine 
times twelve will make up to one hundred and eight. 
This sadhana requires neither a japamala nor a fixed 
place. It can be done while walking or even while lying 
down till you go to sleep. When there are such easy and 
sacred paths, why should one go for strenuous sadhanas 
foregoing sleep? 


Droupadi is known for her chastity. She has 
protected her husbands in many ways. After the 
gruesome massacre of the young Pandava children, 
Arjuna tracked down Aswatthama, the perpetrator of 


216 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


the atrocity, and dragged him before Droupadi. Instead 
of cursing the evildoer and pronouncing punishment for 
him, she fell at the feet of Aswatthama, the son of her 
husbands’ most revered Guru, and said: 


It is at the feet of your father, Dronacharya that 
my husbands have learnt all that they know. 
Being the son of Dronacharya, was it proper to 
kill my children. How could you have the heart 
to kill them who were unarmed, young, quietly 
asleep, were not having any grudge against you, 
and were not contemplating any harm to you? 
(Telugu poem) 


When Droupadi was praying like this, Bhima could 
not bear to see this. Exploding in anger, Bhima roared: 


This Droupadi is a stupid woman, for she pleads 
for this wretch’s freedom. She feels no anger 
against this murderer of her sons. 

(Telugu poem) 


Practise Forbearance 


When Arjuna was about to kill Aswatthama, 
Droupadi fell at his feet and reasoned with him 
thus: “Arjuna! Will my sons be revived by killing 
Aswatthama? His mother too would experience the same 
kind of sorrow that I am undergoing at the loss of my 
sons. Having studied the Vedas and Sastras, how is it 
that you are not able to maintain your tranquillity?” 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 217 


The body is made up of five elements and is 
bound to perish sooner or later, but the Indweller 
has neither birth nor death. The Indweller has 
no attachment whatsoever and is the Eternal 
Witness. Truly speaking, the Indweller who is in 
the form of the Atma is verily God Himself. 
(Telugu poem) 


Thus, Droupadi pleaded with Arjuna to forgive 
Aswatthama for his heinous act. Arjuna replied, “You 
are preventing me from keeping up my vow.” To this 
Droupadi said, ““Tonsuring his head and removing the 
crown jewel from his head is equivalent to killing him.” 
Arjuna paid heed to Droupadi’s advice and as a token 
punishment shaved Aswatthama’s head, took his crown 
jewel and sent him away. 


What is papa (sin)? Hurting, abusing and killing 
others is sin. What is punya (merit)? Helping others is 
merit. Therefore, one should not retaliate to an evil act 
with an evil act. Instead, one should be magnanimous 
in forgiving the offender. There are many such sacred 
teachings in the Mahabharata. 


There are many such noble women like Droupadi. 
She stands as an ideal for all women. Why are we 
forgetting the teachings of such great women? Today, 
women are treated as mere puppets. But they are 
full of courage, valour, sacrifice, determination and 
righteousness. Have you ever cared to recognise the 
power latent in women? Men do not possess such valour 


218 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


and courage of women. It is because of such great 
women that our Bharatiya culture is held in high esteem. 
Otherwise, it would have declined long ago. Did you 
ever recognise the fact that women are endowed with 
such great powers as courage, valour, determination 
and righteousness? These qualities are not to be easily 
found in men. Why? Most of them are afflicted with the 
disease of anger, which is ruining them. 


One with anger will not be successful in any of 
his endeavours. He will commit sins and will be 
derided by one and all. (Telugu poem) 


It is possible that women may also succumb to 
anger and indulge in sinful deeds, now and then. Such 
people should be pardoned and encouraged to make 
amends, not denounced and condemned. The quality of 
patience and perseverance in women is great. In fact, it 
is the quality of equanimity in times of difficulty that was 
characteristic of Droupadi, which saved the Pandavas. 
There are several such women even in present times. 
The bad qualities of anger, passion, jealousy, envy and 
pride are more prominent in men. Women are able to 
control such evil qualities from overtaking them. Under 
the circumstances is it not our duty to encourage and 
honour such women who preserve and promote peace 
and harmony? On the contrary, women are belittled 
and slighted. No, no, this should not happen. Such 
women with noble qualities deserve to be encouraged 
and upheld. 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 219 


A few days ago, you had witnessed a function in this 
Hall, where the glory of womanhood was highlighted. 
A playlet was put up in this Hall by Chethana, in which 
the greatness of mother Sita, as the ideal woman, was 
presented. Sita and Droupadi were great pathivrathas 
(women of chastity). Such efforts to highlight the 
greatness of women need to be encouraged. 


Protect Sathya And Dharma At All Cost 


Sathya and Dharma (truth and righteousness) are the 
greatest characteristics of Indian culture. If these two are 
protected, the country can be saved from degeneration. If 
you want to protect your country, you need not join the 
army and fight a battle. If truth and righteousness that 
are inherent in you are protected, they themselves will 
protect the country. It is not great to kill the enemies ina 
war. First and foremost, protect truth and righteousness 
in you. The country will automatically be protected. 
Indian culture exhorts Sathyam Vada (speak truth) and 
Dharmam chara (practise righteousness). When you do 
this with perseverance, you will become a great hero. 
When you protect Sathya and Dharma, God will, in turn, 
protect you. Instead of trying to worship God and obtain 
His grace, if you protect truth and righteousness, God 
will protect not only your country, but the whole world. 
Truth is your very life-breath. Righteousness is your 
armour. Therefore, protect truth; foster righteousness. 
That is enough. Truth and righteousness are inseparable. 
One cannot exist without the other. 


220 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


They are the very life-breath for the universe. 
Droupadi was assiduously observing and propagating 
these two. 


Sathya Dharmamu Santhi Premalatho 
Nee nithya jeevana yathra saginchu. 


(Oh man! Carry on your life’s journey with the 
help of Truth, Righteousness, Peace, and Love). You 
must hold on to these principles, come what may. God 
will always protect such people. History is replete 
with several examples wherein people held steadfastly 
to the principles of Sathya and Dharma, and were 
constantly protected by God. One such example is that 
of Pandavas and their chaste wife, Droupadi. You may 
argue, “Where is Sathya and Dharma in the present-day 
world? Whom are they protecting?” This is a totally 
wrong argument. If you protect Sathya and Dharma, they 
will, in turn, stand before you and protect you. They are 
the very embodiments of divinity. Unfortunately, today, 
instead of Sathyam vada (speak truth) and Dharmam 
chara (practise righteousness), people are following 
the distorted version Sathvam vadha (kill truth) and 
Dharmam chera (imprison righteousness). This is utter 
perversion. You should lead your lives based on Sathya 
and Dharma and consider them as more important than 
your lives. 


When Droupadi was pleading with Aswatthama who 
killed her sons, Bhima was furious with uncontrollable 
anger. He clenched his fist and proceeded towards 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 221 


Aswatthama to kill him. In that uncontrollable rage, 
he argued with Droupadi, “Are you mad? Why are you 
trying to save this man who mercilessly slit the throat 
of your five sons? I will break the head of this child- 
killer into pieces with my fist. Do not come in my way.” 
At that moment Droupadi fell at the feet of Bhima and 
pleaded with him to spare the life of Aswatthama. She 
prayed for regaining his composure. People around, who 
were witnessing this scene, were wonderstruck. They 
were wondering whether Droupadi was really mad! In 
fact, the world will be better if everyone is afflicted with 
such madness. Thus, when Droupadi pleaded with her 
husbands for saving the life of Aswatthama, he prayed 
for forgiveness. Droupadi was happy at the change of 
heart in Aswatthama and advised him, “Brother! You 
need not beg for my forgiveness. Instead, you pay your 
respect and do service to your mother. Do not drown her 
in sorrow. Never cause her anguish; take good care of 
her.” Even the loss of five sons did not make Droupadi 
shed tears of sorrow. 


Several women come to Me with a heavy heart and 
tell Me “Swami! My husband’s death has caused me 
deep sorrow and anguish. How do I bear this calamity?” 
Then I would respond saying, “Oh! Your husband died? 
Very happy.” They feel very unhappy with My attitude 
and question Me, “What is this Swami? Are You so 
happy on hearing the news of my husband’s death?” 
What am I to say? I am always happy. I do not know 
what sorrow is. I always discharge My duty. 


222 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


God is the only person who protects everybody. 
Therefore, pray to God always. Forgetting God and 
depending on the mercy of human beings! What 
madness! You must depend on God, for everything in 
your life. That is real thapas (penance). 


Respect And Honour Women 


Since ancient times, women have been the very 
life-breath and foundation for Bharat. They are the very 
embodiment of truth and righteousness. How much 
respect and reverence we must show towards such noble 
women? On the contrary, there are several people today, 
who put them to untold suffering. Due to bad habits and 
bad company, people lose their sense of discrimination 
and torture the women. No woman should be put to 
mental and physical torture, whatever be their nature. 
They must be revered and respected and protected in all 
ways. Women in Bharat have always been held in high 
esteem. There are several chaste and noble women in 
Bharat and still Bharatiyas are undergoing difficulties. 
What is the reason? Whose fault is this? It is only 
because the Bharativas are not giving proper respect 
and place to women in society. The fault lies squarely 
on the men. 


Forbearance is the real beauty in this sacred land 
of Bharat. Of all the rituals, adherence to truth is 
the greatest penance. (Telugu poem) 


The truthful character of women is really their 
tapas (penance). Therefore, such noble women must 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 223 


be encouraged and honoured. If you can put this one 
great principle into practice, your life will be sanctified. 
Those who ill-treat their wives can never be happy and 
prosperous. If men cannot protect their women who are 
prepared to sacrifice even their lives for the sake of their 
husbands, what for is their existence? Women are really 
the presiding deities of their homes. Our primary duty 
is to protect them. Never let your women shed tears. 
If women shed tears, such homes will be ruined in no 
time. Women are ideals to the society. Never cause them 
distress. 


Men should lead a life of truth and righteousness. 
Only then can they protect the country and become 
worthy of being called real men. Otherwise, how can 
they become heroic men? Several people go to temples. 
When they visit a temple, they must make a vow that they 
would respect and protect the women. Only then will 
they be protected. It is only when the women are safe, 
the whole world will be happy. Therefore, if you wish 
to protect Dharma in the world, you must first protect 
your Dharma towards women. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Imagine a situation wherein you are in the role of 
women and some men torture you. How miserable and 
helpless you would feel! Women are prepared to sacrifice 
even their lives for the sake of their husbands. But, men 
do not have such spirit of sacrifice. Men should also 
cultivate such a spirit of sacrifice, like women. Only 


224 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


then will you be fit to be called men. Otherwise, you 
will be men only in form, but lacking in masculinity. 
You consider women as abala (weak). But, the truth 
is they are Sakthi swarupas (embodiments of strength 
and power). Only, I know the plight of women who lost 
their husbands. It is our duty to protect such women. If 
you can discharge this duty properly, you will be happy 
throughout your life. 


Embodiments of Love! 


You must follow truth even in small matters. There 
are three letters “Sa”, “Tha” and “Ya” in the word 
“Sathya’’. If you reverse the order, it will become “Ya” 
“Tha” and “Sa”. This means when you do thapas with 
austerities like yama (control of the inner senses) and 
niyama (control of the outer senses), you will have the 
divine vision of Sathyaswarupa (embodiment of Truth). 
You have to thus recognise the inner meaning of every 
word and follow them meticulously. 


King Janaka, a great renunciant king, used to 
propagate truth and righteousness among his subjects by 
his own example. His daughter, Sita, also led a pious life 
based on truth and righteousness. You are not studying 
the life history of such ideal women. Instead, you are 
reading trash. No. No. This is unbecoming of you. You 
should study the ancient history of Bharat, which is so 
sacred. The character and morality of women in Bharat 
are very sacred. You will become worthy of being called 
men only when you undertake to protect such great 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 225 


women. By mere sporting a moustache or growing a 
beard, will you become men? Moustache and beard are 
not the real signs of masculinity. You must protect ladies 
and uphold the dignity of the family. Only then can you 
become great heroes and men of character. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Consider women as embodiments of truth. Even 
if some minor faults are noticed in them, do not give 
credence to them. Respect and revere them. Do not 
use even a single word that would offend them. If they 
really wish, they can achieve any great task. You should 
be even prepared to lay down your lives for the sake of 
protecting and fostering women. At least from today, 
all of you should come forward to protect the honour 
and dignity of women in the world. Women also should 
undertake a vow to contribute their mite in this great task 
of protection of Sthri Dharma. As regards men, there is 
nothing great or new in trying to protect women. That is 
your duty. Her duty is to foster and maintain the entire 
family as a unit. If women are protected, they in turn 
will protect the entire world. Never belittle women and 
treat them as mere playthings. I hope all of you men will, 
at least in future, undertake to protect the dignity and 
honour of women and thereby protect your own dignity 
and honour. I conclude My discourse blessing you all. 


[Krishnashtami Message (Evening), 6-9-2004, 
Prasanthi Nilayam] 


17 


Teachings Of Noble Souls 
Essential For The Young 


Neither by penance nor by pilgrimage nor by 
study of scriptures nor by Japa can one cross the 
ocean of life. One can achieve it only by serving 
the pious. (Sanskrit verse) 


everal noble souls have worshipped God in 
different wayssome by doing penance, some 
by charity, some even by sacrificing their lives. Some 
others dedicated their lives for teaching and propagating 
the sacred scriptures by touring the entire world. 
Nevertheless, they could not win God’s grace and love. 
Why? samsara sagaroththara sajjana sevanam vina 
(one cannot cross the formidable ocean of samsara, 
except by serving the noble souls). It is only by serving 
noble souls and great men that one can attain the power 
of penance. No sadhana other than selfless service will 
enable one to attain Divinity. 


228 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


Love Is The Royal Path For Man’s Liberation 


The punya (merit) of our students is indeed great. 
They have been able to have the darshan, sparshan and 
sambashan of several noble souls and obtain their grace. 
In fact, many people in Bharat sanctified their lives by 
such darshan, sparshan and sambhashan. (Referring 
to Sant Asaram Bapu, Swami said) He has taken a lot 
of trouble to come here all the way from Gujarat to 
address our students. It is their good fortune. He has a 
kind and loving heart. His teachings are very essential 
for our students. When faith and devotion have eroded 
and atheism has become the order of the day due to 
the effect of Kali Age, such teachings are very much 
necessary, especially for the students to keep them on 
the right track. 


Cultivate Universal Love 
Dear Students! 


You cannot get fulfilment in life if you have only 
darshan or sparshan or sambhashan of noble souls. You 
will attain peace and bliss only when you have all the three. 
In order to sanctify human life, Navavidha Bhakti (nine 
forms of devotion) are very essential. They are Sravanam 
(listening), Kirtanam (singing), Vishnusmaranam 
(contemplating on Vishnu), Padasevanam (serving 
His Lotus Feet), Vandanam (salutation), Archanam 
(worship), Dasyam (servitude), Sneham (friendship) 
and Atmanivedanam (self-surrender). Man can sanctify 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 229 


his life by sravanam, mananam and nidhidhyasanam 
(listening, recapitulation and contemplation). The 
modern generation of students is very intelligent. But 
it is only when they put their intelligence to proper use 
can they redeem their lives. And, spirituality is the only 
path that can make one’s life sanctified! Today’s students 
are, however, putting their intelligence to wrong use 
and are wasting their time engaging themselves in vain 
argumentation. God’s grace can be obtained only through 
love and by no other means. It is the only Raja Marga 
(royal path). Students should develop the faith that their 
lives will be sanctified by treading that royal path. 


Dear Students! 


Education is not mere reading of books. By reading 
books, we can only acquire bookish knowledge. Whatever 
knowledge has been acquired must be put into practice. 
If you want to earn God’s grace, love is the royal path. 
Man has been able to acquire several powers by love. 
It is by love alone can one win the minds of others. He 
can even gain control over nature. Spiritual sadhana 
can also become fruitful by love alone. The mind can 
never be controlled by bad qualities, bad thoughts and 
bad company. Human nature can be sanctified only by 
divine and selfless love. The only property and power 
that will never diminish in any human being is love. You 
may share it with any number of people, yet it does not 
diminish, but will continue to grow. The reference in 


230 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


this context is not to worldly love, but to transcendental 
love. We must love God in the same way as we love 
our own father and mother. It should be so natural and 
spontaneous. You cannot find a parallel to such love. 
Therefore, every individual, from the time he gets up 
from bed till he goes back to bed, must strive to make his 
life sanctified by love. You must love your fellow human 
beings, treating them as your friends. By cultivating such 
universal love, the whole world can be united as a single 
family. It is not possible by any other means. Therefore, 
develop such universal love. 


Dear Students! 


You are struggling a lot to acquire education. By 
this education, you may perhaps read some textbooks, 
appear for examinations, pass them and secure a degree. 
But, all this education is negative in character. You 
must acquire positive education which would bring 
out the latent qualities in you like divine love, peace, 
compassion, forbearance, etc. You must cultivate those 
qualities assiduously by constant practice. Several 
people of the older generation sanctified their lives by 
fostering such noble qualities. If human mind is to be 
transformed, it could be done only by love, nothing 
else. Mind...mind...mind. You know how it works. 
It is always changing and very powerful. It cannot be 
controlled by any power, except love. 


God Can Be Attained Only Through Love 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 231 


Dear Students! 


Dedicate your love only to God. There are people 
in the world who dedicated their love for different 
purposes, for example, for acquiring education, for 
acquiring proficiency in various arts, sports and games, 
for the sake of certain individuals, etc. Could they attain 
divinity? No, No. You must realise the truth that it is 
only by constant contemplation of God with single- 
minded devotion that one can attain divinity. Therefore, 
dear students! You realise the truth that God cannot be 
attained by any other science, except the science of love. 
God gives Himself to love easily. Hence, attain divinity 
through love. There is no force greater than love in this 
world. 


Everything In This World Is A Worry 


To be born is a worry, to be on the earth is a 
worry; world is a cause of worry and death too; 
entire childhood is a worry and so is the old age; 
life is a worry, failure is a worry, all actions and 
difficulties cause worry; even happiness too is a 
mysterious worry. (Telugu poem) 


If you are able to win the grace of God, all your 
worries will be removed. You may pursue worldly 
education; nothing wrong in that. But, you must be 
prepared to sacrifice your life even, for attaining Divine 
love, which is permanent, changeless and eternal. Several 
great and noble souls have travelled throughout the world 


232 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


and strove to uplift the world by their sacred teachings. 
What would have been the fate of the country of Bharat, 
if such great souls were not born! Every individual 
should, therefore, strive to emulate the ideals of such 
great souls and elders. Whatever they say, must be taken 
as an authority of the scriptures. You may perhaps think 
that you are able to speak eloquently in English and 
therefore feel proud that you know everything. Pride 
and arrogance are most reprehensible qualities. They 
land you in abysmal depths. It is only by the quality of 
love does a human being become great. 


Dear Students! 


You should therefore, cultivate love and strive 
to attain the grace of God and sanctify your lives by 
humility, devotion and faith in God. Love is the sole 
refuge for a human being, which will take him to God. 
Several elders have reached their goal only through love. 
You follow their example. Never lose your wealth of 
love. Make love as your primary objective in your life. 
Love may appear to be very simple thing to you. But 
there is no force greater than love. Love is God, God is 
Love and therefore live in Love. That is what you have 
to learn. 


[Divine Discourse (When Sant Asaram Bapu visited), 
15-9-2004, Prasanthi Nilayam] 


18 


Obtain Divine Grace By 
Obeying Your Parents 


The moon illumines the world at night and the 
sun during the day. 
Righteousness illumines the three worlds, and a 
virtuous son illumines his entire lineage. 
(Telugu poem) 


Embodiments of Love! 


Fate son is greater than even those 
who have acquired jnana (knowledge), vijnana 
(wisdom), sujnana (higher levels of consciousness) 
and prajnana (constant integrated awareness). Lord 
Vinayaka is such a virtuous son. Every individual has a 
Guru. But, Vinayaka has no Guru at all. He is the Guru 
of Gurus and the leader of leaders. He is called by the 
name “Vinayaka” since He has no leader above Him and 


234 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


He is the leader for all. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Whenever a new task is undertaken, it is customary 
to perform puja to Lord Vinayaka to invoke His blessings 
for the successful completion of the task. Even while 
starting a musical concert, the singers pray to Lord 
Vinayaka with the kirtan, “Vinayaka nannu brovara” 
(Oh! Lord Vinayaka! Please come to my help). It is 
only when you thus pray to Lord Vinayaka and seek His 
blessings, will all your task meet with success. 


Lord Vinayaka has an elephant’s head and trunk. It 
denotes that Vinayaka can be compared to an elephant 
in intelligence, which always thinks twice before setting 
its foot forward. Similarly, it is only after intelligent 
discrimination that Vinayaka moves forward. The four 
letters in the word Ganapathi (ga, na, pa and ti) denote 
that Lord Vinayaka is full of vijnana, sujnana and 
prajnana. People today forget the underlying meaning 
in the name ‘Ganapati’ and engage themselves in mere 
rituals. You may not perform any rituals, but, never 
give up worshipping Lord Vinayaka. Especially, it is 
the foremost duty of the students to come under the 
leadership of Vinayaka, who is a leader unto Himself. 
You would not find a parallel to Lord Vinayaka. When 
you take such a Lord as your ideal and pursue your 
studies, you will be able to master all branches of 
education. Vinayaka has a big tummy, which is full of 
jnana (wisdom). That wisdom is His power. We should 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 235 


worship such a powerful Lord. No one can comprehend 
the true nature of Lord Vinayaka, fully. 


Lord Vinayaka is the leader for one and all. He is the 
divine father and mother to everybody. In accordance with 
the prayer Twameva matha cha pitha twameva, Twameva 
bandhuscha sakha twameva, Twameva vidya dravinam 
twameva (He alone 1s the father and mother, friend and 
relation, wisdom and wealth to every individual). No 
one else can be compared to Lord Vinayaka in terms of 
power and prowess in this world. The world is unable 
to recognise the true nature of such a divine leader. We 
are, today, prepared to accept the leadership of ordinary 
mortals. This is an unfortunate situation. 


Today is the holy day commemorating the birth 
of Lord Vinayaka. In fact, He has no birth at all. He 
created the entire universe. All the Vedas are the result 
of the divine sankalpa of Lord Vinayaka. All forms of 
knowledge have originated from Vinayaka. 


God Only Feigns To Be Angry 
Embodiments of Love! 


Lord Vinayaka does not know what anger is. He 
is the embodiment of love. Where there is love, bad 
qualities like anger, passion, conceit, etc., cannot gain 
entry. You might have witnessed the facial features of 
Vinayaka. Did His face ever reflect anger? No. He will 


236 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


always be smiling. Vinayaka is omnipresent. People 
attribute a particular place as the birthplace of God and 
consider it as a Kshetra (a sacred place of pilgrimage). 
But, no single place can be ascribed as the birthplace 
of God. He is Swayambhu (Self-emergent). There is no 
specific place which can be ascribed as place of birth, 
place of upbringing, etc., for God. He is omnipresent. 
God will manifest in such a place where people get rid 
of their bad qualities and sincerely pray to Him with 
devotion. He is Gunatheetha (beyond attributes). He is 
Nirgunam, Niranjanam, Sanathanam, Niketanam, Nitya, 
Shuddha, Buddha, Mukta, Nirmala Swarupinam (God 
is attributeless, pure, final abode, eternal, unsullied, 
enlightened, free and embodiment of sacredness). 


God appears to be angry at times. But, that is not 
real anger. In order to put the devotees on the right 
path, He pretends to be angry. If He does not pretend 
so, there is no chance for the devotees to change their 
behaviour. His pretending to be angry is just a drama. 
God has no trace of anger in Him. When we commit 
mistakes or tread the wrong path, we are afraid that 
God will be angry with us. But, God only pretends to 
be angry on such occasions so that you become aware 
of your own faults and deficiencies. For example, when 
Swami keeps Himself away from you, you feel very sad 
and think that Swami is not talking to you because He 
is angry with you. In fact, Swami does not know what 
anger is. He is the embodiment of love. He is full of 
love. However, on some rare occasions when He speaks 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 237 


harshly, it might be misconstrued that He is angry. This 
is quite natural even in our day-to-day life. When you 
call somebody, “Son! Please come here,” it sounds that 
you are calling him with love. But, if the same words 
are uttered with a raised voice (in an angry mood), it 
looks as though you are angry. Therefore, all these are 
variations in expression and nothing else. The same was 
the case with Sage Durvasa, whose expressions revealed 
anger and thus became synonymous for anger. But in 
fact, Sage Durvasa had no anger at all! 


During the Mahabharata war, Aswatthama, the son 
of Dronacharya, took a terrible vow to annihilate all 
the Pandavas. Having come to know of this, Droupadi 
prayed to Krishna to save the Pandavas. The /eelas of 
the Lord are not only wonderful but also mysterious. 
God enacts dramas and even changes the scenes in His 
play for the welfare and safety of His devotees. In this 
instance, the Lord saved the Pandavas with a delicate 
touch of humour that He alone is capable of. 


He went to Sage Durvasa. He was immensely 
delighted to receive Krishna. The sage asked, “Lord, 
what brought You to my humble ashram?” Krishna 
smiled and said, “I have a small job for you.” The sage 
was happy and said, “I am at Your service. You just 
have to command.” Krishna then said, “Good! Tonight, 
you have to save the Pandavas.” Durvasa was puzzled 
and asked, “Lord, it is You who protect everything in 
creation. Who am I to do that job?” Krishna replied, “That 


238 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


is a different matter. But for this job, you will be My 
instrument. I extend protection in many different ways. 
On this occasion, you have to do something specific as 
per My instructions.” Durvasa wanted to know what it 
was and Krishna continued, “Dig a pit, ask the Pandavas 
to hide themselves in it, cover it with planks, grass and 
mud, and then take your seat on the shelter so prepared. 
The enemies of the Pandavas may come and ask you 
about the whereabouts of the Pandavas. They may say, 
“You know the past, present and future. Please tell us 
where the Pandavas are hiding.” Durvasa intervened and 
said, “Lord, I cannot tell a lie.” Krishna countered, “Did I 
ask you to utter falsehood? Iam Myself the Embodiment 
of Truth, and I will always ask you to speak only the 
truth. However, you are at liberty to change your voice 
suitably to achieve the desired result. I am sure you 
understand.” The sage nodded and smiled. 


Some time later, after the Pandavas were hidden, 
Aswatthama came there, exactly as Krishna had foretold. 
Durvasa was sitting with his eyes closed. Bowing to the 
sage, Aswatthama enquired, in a most humble manner, 
about the whereabouts of the Pandavas. Durvasa slowly 
opened his eyes; which were like flame. Angrily he 
roared, “Yes, the Pandavas are here, right below me.” 
Aswatthama was frightened because the sage was well 
known for his bad temper and his propensity to curse 
those whom he is angry with. Promptly, he fled from the 
scene, and the Pandavas were duly saved. All Avatars 
employ such techniques, and Swami too does the same 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 239 


when required. 


The sages and saints, yogis and jnanis for ages 
have been providing rakshana (protection) and sikshana 
(correction) and make people tread the right path. Sage 
Durvasa did the same thing. Ignorant people accuse him 
of being one of anger in spite of being a great tapasvin. 
But, those people who are able to understand the real 
intention behind his apparent anger realise the truth. 
God has no anger. In fact, one who has anger is not fit 
to be called God at all! 


Parents Are The Very Embodiment Of Divinity 


Once Mother Parvati and Easwara called Vinayaka 
and His younger brother Subrahmanya, and advised 
them to go round the world. They also told them that 
whoever came first would be given a phala (fruit) as 
reward. This competition was intended to demonstrate 
the greatness of Vinayaka to the world. The younger 
brother Subrahmanya immediately plunged into action. 
He mounted His vehicle, the peacock, to fly round the 
world. But, Vinayaka did not move and sat in His own 
place. Easwara then enquired, “My dear son! Why did 
You not start on Your journey round the world?” Vinayaka 
laughed at this question and replied “Oh! Father! I need 
not go anywhere. The fruit of all My journey round the 
world is right in front of me.” So saying, Vinayaka made 
a pradakshina (circumambulation) round His father and 
mother (Lord Easwara and Mother Parvati) and sat down 


240 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


calmly. He claimed victory in the race. In the meanwhile, 
Subrahmanya came there, after completing His journey 
round the world. He was very much tired and reported to 
His father about His successful completion of the task. 
Lord Easwara then declared Vinayaka as the winner in 
the race and handed over the fruit to Him. The place 
where this episode took place is called Palani, in the 
State of Tamil Nadu . 


The underlying meaning in this story is that the 
parents are the very embodiment of divinity and it is 
enough if one does pradakshina to them in reverence. 
That would be tantamount to the punya (merit) acquired 
by visiting all the holy shrines in the world. Without 
the parents, there can be no son at all! If children are 
to be virtuous, it is the parents who have to take care 
of them. The parents are responsible for the success of 
their children in all the endeavours. 


It is common practice for students to visit temples 
during examination time and pray for success in the 
examinations. They offer coconuts in the temples with 
the pocket money given by their parents. These are all 
external practices, which have little to do with sincere 
devotion. If they really wish to achieve success in their 
endeavour, it is enough if they please their parents and 
obtain their blessings. If they are satisfied, you are 
sure to succeed. In order to drive home the point that 
children should strive to please and satisfy their parents 
first, Lord Easwara and Mother Parvati arranged this 
competition of going round the world for Lord Vinayaka 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 241 


and Lord Subrahmanya. If you want to obtain the grace 
of God, it is enough if you obey the command of your 
parents lovingly. There is no greater divinity than the 
parents who are present right in front of your eyes. 
They have struggled hard in several ways to bring you 
up to the present state. They made a lot of sacrifice, so 
that you may come up in life. No parent would ever 
like to displease his children. They appear to be angry 
sometimes and may even give some punishment, but 
that is only outward. In their heart of hearts, they have 
abundant love for you. Even if they pretend to be angry, 
itis for your own good. The stream of infinite love ever 
flows in their hearts. Here is a small example: When the 
child does some mischief, the mother gives a beating. 
But, how? The beating merely produces sound but 
does not cause any pain to the child. Her anger is borne 
out of love only. On certain occasions, they may show 
anger, but it is only temporary. It is never permanent. 
You may think that your parents are angry with you. 
But, that is your own misunderstanding; you may not 
be able to understand their love, which is lying dormant. 
Even if they show anger and say “chee” (an expression 
in Telugu to indicate one’s disapproval), it is only out 
of love. Students shall, therefore, try to understand the 
real nature of their parents. 


In fact, one’s anger is his own enemy, and 
happiness, his heaven. One should always be happy. A 
person with anger and irritable temperament can never 
achieve anything. Vinayaka is one who always obeyed 


242 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


his parents’ command. That is why it is said that there is 
no leader above Him. Students sometimes ask for money 
from their parents to go to a cinema. When parents 
refuse, they think that the parents are angry. These are 
trivial issues. The parents, especially the mother, will 
be even ready to sacrifice her life, in order to save her 
children in times of danger. Unfortunately, today there 
are sons who even go to a court of law against their 
mothers. It is, therefore, essential that they change their 
attitude towards their parents and realise that they are 
verily embodiments of love. 


Any number of diversions or silly thoughts may 
arise in children, but the parents’ love towards their 
children remains unwavering. There are several sons 
in the world who are angry with their parents, but 
relationship of the parents and their children is one of 
love only. The son may go to the court of law because of 
some differences with his mother. On being asked by the 
judge, he tells his mother’s name as so and so. He utters 
the words, “My mother’. Similarly, the mother tells her 
son’s name as so and so. She says, “My son”. Such is the 
intimate relationship that exists between the mother and 
son. Whatever differences that may arise between them 
are only temporary. Lord Vinayaka is the embodiment of 
love. He always showers love only. When He was acting 
as a scribe to write the Mahabharata to the dictation of 
Sage Vyasa, he displayed the same attitude of love. Since 
He was the embodiment of Love, Vyasa selected Him 
particularly to undertake the duty of a scribe. Throughout 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 243 


the period of writing the Mahabharata, Vinayaka 
displayed this quality of pure love. That is why you 
do not find even a single mistake in the Mahabharata. 
Since He was flawless, His word was also flawless. You 
do not find the bad qualities of anger, jealousy, envy or 
pride in Vinayaka. They are the qualities of a human 
being devoid of noble qualities. 


Dear students! From today onwards, you give up 
whatever little anger you have towards your parents 
and cultivate pure love towards them. Love begets 
love. Receive love from your parents in abundance and 
prosper in life. 


Today is the festival of Vinayaka Chaturthi. It is 
a very important festival. There is a custom in some 
families to invite the newly married son-in-law for the 
festival. Therefore, do not hesitate to go to your in-law’s 
house to spend some time happily with them. 


Oh newly married bridegroom, visit your 
in-laws’ house, 
Come, spend your time in fun and frolic with your 
brothers-in-law and sisters-in-law, 
The entire household and the neighbourhood will 
honour you with love and affection. 
(Telugu song) 


Observe Diet Regulations 


When a son-in-law visits his spouse’s parents’ 


244 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


house, the entire household gets into a festive mood. 
One is sure to feel happy and mentally relaxed. There 
are, however, some stone-hearted sons-in-law, who 
cultivate ill-feelings towards their in-laws and do not 
visit their house. Such ill-feelings are the result of food. 
As 1s the food, so is the head. The feelings of the heart 
reflect the thought in the head (mind). Therefore, we 
must take the right food. You should never take such 
food as would kindle the flames of anger and envy in 
you. Since ancient times, sages in India have observed 
strict diet regulations. They always made it a point to 
consume sattwic food, not rajasic food. By consuming 
rajasic food, anger is generated. On the other hand, if 
you consume thamasic food, you will feel sleepy even 
while you eat. Therefore, both rajasic and thamasic 
types of food must be avoided. Only sattwic food must 
be taken. Excess of chillies, salt and sour items must 
be avoided in food. Before you take food, never forget 
to offer your prayers: 


Brahmarpanam Brahma havir 
Brahmagnou Brahmanahutam 
Brahmaiva thena ganthavyam 
Brahma karma samadhina. 


(Brahman is the ladle as well as the oblation. He 
is the sacrificial fire as also the sacrificer. And finally, 
Brahman is the goal of one who is engaged in the act 
of sacrifice.) 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 245 


When you pray in this manner before you partake 
of your food, God immediately responds thus: 


Aham Vaishvanaro bhutva 
Praninam dehamasritah 
Pranapana samayukta 
Pachamyannam chaturvidham. 


(I am present in all beings in the form of digestive 
fire. United with the prana (inhalation) and apana 
(exhalation), it is I who consume the four kinds of 
food.) 


While taking food, you must always ensure that 
you take only such items which you can easily digest. 
Never consume food which you cannot digest. Just as 
you sit down happily for taking food, so also when you 
get up after taking your food, you must feel happy and 
light. Some people sit for food with a light stomach and 
get up with a heavy stomach after eating bellyful. This 
is not the proper method of taking food. 


Always take light food. These are the habits 
you must cultivate at least from this auspicious day 
of Vinayaka Chaturthi. If you cultivate these good 
habits and qualities you can become as great as Lord 
Vinayaka. 


[Vinayaka Chaturthi, 18-9-2004, Prasanthi Nilayam] 


246 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


19 


Your Reality Is In Your Own Self, 
Not Elsewhere 


By which power of love the earth does rotate 
without axle or bearing, 

By which power of love do the stars remain in 
the sky without falling on the earth, 

By which power of love do the oceans confine 
themselves to the limits without inundating 
the earth, 

By which power of love does the wind-god blow 
cool breeze in all the worlds, 

That mighty power of love is verily the Atmic 
power. 

That power of love is most wonderful, unique 
and all-pervasive. 

The entire creation is permeated with love. 

(Telugu poem) 


248 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


Embodiments of Love! 


AN need not undertake any special 

sadhanas to visualise the all-pervading 

truth. We call God by different names like Brahma, 

Vishnu and Maheswara. These are the names given by 

man to God based on some imaginary forms. But, who 

has actually perceived these forms? None so far. There 

is only one power in the world, which is all-pervasive. 
That is the power of love. 


It is only by love, are human societies formed. 
There can be no humanity without divinity. It is only 
when man establishes contact with divinity to some 
extent, he can acquire a little of that divine power which 
is omnipotent. 


Humanness Contains All Powers 
Embodiments of Love! 


In fact, all modes of powers are immanent in 
manavatwa (humanness) itself. It needs no special agent 
to vest it with any extra powers. The divine power fully 
manifests itself in a human being. Human power cannot 
function without the help of divine power. There are four 
mahavakyas in the Vedas, namely, Tattwamasi (That thou 
art), Prajnanam Brahma (constant integrated awareness 
is Brahman), Ayam Atma Brahma (This atma itself is 
Brahman) and Aham Brahmasmi (1 am Brahman verily). 
The essence of these mahavakyas is further explained in 
the Upanishads and Bhagavad Gita. But, man is getting 
deluded as he is unable to understand the import of these 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 249 


mahavakyas. He is not able to realise divine power 
which, in fact, is in his own self. The divinity in humanity 
expresses itself as Sakthitattwa (energy). Today, man is 
striving to acquire several powers and make use of them 
for getting relieved of his sorrows and sufferings. In 
fact, these sorrows and worries are the stepping stones 
to divinity. Man should not give too much importance 
to these worries. If one analyses carefully, what is there 
in human existence, which does not cause worry? Man’s 
life from birth to death is full of worries. I often quote 
a poem to describe this fact: 


To be born is a worry, to be on this earth is a 
worry, 
The world is a cause for worry and death too; 
The whole of childhood is a worry and so is the 
old age; 
Life is a worry, failure is a worry; 
All actions and difficulties cause worry, 
Happiness too is a mysterious worry. 
(Telugu poem) 


Embodiments of Love! 


Some people say they had the vision of the Divine 
in their dream. Some others say they had it in their 
meditation. Yet others declare they had seen God through 
their jnana nethra (eye of wisdom). Most of these claims 
are the result of man’s delusion. They are not real. Some 
people claim to have seen God in their dream. Where is 
dream? Where is God? In fact, dream experience itself is 


250 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


not real. It is only an illusion. They are deluded to think 
that way. The day man gets rid of this delusion, he will 
acquire divine power. Hence, everyone should come out 
of such illusion. Some sit in meditation and think they 
are contemplating on somebody. Some others claim to 
have seen some effulgence in their meditation. What is 
meditation? It means ekagratha (concentration on the 
inner vision of the omniself). It is visualising a drisya 
(scene) in a state of absolute stillness of the body and 
mind free from illusion. But wherever a man is, there is 
his mind as well. There is no place in this world without 
the mind being present. The mind is all-pervasive. It 
is said, Manayeva manushyanaam karanam bandha 
mokshayoh (the mind alone is the cause for bondage as 
well as liberation). We say we are happy. Where does this 
happiness come from? Certainly, it is not from outside. 
It wells up from one’s own heart. The nature of the mind 
is chanchala (fickleness). This fickleness is in our own 
nature. It has not come from outside. All relationships 
we maintain in the objective world are only illusory. 
Supposing you marry a girl. From then on, you maintain 
a husband and wife relationship with her. Even prior to 
the marriage both of you were existing in the world, but 
this relationship was not there. From the moment you 
both are married you think she is related to you. Thus, 
it is a mental relationship. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Even maya (delusion) is associated with love. You 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 251 


do not find anything in this world, devoid of love. Love 
is in everything in this world. All relationships between 
people in this world are established and cultivated on 
account of love. Again, love becomes the cause for 
separation of two individuals. There are several types 
of sadhana in this world; bhrama sadhana (coming 
out of delusion) is one such. In fact, Brahma, Vishnu 
and Maheswara cannot be visualised in your sadhana 
(meditation, etc.). What all you see in your meditation 
are only reflections of your feelings. Brahma, Vishnu 
and Maheswara are not really existing in this world. 
They are only your imaginary forms. What really exists 
in the world is manavattwa (humanness). Unable to 
believe the humanness that is present right in front of 
your eyes, if you contemplate on divine nature, how 
can you find it? The name and form that you attribute 
to divinity, namely, Brahma, Vishnu and Maheswara 
are not real. They are only a mirage born out of your 
delusion. Everything is contained in the human being. 
You are Brahma, Vishnu and Maheswara and every 
conceivable name and form attributed to divinity. When 
you begin to believe that you are everything, there can 
be no cause for any kind of worry. When you are able 
to realise Aham Brahma, Aham Vishnu, Aham Easwara 
(I am Brahma, Vishnu and Maheswara verily), there is 
no scope for any doubt. All these names and forms are 
products of your own imagination. There is no power 
greater than humanness in this world. 


252 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


Embodiments of Love! 


You say that Swami appeared in your dream last 
night. This is not correct. I do not appear in anybody’s 
dream. When you intensely desire that Swami must 
appear in your dream and constantly think of the same, 
that intense desire will assume a form in your dream. 
God does not assume a form or change into another 
form. Some people think that God is angry with them. 
This presumption is also not correct. God has neither 
love towards somebody nor anger towards another. 
All these presumptions are of your own making. You 
attribute anger or other feelings to God. Instead, if 
you live in love constantly, you will not find anger in 
others. In fact, love is your true form. Man is born out 
of and brought up with love. Not only a human being, 
but every living creature experiences love right from 
its birth. There is no force more powerful than love 
in this world. No power on earth can change love. Do 
not get deluded by the thought that you have acquired 
this power and that power. All these are only illusions 
(bhrama). Bhrama is not brahman. Nor can Brahman 
be equated with Bhrama. 


Embodiments of Love! 


What is meant by divyatma? It means divine 
atma. Atma is nothing but consciousness. And, that 
consciousness is all - pervading. You do not find a 
place where there is no consciousness. Consciousness 
is omnipotent. There is one aspect to be borne in mind 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 253 


in this context. Consciousness is movable. But we are 
deluded to think that it is static. In fact, the real power 
is within you only. That is Atma Sakthi (atmic power). 
We have already known that atma is consciousness. 
Therefore, atma sakthi is chaithanya sakthi (power 
of consciousness). This is all-pervading. This enables 
you to witness different forms. The immense power 
in humanness is divine in nature. It confers peace 
and happiness. You may think that divine power is 
some special power. It is not true. Your own power 
of contemplation assumes the form of divine power. 
Therefore, first and foremost you realise your own 
innate divine nature. All that is written in the books or 
read by you are not in fact true. There are some kinds of 
power which are temporary. They are not eternal. Such 
transient powers should not delude one. You are learning 
the Vedas. Every sound that emanates from the Vedas 
emerges from the navel only. We are experiencing the 
sound emanating from our own navel. Supposing you 
go to a hill and shout “Oh!” the sound comes back to 
you as resound. Similarly, good and bad emanates from 
you only. They do not come from somewhere and get 
into you. 


As You Think So You Become 
Embodiments of Love! 


For example, you go on repeating loudly a 


254 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


particular sentence taken from a book. After sometime, 
you will get it by heart. But, the sentence memorised by 
you is not yours. It is only a resound. In God’s creation, 
everything is reaction, reflection and resound. All that 
we experience in the outside world is only a reaction, 
reflection and resound of the inner being. We are, 
however, deluded to think that this reaction, reflection 
and resound are real ones. Whatever feeling comes out 
of your heart and takes a shape outside is the real form. 
It means that, that form has already been conceived by 
you. Supposing you imagine a particular form for Lord 
Rama. Then, contemplate on that form, closing your 
eyes. You can visualise the same form, as a reflection 
of your inner thoughts. All that is manifested in the 
outside world is only a reaction, reflection and resound 
of your inner being. 


Embodiments of Love! 


You yourself are Rama, Krishna, Easwara, etc. 
You think that you are Easwara and contemplate on that 
form. You will become Easwara, verily. Yad bhavam 
tad bhavathi (as you think so you become). Similarly, 
you think that you are Rama, Krishna, etc., and you 
will become Rama and Krishna. Today, people sit in 
meditation. It is only for developing concentration, 
not with a view to contemplate on God. People mistake 
concentration for meditation. This is not a correct 
method. All these exercises are reaction, reflection and 
resound. Only you are real, you are the truth. You are 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 255 


able to visualise God only in human form. Man cannot 
conceive or visualise anything greater than him. You 
are everything and everything in creation is immanent 
in you. Unfortunately, man today is forgetting his real 
nature and is imagining something which does not exist. 
This is the result of delusion, which, in fact, is of his own 
making. It is only when man comes out of this illusion 
that he will be able to realise Brahman. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Love is the most important factor. If you pray 
to God with intense love and devotion, your prayers 
will certainly be answered. Such is the power of love. 
Devoid of love, nothing can be achieved even in this 
mundane world. Love is God, live in love! The whole 
world becomes a vacuum, without love. That love alone 
assumes a form. Realise this truth. You sit in your so- 
called meditation, and try to forget yourself through 
imaginary experiences. If you forget yourself, how can 
you visualise the truth? Constantly live in the awareness 
“Tam God, I am everything and I am the reality. All 
forms are subject to change”. For example, an infant at 
the time of birth will be small in size. Then it will grow 
into a child, a boy, youth and an old person. In all these 
different stages of life, man alone is the reality. “All are 
one, be alike to every one”. This is the lesson one must 
try to learn. 


Embodiments of Love! 


256 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


Let the flame of your love be steady, not flickering. 
There is no greater sadhana than love. That is the 
spiritual practice you have to adopt. That is the divine 
practice. Divinity is omnipresent. You have to realise 
that omnipresent divinity within your own self. It is 
present in all the three states of consciousness, namely, 
dream, wakeful and deep sleep state. One has to strive 
to experience that divinity constantly. That is Prajnanam 
Brahma (constant integrated awareness is Brahman). 
That is sakshatkara (vision of divinity), an experience 
which transcends all the three states of consciousness. 


Embodiments of Love! 


You are worshipping several forms of divinity. 
However, you cannot afford to forget your own innate 
divinity. In fact, you yourself are ascribing umpteen 
number of names and forms to divinity. But, divinity 
is only one, which is changeless. That changeless 
eternal divinity is immanent in you. All external forms 
and names are like fleeting dreams. And those dreams 
are not real. Hence, strive to come out of that bhrama 
(delusion). Itis only when you come out of that bhrama, 
you will be able to realise Brahman. You have witnessed 
something in your dream. What is it? It is your own self, 
nothing other than that. You are visualising your own 
self in the dream state. Your real nature is love. Hence, 
you manifest your real nature. There are several aspects 
which you have to learn in future. What is future? Future 
is uncertain; past is past; only present is what matters. 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 257 


Both past and future are contained in the present. You 
alone are present in all the three - past, present and 
future. 


Visualise Your Own Innate Divinity 
Embodiments of Love! 


Divine powers and Divine manifestations are 
immanent in the human being; they are not to be sought 
from elsewhere. By constant sadhana, man can realise 
this truth. Your reality is in your own self, not elsewhere. 
In order to visualise that reality, one has to turn his vision 
inward. Reaction, reflection and resound - all the three 
are existing in your own self; they are not external. 
Supposing you have a brother who earned a good name 
and fame. Who is he? He is your brother. He represents 
a particular form. From where did this form come? It 
came from reality. And that reality is his true nature. 
Thus, a form that manifested from reality deludes us 
from visualising the reality itself. 


Dear students! 


If you wish to understand certain aspects more 
clearly, I will explain in greater detail after sometime. 
The kind of meditation you are doing is not correct. You 
are keeping one form in your mind and contemplating on 
that. Where did this form come from? It is of your own 
making. You are deluded to think that God is confined 
to only this form. Thus, right from the beginning you 
are with a deluded belief. If only you come out of this 


258 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


delusion, can you visualise the truth. Do not ever be 
under the illusion that God is somewhere in a distant 
place. You are, in fact, God verily. Your own form is 
Divine. Your bliss is Divine. Your reaction, reflection 
and resound are Divine in nature. Never deviate from 
the firm faith that you are God. Always contemplate 
on one aspect: Aham Brahmasmi (1 am Brahman). 
What is the meaning of the mahavakya Tattwamasi (That 
thou art)? Zat is that. twam is this. Together they become 
asi. They become one. Thus, all these four mahavakyas 
Tattwamasi, Prajnanam Brahma, Ayam Atma Brahma 
and Aham Brahmasmi \ead you to the same truth, that 
is, you are God verily. Adi Sankara had expounded and 
explained this great advaita philosophy in ever so many 
ways and ultimately merged himself in that great truth. 
Thus, reality is not somewhere in a distant place. It is 
within you. Your very nature is reality. How can you 
realise this truth? Only by cultivating pure, selfless and 
Divine love. Without love, nothing can be achieved in 
this world. Love is the source and sustenance for the 
entire universe. Love is God and God is love. 


Embodiments of Love! 


All of you are embodiments of divinity. Your forms 
are divine. You and God are one. You are not different 
from God. Experience this unity. Ekam sath (truth is 
one). Unity is truth. Unity is divinity. God is not separate 
from you. God is manifest in you. Unfortunately, you 
are forgetting this truth. If you forget your own nature, 
it amounts to forgetting everything else. Never forget 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 259 


your reality. Without forgetting that reality, meditate on 
it. Always remember one fact: wherever I am, I am 
always Divine. Hold on to this firm belief, steadfastly. 
That is the truth contained in the mahavakya Tattwamasi, 
the inseparable and non-dual nature of divinity. Do not 
be under the illusion “Rama has appeared in my dream, 
Krishna has appeared in my dream, Swami has appeared 
in my dream”. This is a sign of ignorance. All these are 
dreams only. How can a dream be called a reality? The 
very word “dream” explains its nature. As long as you 
are in sleep, this experience may be true. The moment 
you wake up, the experience vanishes. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Keep your love securely. Never give up love 
under any circumstances. There is no God other than 
love. Love is God, verily. Love is your path, and goal. 
Never deviate from this path of love. If you find any 
difficulty in treading this path or if you have some 
doubts to get clarified, I am always there to help you. 
Try to reduce your doubts. These doubts will lead you 
to delusion. Always get yourself firmly established in 
the truth Zattwamasi (That thou art). It is a mistaken 
idea to think that this form has visualised that form of 
divinity, for you and God are not separate. Brahman is 
very much immanent in this body. Brahman and Aham 
are one and the same. Undertake sadhana to realise the 
oneness of these two. That is the ‘Pathway to God’. If 
you wish to meditate on God, never allow your thoughts 


260 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


to be disturbed by worldly objects. You meditate on 
your own real nature, which is divinity. In that divinity, 
everything else is contained. If you thus meditate on 
your own innate divinity, you will realise your unity 
with divinity. In fact, that unity is Divinity. 


ThefourMahavakyas Tattwamasi, Prajnanam 
Brahma, Aham Brahmasmi and Ayam Atma Brahma are 
Vedic declarations which emphasise the oneness of the 
individualised soul and the Supreme Soul. They exhort 
the individualised soul to realise this truth. Therefore, one 
has to strive to attain that state of unity. As you gradually 
progress in that sadhana, you will ultimately reach that 
goal. Supposing you want to learn the spelling of a word; 
just think how many times you will be repeating that 
spelling. In the same way, you must set out on this path 
of sadhana. This is a scared sadhana. If you are able to 
know the true meaning of these mahavakyas, you will 
be able to realise the truth. 


[Divine Discourse, 25-10-2004, Prasanthi Nilayam] 


20 


Experience Divinity Within In 
Total Silence 


Embodiments of Love! 


OU are very well aware of the present 

condition of the world. There is no scope for 
talking about God. Today dhanam (money) is considered 
as daivam (God). In such a situation, how can dharma 
(righteousness) prevail in the world? 


Principle Of Love Is Changeless 
Embodiments of Love! 


There is no other path except that of love to attain 
God. Love is God, God is love. But people do not 
understand what love is. They consider attachment to 
all that is worldly and material as love. Out of their 
selfishness, they love worldly objects and materials. So, 
man’s love today is tainted with selfishness. There is 


262 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


selfish motive behind whatever he does. How can then 
man have the vision of God who is the very embodiment 
of selfless love? Love is present in all beings, right 
from a pamara (ignorant person) to a Paramahamsa 
(realised person). How can one describe such a principle 
of love? 


Ego and pomp have become rampant today. 
Desires have become limitless. Man’s heart is filled with 
selfishness, and compassion has no place in it. That is the 
reason why he is unable to have the vision of the Atma 
and experience bliss. I always speak about the principle 
of love. I do not know anything other than love (loud 
applause). When divinity is uniformly present in all, 
how can you share your love with some and deny it to 
others? How can anyone say, “Love this and not that’’? 
God has no specific form. But if you firmly resolve to 
see God and make sincere efforts, God will assume a 
form and manifest before you. 


There is love in everyone of you. What is the form 
of love? What is the nature of love? When we analyse 
carefully, we will realise that love is not limited to human 
beings alone but is present in all living beings. Every 
being is endowed with the quality of supreme divine 
love. One has to give up enmity and cultivate unity and 
purity in order to understand this truth. Love cannot be 
explained in words. How can you describe it? It can 
only be experienced and enjoyed. The experience of 
love confers bliss on us. Hence, we can say that bliss is 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 263 


the form of love. 
Embodiments of Love! 


Everything in this world is bound to change except 
the principle of love. Love is the only true and eternal 
path which will lead you to divinity. Divinity pervades 
each and every limb of the human body. It can be 
visualised only when we understand the principle of 
oneness. People attribute various names and forms to 
God. In fact, God should not be confined to a particular 
name and form. God is beyond all attributes and 
transcends all names and forms. Divinity is present in 
all in the form of love but each one experiences it in his 
own way. People imagine a particular form of divinity. 
They think divinity is limited to a specific name and 
form. That is why they are unable to experience it. 


One whose heart is filled with love will see the 
manifestation of divinity everywhere. It is a mistake 
to think that Nature is different from God. People give 
various names to divinity based on their own experience. 
Jewels are many but gold is one. Likewise, names and 
forms are different but divinity is one. Where does gold 
come from? It comes from the earth. Similarly, God 
manifests in human body. Daivam manusha rupena 
(God incarnates in the form of a human being). Hence, 
consider everyone as divine. Sahasra seersha Purusha 
Sahasraksha Sahasra pad (The Cosmic Being has 
thousands of heads, eyes and feet). All heads, all eyes 


264 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


and all feet are His. Such transcendental divinity can 
be experienced only in absolute silence and in solitude. 
There lies hidden sacred divine power in the depth of 
total silence. The tongue is given to you not to indulge 
in vain gossip. That is why the ancient sages and seers 
practised mounam (silence). It is possible to experience 
God only in the depth of silence. However, we should 
understand the true meaning of silence. Silence does not 
mean merely refraining from speech. It is much higher 
than that and includes the mind also. The transcendental 
nature of divinity cannot be described in words. It is 
beyond the grasp of the mind. 


Focus Your Mind Only On God 


Whatever you see in this world is the manifestation 
of truth. When divinity is all-pervasive, how can there 
be untruth? But you are unable to realise the all- 
pervasiveness of divinity. Turn your vision inward and 
observe absolute silence. Only then can you realise 
the all-pervasive divinity. Mere intellectual exercise 
will not help you in this regard. Whatever you see, 
hear and experience is the manifestation of divinity. 
Only God exists everywhere. Such being the case, is 
it possible to attribute a particular name and form to 
Him? He is present in all forms. When we experience 
the principle of oneness, we will be immersed 
in bliss. Hence, we can say that bliss is His form. 


Nityanandam, parama sukhadam, kevalam 
Jnanamurtim, dwandwateetam, gagana sadrisham, 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 265 


tattwamasyadi lakshyam, ekam, nityam, vimalam, 
achalam, sarvadhee sakshibhutam (God is the 
embodiment of eternal bliss, He is wisdom absolute, 
beyond the pair of opposites, expansive and pervasive 
like the sky, the goal indicated by the mahavakya 
Tattwamasi, the one eternal, pure, unchanging, the 
witness of all functions of the intellect). 


Embodiments of Love! 


When God 1s all-pervasive, where is the need to go 
in search of Him? You should make efforts to experience 
your innate divinity by observing total silence and 
turning your vision inward. You can experience divine 
bliss only in absolute silence. That is why it is said, 
“Silence is golden”. 


God is present in all forms. All names and forms 
are His. The Vedas state the same principle when they 
declare: “Sahasra seersha Purusha...” Various types of 
jewels are made out of gold. Likewise, God has assumed 
all the names and forms that we find in the world. Hence, 
you should develop faith in the existence of God. If you 
make sincere efforts, you can certainly realise Him. 
Many spiritual aspirants in the past could have the divine 
vision by their intense sadhana and by going into total 
silence. One has to annihilate the mind in order to have 
the vision of God. You cannot experience divinity until 
and unless you transcend the mind. 


Today people conduct enquiry and research into 


266 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


various aspects of the world. But divinity cannot be 
experienced with such enquiry and research. Select a 
divine form of your choice and contemplate on it. When 
you focus your mind on the divine form, your mind gets 
transformed completely and becomes one with divinity. 
Today man’s mind keeps wavering from moment to 
moment. Do not rely on such a wavering mind. Instead, 
rely on divinity which is steady and changeless. Once 
you fix your mind on a divine form of your choice, never 
change it. Close your eyes and contemplate on it. Only 
then can you experience divinity. 


Understand The Principle Of Unity 


People use the word “divinity” without really 
knowing its meaning. The Vedas declare, ekameva 
adviteeyam Brahma (God is one without a second), 
ekatma Brahma (atma is Brahman). You may call Him 
by any name. He has thousands of heads, hands and 
eyes. Wherever you see, there is God only and no one 
else. The same primordial principle pervades everything. 
Contemplate on Him with single-minded devotion. 


Nirgunam, Niranjanam, Sanathana Niketanam, 
Nitya, Shuddha, Buddha, Mukta, Nirmala Swarupinam 
(God is attributeless,pure,finalabode, eternal, unsullied, 
enlightened, free and embodiment of sacredness). 
Divinity is present within you. Unable to realise your 
innate divinity, you waste your time searching for God 
outside. Whatever you see and experience in the world 
is only the reaction, reflection and resound of your 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 267 


feelings. Do not get deluded by the reaction, reflection 
and resound. Turn your mind inward and contemplate 
on the reality within you. You will certainly be able to 
experience divinity. You should have divinity as your 
goal and nothing else. Divinity is one without a second, 
and is all-pervasive. 


Understand the principle of oneness and install God 
in your heart. Without the principle of unity, there can 
be no multiplicity. If you do not understand unity, you 
cannot understand the multiplicity of Nature. Nature is 
the best preacher. Follow the ideals demonstrated by 
this preacher with preeti (love). The more you develop 
love, the sooner you can see God. Body attachment is 
the cause of all differences. You will understand and 
experience unity in diversity only when you give up body 
attachment. Once you are free from body attachment, 
you can experience God in a moment. Whatever you see 
is the manifestation of God. The principle of unity in 
diversity is divinity. But you are unable to understand 
and appreciate this truth. In order to understand this truth, 
there should be total transformation in your feelings. As 
is the colour of the glass, so is the colour of the scene 
outside. Remove the colour glasses of body attachment 
and see the reality. 


Make Your Mind Steady 
Embodiments of Love! 


Hold on to the principle of love firmly and you can 
achieve anything. When you fill your heart with love, 
you will be protected wherever you go. Love is the 


268 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


reality and everything else is only reaction, reflection and 
resound. In order to experience the reality, you have to 
cultivate steadiness of mind in the first instance. How can 
you make your mind steady? You have to contemplate 
on one name and one form. Be firm in your chosen path. 
Do not get deluded by what appears to the physical eyes. 
Open the eye of wisdom and see the reality. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Consider everyone as the embodiment of divinity. 
God is the mother and father of all. That is why, we 
pray: Twameva mathascha pitha twameva, Twameva 
bandhuscha sakha twameva, Twameva vidya dravinam 
twameva (Oh God! You alone are our father and mother, 
friend and relation, wisdom and wealth). Have firm faith 
that God is your everything. Do not entertain any doubts 
in this regard. It is because of doubts that man’s mind 
is in a confused state. Many people ask Me about the 
proper way of meditation. I always tell only one thing, 
“Meditation does not mean merely closing your eyes and 
imagining anything and everything. Choose one form, 
install it in your heart and see that it is steady. Have total 
faith in one name and one form and contemplate on it 
incessantly. That is true meditation. If you follow this 
practice earnestly, you can experience divinity.” 


Embodiments of Love! 


There is no greater sadhana than following the path 
of love. Your love should flow only in one direction, 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 269 


and not in many directions. Your love should constantly 
flow towards God. Only then can you have the vision 
of God, who is the very personification of love. If you 
are unable to visualise God, it only means that you have 
not directed your love towards Him. 


Make your mind steady and fix it on God. Mind 
is the cause of everything in this world. Mind by itself 
does not go anywhere. It is we who direct it and divert 
it in different ways according to our whims and fancies. 
We are responsible for its unsteadiness. When you keep 
your mind steady and focus it on God, you will find the 
brilliant and blissful form of God wherever you see. You 
are unable to see and experience God because you doubt 
His existence. First of all, develop unwavering faith in 
God. Your faith alone will protect you. Do not follow 
the vagaries of the mind. You should be the master of 
your mind and not its slave. 


Embodiments of Love! 


People talk about meditation. Meditation is 
very simple. Meditation is not mere concentration. 
Concentration can never be equated with meditation. 
With unflinching faith and unwavering mind you should 
let your love flow towards God. If there is unsteadiness 
in your mind, it is reflected outside. All unsteadiness 
comes from within you. I am rather surprised to note that 
man’s mind is wavering every moment. Why should the 
mind waver? It has no such power. Manas (mind) and 


270 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


Manishi (man) should be one. When you achieve this 
oneness, you can experience the principle of unity. 


Embodiments of Love! 


You must firmly resolve to hold on to the principle 
of unity and divinity. What is the purpose of human 
birth? Is it to spend your time in eating and drinking? 
No, no. You should make efforts to understand the 
underlying principle of unity of five elements, five 
senses of action, five senses of cognition and five life 
sheaths. If you make sincere efforts, you will certainly 
be able to experience the principle of unity. Among all 
the living beings, only man is endowed with the ability 
to understand and experience unity and divinity. In fact, 
the very purpose of human birth is to experience unity in 
diversity. Hence, make every effort to experience unity 
and sanctify your lives. It is possible only by following 
the path of love. There is nothing superior to love in 
this world. 


Today I have awarded the gold medal for all-round 
excellence to a girl student from Anantapur Campus. 
She has been a diabetic right from her childhood. Her 
parents and doctors have been trying their best to control 
her diabetes but all in vain. However, she has unflinching 
faith in Swami. That is why she had no problem at all 
in spite of her blood sugar level being very high. She is 
not worried at all. In fact, when her parents get worried, 
she infuses courage in them, saying, “Don’t worry. God 
is with me.” In this manner, she has spent sixteen years. 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 271 


She has studied in Puttaparthi school and Anantapur 
college. Sometimes, her blood sugar level is very high. 
No medicine can control it. Her father becomes anxious. 
But she is protected by her steady faith. Swami told her 
firmly, “This disease cannot harm you. Have total faith 
in God. Do not pay heed to what others say.” She forgets 
her badha (suffering) remembering Swami’s bodha 
(teaching). She has followed Swami’s words implicitly 
and has remained steady in her faith. That is why she 
has come up in life. 


She devotes all her time to studies. She will pursue 
higher studies. She has absolutely no worry even if her 
blood sugar level shoots up. She says, “It comes and 
goes. I have nothing to do with it.” She has faced her 
health problem with fortitude. In this manner, one should 
never be afraid of problems. This body is a storehouse 
of dirt and a den of diseases. One should never rely on 
such an ephemeral body. The body may have to undergo 
suffering on account of some diseases. But whatever may 
be the problem, one should not worry about it. 


Her father is teaching in Puttaparthi college. 
Sometimes, he gets phone calls from his daughter’s 
teachers in Anantapur Campus, telling him, “Your 
daughter’s blood sugar is very high today. She is unable 
to attend the classes. What should we do?” He comes 
to Me for guidance and I tell him not to worry. I infuse 
courage in him, saying she would be all right. Because 
of her devotion and steadfast faith, she is maintaining 
her health and carrying on her studies without any 


272 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


hindrance. 


Having resolved, what ought to be resolved, hold on to 
it till you have succeeded. Having desired what ought 
to be desired, hold on to it till your desire is fulfilled. 
Having asked what ought to be asked, do not leave 
the hold till you get it. Having thought what ought to 
be thought, hold on to it till you have succeeded. With 
heart mellowed, the Lord must yield to your wishes or 
forgetting yourself, you should ask Him with all your 
heart. Persevere, be tenacious, and never give up, for it 
is the quality of a devotee never to retreat, abandoning 
his resolve. (Telugu poem) 


She is leading her life with such unflinching faith 
and determination. Sometimes, she becomes very weak 
because of anaemia. Even in such a condition, she 
continues to do her work. That is true devotion. She is 
leading her life with total faith in Swami. She has stood 
first in her studies and has also achieved excellence in 
co-curricular activities. That is why she has been given 
the gold medal for all-round excellence. 


[Benedictory Address, 23rd Convocation of Sri 
Sathya Sai Institute of Higher Learning, 22-11-2004, 
Prasanthi Nilayam] 


21 
Dedicate Your Life To Serve Society 


All your education, all your positions of authority, 
all your acts of charity and service have little 
value without the four virtues of Sathya, Dharma, 
Prema and Santhi (truth, righteousness, love and 
peace). 

(Telugu poem) 


Embodiments of Love! 


OU are all forgetting the purpose for which 

you have come into this world. Wherever you 
are, you must remember three things, namely, Where 
did we come from? Where are we at present? and what 
is the purpose of our coming here? Supposing you are 
dropping an envelope or letter in a post box; it should 
have the “From” address and “To” address written 
thereon. If these two addresses are not written, where 


274 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


will the envelope or letter go? It will go to the “dead 
letter office”. Similarly, you are in the world now without 
these two addresses. You can very well imagine what will 
happen to such an individual. You must therefore find out 
yourself an answer at least for one of the three questions. 
Otherwise, your life itself will become a waste. 


Here is a small story. The business people in the 
delta areas of East and West Godavari districts in Andhra 
Pradesh cross the river on boats. Once, a businessman 
was travelling in a boat. There was no one else in the 
boat except himself and the boatman. Usually, people 
would like to engage themselves in conversation with 
somebody during travel in order to forget the tedium of 
the journey. Therefore, he started a conversation with the 
boatman to while away the time. He asked the boatman, 
“Do you have a newspaper?” The boatman replied, “Sir! 
I don’t have a newspaper. I cannot read and write.” To 
this, the businessman commented, “Alas! If you cannot 
read and write, one quarter of your life is consigned to 
the waters of Ganga.” The boatman felt sorry for his 
pitiable condition and kept quiet. After a few minutes, 
the businessman enquired again, “My dear! Do you 
know the present prices of gold and silver in the Bombay 
market?” The boatman replied, “Sir! I do not have any 
experience in gold business. Hence, I do not know the 
prices of gold and silver in the Bombay market.” Then 
the businessman commented, “If you do not know about 
gold business, half of your life is consigned to the waters 
of Ganga*.” The conversation continued. Observing the 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 275 


wrist watch worn by the boatman, the businessman again 
enquired, “My dear! What is the time now?” Though the 
poor boatman had a watch on his wrist, he did not know 
how to read a watch. The businessman again asked, 
“Why then did you wear a wrist watch?” The boatman 
replied, “Though one does not know how to read a 
watch, it is a fashion nowadays to wear a wrist watch. 
That is why I am wearing one.” Then, the businessman 
commented, “If you do not know even to tell the time 
from a wrist watch, then three-fourths of your life is 
consigned to the Ganga.” Meanwhile, a gale started 
with great force raising high waves in the river. The boat 
started tossing up and down and became unsteady. The 
boatman then asked the businessman, “Sir! By the way 
do you know swimming?” The businessman replied, 
“Alas! I do not know swimming.” Now it was the turn 
of the boatman to comment, “Then, your entire life is 
about to be consigned to the waters of Ganga.” 


Today, we are all in the same situation and are 
tossed in the river of this world. But, unfortunately we 
are not making any effort to know why we are here, 
what have we to learn in this world, where do we have 
to go and by knowing what we could reach there, etc. 
Thus, by being ignorant of these aspects, our entire life 
is being consigned to the Ganga. Therefore, we have to 


* Note : The expression consigned to the waters of the 
ganga is a colloquial way of saying that something is totally 
wasted. 


276 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


first try to find out answers to the queries of: Why have 
we come here? What are we supposed to know? and 
Where do we go from here? If we are not able to know 
the answer to at least one of these queries, our life’s 
journey will be without a purpose. It is only when we 
are aware of the “From” address, “To” address and the 
“present residential” address, our life will be meaningful 
and sanctified. 


You Must Have Unflinching Faith 


Dr. Michael Goldstein (Chairman, Prasanthi 
Council and a devotee of Swami) and his wife visit 
Puttaparthi often. When I was going to the college one 
day, he approached Me and requested, “Swami, if You 
kindly permit me, I will accompany You to the college.” 
I told him to come. While we were travelling in the car, 
I asked Mr. Goldstein, “What is your programme?” He 
replied, “Swami, I have to start my journey back home 
today.” Then I advised him not to leave on that day. 
He again told Me, “Swami, I shall go today, but I shall 
take the next day’s flight from Bombay. “Thereupon I 
told him firmly, “You do not talk to Me about all those 
things. If I say don’t go, it is final.” Goldstein could not 
realise that his life itself would be in great danger if 
he decided to start on the same day. At last I told him, 
“Okay, you can go, if you so wish.” Then he returned to 
his room, packed up his luggage for the Bombay flight. 
Thereafter, he boarded the plane for USA. Soon after 
the plane took off, it was realised that there were some 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 277 


hijackers in the plane. The entire atmosphere in the 
aircraft was extremely tense. Two hijackers stood guard 
at the entrance. Another two were roaming about in the 
aircraft with fully loaded guns pointed at the passengers. 
It is then that Goldstein realised why Swami wanted 
him not to board the aircraft on that particular day. He 
could not do anything in the situation and was praying 
to Swami as his sole refuge. His wife is a great devotee 
of Swami. She started chanting Swami’s Name, “Sai 
Ram, Sai Ram, Sai Ram’. When the aircraft gained some 
altitude, the hijackers started shooting the passengers. 
The passengers were struck with terror not knowing 
what to do. As the hijackers opened fire, the aircraft was 
strewn with dead bodies. He and his wife were seated 
on the front portion of the aircraft. The hijackers started 
shooting the passengers around them. They thought it 
would be their turn next. Goldstein then told his wife, 
“Swami advised me not to start on this day, but I did not 
follow Swami’s instruction completely and that is why 
we are in this situation.”” Meanwhile, one hijacker set 
his eyes on the couple. Goldstein’s wife, however, had 
been chanting the Name of Swami incessantly forgetting 
everything. The chanting of Swami’s Name worked 
wonders and Goldstein’s wife was spared. Goldstein 
then got up and stood at the entrance of the aircraft. The 
hijackers, however, could not notice him even though 
he was such a hefty person. Thus, the life of Goldstein 
was saved by Swami’ grace. They remained on the plane 
as hostages for a long time without food, water and 


278 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


sleep. They were very much depressed. Goldstein’s wife 
has intense devotion for Swami. Normally women are 
more devoted than men. It is not that men do not have 
devotion, but they do not show it outwardly. Goldstein’s 
wife advised him, “You do not worry, contemplate on 
Swami.” At this point the hijackers began to shoot men, 
women and children mercilessly. Goldstein and his wife, 
however, continued to pray to Swami, “Sai Ram, Sai 
Ram, Sai Ram”. They silently prayed to Swami closing 
their eyes. In the meantime, all the ammunition in the 
guns of the hijackers was exhausted. The police caught 
the hijackers. Goldstein and his wife were released and 
put on board on another aircraft bound for America. 
However, the ordeal that they underwent continued 
to haunt them. After a few days, the police came to 
enquire about the incident. Goldstein was offered some 
compensation, but he did not accept it. After two or 
three months, Goldstein again came to Puttaparthi and 
had Swami’s darshan. Now he realised through his 
own experience that he had not to fear anything under 
any circumstances if he did namasmarana (chanting of 
God’s Name). After he had Swami’s darshan, calmness 
was restored in him. From then on, when Swami would 
enquire about his return journey he would leave it to the 
Lord’s Will. He realised that it would be better to leave 
the matter in Swami’s hands. From then on Goldstein 
developed unshakeable faith in the words of Swami and 
stood firmly by them. 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 279 


People today are unable to realise from where they 
came and where they would go. It is only after people 
have undergone such experiences that they realise the 
strength of faith. They have come into this world and 
somehow spend their time. When someone questions 
them how they spend their time, they reply that they have 
come into this world for enjoying food and comfortable 
sleep. However, it should be understood that man has 
taken birth in this world not merely for enjoying food 
and drink. The same truth has been explained by Adi 
Sankara in his famous Bhaja Govindam song thus: 


Bhaja Govindam, Bhaja Govindam 
Govindam bhaja moodha mathe 
Samprapthe sannihithe kale 

Nahi nahi rakshati dukrun karane. 


(Oh foolish man, chant the name of Govinda; the 
rules of grammar will not come to your rescue when the 
end approaches.) 


Realise The Purpose Of Life And Sanctify It 


When people are questioned why the human birth 
was given to them, most of them would reply that it 
was for khana (food), peena (drink), sona (sleep) and 
marna (death). This assumption is totally incorrect. 
There are several things in life that one has to achieve. 
The purpose of a human birth is not for enjoying food 
and comforts. It is not even for pursuing education. The 
purpose of human birth is totally different and the people 


280 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


have forgotten it. You have to fulfil your life and sanctify 
your birth. The body comes, grows and dies, and finally 
undergoes decay. Before the body dies, one has to fulfil 
the purpose for which he has come into this world. 


Embodiments of Love! 


There will be several trials and tribulations in 
the journey of life. One has to acquire the power by 
which he can courageously encounter them. That 
is the power of spirituality. One should not become 
diffident and withdraw from his effort in the middle. In 
this Bhavasagara (ocean of life), there will of course 
be, turbulent waves which will toss your boat up and 
down. 


Punarapi jananam punarapi maranam 
Punarapi janani jathare sayanam 

lha samsare bahu dustare 
Kripayapare pahi Murare. 


(Oh Lord! I am caught up in this cycle of birth 
and death; time and again, I am experiencing the agony 
of staying in the mother’s womb. It is very difficult to 
cross this ocean of worldly life. Please take me across 
this ocean and grant me liberation.) 


The purpose of human birth is not to be born again 
and again from the womb of the mother, spend the life 
aimlessly and finally depart from this world. There is a 
specific purpose why one is born in this world. Therefore, 
one has to realise the purpose and sanctify his life. Our 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 281 


education, our work and the money we earn, all these 
must be spent in a purposeful way. The students of the 
present-day are pursuing education to make a living. 
They are acquiring degrees with the sole purpose of 
earning money. What is so great about struggling for 
filling one’s own belly? Even dogs and foxes fill their 
bellies. You might have observed in the circus that even 
the monkeys learn several types of feats and display 
them. You, who are born as human beings should not 
behave like dogs, foxes and monkeys. If you do so, of 
what use is your education? The education you acquire 
must be put to proper use. Only then will it become 
meaningful and will give strength to your personality. 
The purpose of your life is not merely pursuing education 
and acquiring degrees. Of course, you may study, but it is 
not enough if you simply study for acquiring degrees. 


Can you call all those who know how to read and 
write educated? 

Can one be called educated merely by acquiring 
degrees? 

Can you call it education which does not confer 
virtues ? 

If education is just for a living, don t we find birds 
and beasts carrying on their lives? 

(Telugu poem) 


It is only when you keep education for both life 
and for living as your goal, your education will be 
meaningful. Therefore, every human being must keep 


282 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


the purpose of life in view. Of what use is it, if you exult 
in your success thinking, “I have passed MBA; I have 
acquired several degrees.” Those degrees must be put to 
proper use. Only a human being has the power to realise 
the purpose of his life. If one is satisfied thinking, “I am 
born, I am educated, I earned money, I have sufficient 
bank balance, I have got my children educated and sent 
them for higher education to foreign countries”, that is 
not the sole purpose of life. You should never forget the 
purpose why you were born in this world. Unfortunately, 
today, you have forgotten the purpose of your life and 
are indulging in futile activities. As long as you live you 
must experience peace until your last breath. You should 
attain true and eternal bliss. 


Acquire The Spirit Of Sacrefice 


Mahatma Gandhi went to London and was 
conferred with the degree of Bar-at-Law. He wished to 
fulfil his life by utilising his education in the service of 
society. Therefore, after his return to his motherland, he 
joined the Indian National Congress. He sacrificed his 
entire life for achieving Independence for the country. 
He started wearing a simple dhoti and a piece of cloth 
to cover the upper portion of his body. He underwent 
several difficulties in the north Indian States during the 
freedom struggle. He was beaten by the police with lathis 
(baton) in Lucknow. However, in spite of undergoing 
several difficulties and physical torture at the hands 
of the police, he did not give up his resolve to attain 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 283 


Independence for the country. He started practising 
Law. Even then, his life did not go smoothly. He joined 
the Independence movement on behalf of the Indian 
National Congress and underwent great torture at the 
hands of the British. Nevertheless, he did not lose heart. 
His wife Kasturba was a noble lady. She always served 
her husband with great devotion, even when Gandhi 
was in jail. Simultaneously, she was also engaged in 
service to the country. It is only her spirit of service 
that protected her throughout. During the days of their 
involvement in the Independence movement, there were 
occasions when the husband and wife got separated. But 
Kasturba was reconciled to the situation that whatever 
happened was for her good only. Thus, people who serve 
others with a noble heart will always see good only. At 
last, the country attained Independence and Jawaharlal 
Nehru became the first Prime Minister. 


Subhash Chandra Bose was another great leader of 
the freedom movement who was good at heart and was 
a great patriot. It is only because of the efforts of such 
men of sacrifice, the country could attain Independence. 
However, it is not merely Swatantrya (Independence) 
that we have to wish for. We must attain Swarajya. That 
is great. Swatantrya is a temporary phenomenon of 
freedom from foreign rule while Swarajya is concerned 
with and attained by the heart. 


Dear Students! 


284 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


You must be prepared to sacrifice even your life for 
the country. You are not the body. The body is only an 
instrument and a means for achieving something higher 
and noble. The body has to be put to use for achieving 
these higher and noble aims. The body is like the dress 
we wear. One day or the other the dress is bound to decay. 
Till then the body has to be maintained properly. It is 
only by sacrifice one can attain yoga. That is what the 
Veda has proclaimed, Na karmana Na Prajaya dhanena 
thyagenaike amrutatthwamanasu (immortality is not 
attained through action, progeny or wealth; it is attained 
only by sacrifice). Having been born as human beings 
we must dedicate our lives in the service of God and in 
the constant contemplation of God. If you do so, none 
of the physical ailments will trouble you. 


Give Up Attachment To The Body 


A small example which I would like to narrate 
to you. When I was in Bangalore sometime back, this 
body fell in the bathroom. There were two students by 
name Satyajit and Achintya who used to attend to My 
needs. They did great service to Me. I told them “I have 
no body attachment. You may conduct an operation on 
this body, but I have nothing to do with this body. I am 
not this body. As long as the body is there, I have to do 
My work.” The doctors wanted to put Me in bandage, 
but I did not agree. They advised Me to undergo an 
operation so that the fracture would be healed quickly. I 
placed this body in the hands of the doctors and let them 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 285 


do whatever they wished to do with it. I continued to 
walk which I am still doing. I have no pains or suffering. 
Several devotees are anxious that Swami is walking with 
great difficulty and perhaps is undergoing great pain. I 
would like to reiterate that I do not undergo any pain or 
suffering. Till today, I did not undergo any body pain 
whatsoever. If you thus sacrifice your dehabhimana, you 
can achieve anything in life. Whatever I do, I tell the 
same thing. One has to do what he says and say what 
he does. That is what is meant by 


Manasyekam vachasyekam karmanyekam 
mahatmanam 
Manasyanyath vachasyanyath karmanyanyath 
duratmanam 


(Those whose thoughts, words and deeds are in 
perfect harmony are noble ones; those who lack harmony 
of these are wicked.) 


That is the real manavatva (human nature). I can 
stand for any length of time though the doctors advised 
Me against it. Even now I have been standing for a long 
time. I have no suffering at all. I don’t take even a single 
tablet. I don’t put on any bandage. Mine is atmabhava 
and atmabhava alone. I set an example by My own 
actions. 


Dear Students! 


The body may undergo any amount of suffering. It 
is like a water bubble. The mind is like a mad monkey. 


286 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


Therefore, we should not follow either the body or the 
mind. We must follow our antharatma (conscience). 
We must develop atmabhimana. If atmabhimana is 
developed, no pain can trouble us. It is only for teaching 
you about this atmabhimana, I am undergoing all this 
trouble. I don’t feel any pain at all. I am telling you the 
truth. I am not suppressing the facts. In fact, I don’t 
know or feel what pain is. We must face the difficulties 
courageously. It is only to teach you this steadfastness 
and courage, I have taken upon Myself this pain. You 
must follow My ideal. Do not ever give importance to the 
suffering of the body. Give up dehabhimana. However, 
engage the body in proper activities. Engage the body 
in the service of God. Our body is a gift of God. For 
what purpose has God given us this body? It is only for 
dedicating it in the service of the Lord. 


Embodiments of Love! 


The body has been given to you for performing 
sacred karmas (actions). Several people wonder why 
Swami does not feel tired in spite of undergoing so much 
physical suffering. Especially, the ladies can observe the 
signs of weakness quickly. I want to assure you that I 
am maintaining a constant body weight and good health 
throughout. Neither I have put on weight nor become 
weak. I can walk swiftly, but I am desisting from doing 
so only to satisfy the doctors. The doctors are particularly 
pressurising Me not to walk swiftly. They advised Me, 
“Swami, please do not walk fast. You always keep two 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 287 


students with You to help You.” It is only to please them 
and satisfy them that I am keeping these two students 
with Me. I am not causing any inconvenience to these 
boys. Both these boys, Arun and Prusty go to their offices 
and work there besides attending to My needs. The 
moment I call Prusty, he immediately rushes in. I ask him 
to get Me a glass of water and I drink the water given 
by him. Similarly, both these boys constantly attend to 
My needs. They are serving Me with great devotion and 
love. I do not cause any inconvenience to anybody. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Today you are celebrating Swami’s birthday. In 
fact, it is the body that has a date of birth. This body 
has already passed 78 years and has entered the 79th 
year. But do I look like a 79 year old man? No. No. Not 
only now, even after 80 or 90 years of age, I will be like 
this only. I will never depend on anybody. My eyes and 
teeth are in perfect condition. Normally, by the time a 
person attains 79 years of age, all his teeth will be lost. 
His eyesight will be affected by cataract. His skin will 
have wrinkles, but I have no wrinkles at all. I will not 
have old age. In fact, I have no old age. Similarly, you 
also develop such courage and confidence. You will 
certainly feel good. Not only Myself, all of you should 
be in sound health. But you are spoiling your own health. 
You are misusing your physical strength in so many 
ways. If you put your body to proper use, you can come 
up well by Swami’s grace. You can serve any number of 


288 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


people with a healthy body and a sound mind. Therefore, 
you have to maintain your body in healthy condition in 
order to serve others, not to show off your beauty. Even 
for Me, this body is required for serving others. In the 
service to humanity, I am prepared for anything, even to 
sacrifice My life. Similarly, you must also be ever ready 
to serve others. Do not ever consider that the body is 
very important. Neither, you fritter away the physical 
strength. You must make proper use of the physical 
body. You must also gain enough mental strength. You 
must come up well in your educational career and make 
your life sanctified in the service to humanity. You must 
always be ready to face any situation in life boldly. That 
is the real nature of humanity. Whenever your services 
are required, you must respond immediately, saying, 
“T am ready, I am ready, I am ready.” Develop such a 
courage and confidence and set an ideal to the world. 


This body is a den of dirt and prone to diseases; 
it is subject to change from time to time; it cannot 
cross the ocean of Samsara. It is nothing but a 
structure of bones. Oh mind! Do not be under 
the delusion that body is permanent. Instead take 
refuge at the Divine Lotus Feet. (Telugu poem) 


You seek refuge in the lotus feet of the Lord. Do 
not mind any amount of suffering of the physical body. 
You serve the country to the extent you can. Utilise 
every small opportunity to serve the country and society. 
Even a small help done to an old woman that you come 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 289 


across on the way is service. Do not ever think, “What 
do I gain by helping this woman?” There is great merit 
even in such a small service. Therefore, continue to 
serve. There is no greater sadhana than service to the 
fellow human beings. Seva bina nirvan nahi (there is 
no redemption without service). You should not mind 
any inconvenience that you may undergo while serving 
others. 


I have no intention of celebrating My birthday ona 
grand scale. My only intention is that the body should be 
maintained in a proper condition and through the body 
service should be rendered to others. You must always 
be prepared to dedicate your life to serve society. That 
is the real service. 


[Divine Birthday, 23-11-2004, Prasanthi Nilayam] 


22 
My Power Is The Power Of Love 


How is it that the sun rises in the morning and sets 
in the evening with utmost regularity everyday? 
How is it that the stars twinkle beautifully in 
the sky at night and hide themselves during the 
day? How is it that the wind blows incessantly 
and sustains the living beings without taking rest 
even for a moment? How is it that the rivers flow 
perennially making gurgling sounds? 
(Telugu poem) 


Embodiments of Love! 


AGAT denotes that which is subject to creation, 
sustenance and dissolution. God, who is 
responsible for these phenomena, has no specific form. 
He pervades the entire world in the form of the five 
elements, namely, space, wind, fire, water and earth. 


292 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


Food And Water Are The Gifts Of God 


In man, these elements connote the faculties of 
sabda, sparsha, rupa, rasa, gandha (hearing, touch, sight, 
taste, smell), respectively. There is no place where 
these five elements are not present. Sarvatah panipadam 
tat sarvathokshi siromukham, Sarvatah sruthimalloke 
sarvamavruthya tishthati (with hands, feet, eyes, head, 
mouth and ears pervading everything, He permeates the 
entire universe). That is why it is said that all hands, feet, 
eyes, heads, mouths and ears are His. The elders in the 
past therefore declared that God is present everywhere; 
there is no place where God is not present. How can we 
comprehend the principle of this all-pervasive divinity? 
People attribute various names and forms to God. They 
celebrate the birthdays of their chosen deities, worship 
them and derive joy therefrom. But it is not possible for 
anyone to fathom fully the nature of divinity. It is not 
possible to attribute any form to God. He is beyond all 
names, forms and attributes. God has neither birth nor 
death. How can anyone give a specific name to God who 
is all-powerful and all-pervasive? 


God is eternal without birth or death. He has no 
beginning, middle or end. He is omnipresent and 
is the eternal witness. (Telugu poem) 


When a child is born from the womb of its mother, 
it starts crying. However, it stops crying the moment you 
put a drop of honey or milk on its tongue. From this, 
we can deduce that everyone is born with hunger. What 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 293 


type of hunger is that? Is it worldly or spiritual? It is 
difficult to judge who is born with what type of hunger. 
Though food is of various kinds, hunger is common to 
all. Food is essential to satisfy one’s hunger. So, every 
individual has to eat food. It is also his duty to share it 
with others. 


It is the earth which provides food to man. It 
absorbs rainwater and supplies it to the crops. In this way, 
we grow crops. Thus, mother earth sustains our life by 
providing food to us. Water is also very essential for our 
survival. One may live without food for a few days, but 
not without water. Water is very necessary for growing 
food also. It can be acquired only through prayer and 
not by any other means. People perform worship and 
offer special prayers to invoke divine grace for water. 
Everyone should pray to God whether one is a pauper or 
a millionaire, for it is God who provides food and water 
to man. Food and water are the gifts of God. Man cannot 
create food and water by himself. He does not even know 
what type of food is essential to lead a healthy life. He 
should, in fact, make efforts to understand this. 


Anything Can Be Achieved Through Prayer 


Whatever God does is for the welfare of the world. 
You must understand that world is the very form of God. 
The Creator and creation are not different from each 
other. We should not worship God for the fulfilment 
of worldly desires. We should pray to God to attain 
Him. He showers His grace on all. It is God who gives 


294 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


us everything. He alone knows what is good for us. 
Everything that we need is provided by Him. However, 
it is not the quality of a true devotee to feel disappointed 
and to blame God if his desires are not fulfilled. It is our 
duty to find ways and means to earn God’s grace and 
make efforts to attain Him. Nobody can understand or 
explain divine plans. God alone knows His plans and 
He only can reveal them. No one can comprehend the 
ways of God as stated by Thyagaraja: 


Not even a blade of grass will move without 
divine Will, 

Right from an ant to Brahma, God pervades 
everything, 

But some people do not understand this and take 
pride in their intelligence, 

But no one however mighty knows what is going 
to happen in the next moment. 

(Telugu poem) 


No one can predict when God will shower His 
grace on an individual. Only God knows the answers to 
the questions like who, when, where, why and how. If 
one forgets God and gets carried away by ego and sense 
of doership, one will not meet with success in one’s 
endeavours. Anything can be achieved through prayer. 
There is nothing greater than prayer. Hence, everyone 
must necessarily offer his prayer to God. However, one 
should not pray for worldly gains. “Oh God! I want Your 
love and nothing else.” This should be your constant 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 295 


prayer. Once you become the recipient of God’s love, 
you can conquer the entire world. 


Do not pray to God for the fulfilment of your 
worldly desires. Instead, leave everything to God’s Will. 
Have full faith that He will do what is good for you. Pray 
to Him, “Oh God, please take care of us every moment of 
our life.’ When you discharge your duties surrendering 
everything to God’s Will, you will certainly achieve 
success in all your endeavours. But God’s Will takes 
shape at the appropriate time without any prompting or 
planning. 


All Are The Children Of God 


Any mighty task can be accomplished by prayer. 
Hence, pray to God silently. Do not pray for the 
fulfilment of your petty desires. Give up all desires and 
pray to God wholeheartedly with love. You will certainly 
find fulfilment in life. You can understand and experience 
divinity only through love. Nothing can be achieved 
without love. Love makes all your tasks successful. 
Some people complain, “Swami, we are making fervent 
prayers but our prayers are not fruitful.” I tell them, “The 
mistake lies in your prayer and not in God.” If your 
prayers are sincere, they will certainly be answered. 
There is nothing that God cannot accomplish. 


The stories of the Lord are most wonderful and 
sacred in all the three worlds. They are like 
sickles that cut the creepers of worldly bondage. 


296 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 


They are most ennobling and elevating. They 
confer bliss on the sages and seers doing penance 
in forests. (Telugu poem) 


Today we are celebrating the sacred festival of 
Christmas. We should celebrate it in the true spirit 
without entertaining petty desires. Jesus was the son 
of God. While he was being crucified, he said, “Oh 
Father, Let Thy Will be done.” When you surrender 
yourself to God’s Will, He will take care of you. Do 
not develop pride. Give up ego and ostentation. Pray 
silently and sincerely. Then your prayers will surely be 
answered. God is not confined to a place somewhere in 
a distant corner. He always resides in your heart. He can 
accomplish anything. He is ever ready to perform any 
task, big or small, for His devotees. All are His children. 
Hence, He will certainly answer your prayers. Jesus 
taught, “All are the children of God.” When you have 
such firm conviction, you can accomplish any task. You 
need not read voluminous books. Fill your heart with 
love and leave everything to His Will. You will certainly 
achieve success in all your endeavours. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Love is the quintessence of My teachings. My 
power is the power of love (loud applause). There is 
nothing greater than love. When you develop love, 
you can easily face the challenges of life and emerge 
victorious. God will always be with you, in you and 
around you and will take care of you. Any mighty task 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 37 297 


can be accomplished through prayer. However, your 
prayer should be sincere. Say what is there in your 
mind. Swami is within you; He knows your thoughts 
and feelings. Develop unity of thought, word and deed. 
Have faith that Swami is in you, and He always listens 
to your prayer. If you think that Swami is outside, how 
will your prayer reach Him? 


Embodiments of Love! 


It is only love that will help you to achieve success 
in your life. Hence, develop love. That is the true prayer 
God expects from you. 


[Christmas, 25-12-2004, Prasanthi Nilayam] 


