SATHYA SAI SPEAKS 


VOLUME 38 


Discourses of 
BHAGAWAN SRI SATHYA SAI BABA 
(DELIVERED DURING 2005) 


PRASANTHI NILAYAM 


SRI SATHYA SAI BOOKS & PUBLICATIONS TRUST 
Prasanthi Nilayam — 515 134 
Anantapur District, Andhra Pradesh, India 
STD : 08555 ISD : 91 — 8555 
Phone: 287375 Fax: 287236 
email: enquiry@sssbpt.org 


© Sri Sathya Sai Books & Publications Trust 
Prasanthi Nilayam (INDIA). 


All Rights Reserved 


The Copyright and the rights of translation in any language are 
reserved by the Publisher. No part, paragraph, passage, text or pho- 
tograph or artwork of this book should be reproduced, transmitted or 
utilised, in original language or by translation, in any form or by any 
means, electronic, mechanical, photo copying, recording or by any in- 
formation, storage or retrieval system, except with and prior permission 
in writing from the Convener, Sri Sathya Sai Books & Publications Trust, 
Prasanthi Nilayam (Andhra Pradesh) India, except for brief passages 
quoted in book review. This book can be exported from India only by 
the Publishers - Sri Sathya Sai Books & Publications Trust, Prasanthi 
Nilayam (India). 


81 - 7208 - 454 - 4 
81 - 7208 - 118 - 9 (Set) 


International Standard Book No: 


Published by 


The Convener, 

Sri Sathya Sai Books & Publications Trust 
Prasanthi Nilayam, India - Pin Code 515 134 
STD : 08555 ISD : 91- 8555. 

Phone : 287375 Fax : 287236 

email : enquiry@sssbpt.org 


Publisher’s Note 


The various festivals that punctuate the Indian 
calendar in a year invariably bring with them refreshing 
showers of wisdom in the form of Discourses from the 
Divine. This invaluable gift of grace unfailingly reaches 
millions all over the world, soothing the drooping hearts 
and rejuvenating the palsied nerves of the listeners and 
readers alike. 


The present compilation of 18 such discourses 
delivered during the year 2005 which constitute the 38th 
volume of ‘Sathya Sai Speaks’ is yet another instalment of 
His benediction. Moral reconstruction of human society 
being the avowed mission of the Avatar, these discourses 
richly contribute to a strong ethico-moral fabric of human 
society. Though some of them are couched in a language 
for the younger generation, they are bound to impact the 
manners and habits of the grown-ups as well. 


This compilation does not include the five dis- 
courses delivered during Dasara festival in October 2005 
as they have been clubbed together and published as a 
separate booklet. 


The Book Trust hopes that the readers will receive 
this volume with the same warmth and delight with which 
the earlier ones were received. 


With pranams at the Lotus Feet 
Convener 


Sri Sathya Sai Books and Publications Trust 
Prasanthi Nilayam 


CONTENTS 


1. Your True Nature Is Bliss- RealiseIt 4 2 own. 1 


2. Elders Are A Source Of Wisdom And 


Strength Revere And Respect Them ann. 17 
3. Experience The All-Prevading Divine 

Consciousness a 21 
4. Your Are All Amrutaputras - Sons Of Immortality _...... 35 
5. All Are Bound By The Law Of Karma —si—=="un.... 45 
6. Humility Is The Hallmark Of Education a... 59 
7. Love And Unity - Your True And Eternal 

Property: ait 71 
8. Understand The SpiritOfService a. 89 
9 . Love Is God, God Is Love; LiveIn Love aa... 97 
10.Ramayana-ASacred Way OfLife a 105 
11. Win The Love Of Your Mother To Win The 

LoveOfGod ee 119 
12. Develop The SpiritOf Oneness nn 137 
13. Understand The Principle Of Fundamental Truth _...... 145 
14. Pray ForThe WelfareOfAI 153 


15. Unity, Purity, Divinity ae 165 


16.Eschew Body Attachment 2 aan. 17g 


17. Cultivate Satwic Qualities Right From Childhood...... 193 


18. Develop The SpiritOf Oneness lian. 203 
19. Truth And Righteousness Are The Foundation 

For True Education 2 ZAS 
20. Realise Your Innate Divinity To Attain Peace __...... pea | 


1 


Your True Nature Is Bliss Realise It 


The sun appears serene and peaceful. The 
days have become shorter. The sweet festival 
of Sankranti has come filling our homes with 


the newly harvested grain. 
(Telugu poem) 


ae is the most important of all festivals. Practi- 
cally, every day is a festival day for humanity. But, 
people out of their ignorance have earmarked a few days as festival 
days and the rest as ordinary days. Many celebrate this festival 
without actually knowing its significance. On this day in this part 
of the world, people pay their respects to cows and bulls. Bulls 
are decorated daintily with a variety of ornaments and clothes and 
taken round the streets. They are called gangireddhulu (sacred 
bulls). Not merely this; a symbolic marriage is performed between 
the cows and the bulls. The person who takes round the decorated 
bull is called Gangireddudasu. He wears a special dress 
on this occasion. The very sight of Gangireddudasu 
fascinates children. The elder brother lovingly calls the 


younger brother to go along with him to see the sacred 


2 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


bull and its master. 


“Oh my dear brother, here comes the Gangired- 
dudasu. Come, let us go and see him. He wears 
a silver medallion and a waist belt. He carries 
a decorated staff and wears special marks on 
his forehead. He brings with him the richly ca- 
parisoned sacred cow and bull and performs their 
marriage. Let us see the marriage ceremony and 


offer our gifts” 
(Telugu poem) 


He brings with him a cow anda bull and calls them 
Sita and Rama, respectively. They are trained in such a 
way that they respond to his questions according to the 
movement of the stick in his hand. He asks the cow, “Oh 
Sita! Do you like Rama?” As per the training given, the 
cow shakes its head in disapproval. Then he asks the bull, 
“Oh Rama! Do you like Sita?” The bull also answers in 
the negative. In this manner, both of them disapprove 
initially and later on agree for the marriage. Then the 
Gangireddudasu performs the symbolic marriage of Sita 
and Rama. 


The Message Of Sankranti 


The festival of Sankranti bestows immense 
joyeven on animals and birds. It is a very important 
festival for farmers. This is the day he brings home the 
newly harvested crop and enjoys the fruits of his hard 


Your True Nature Is Bliss — Realise It 3 


labour. Thus, right from a farmer to the king, everyone 
celebrates this festival joyfully. Names may vary, but 
this festival is celebrated by one and all irrespective of 
religion and nationality. It marks the beginning of the 
sacred time of Uttarayana (sun’s movement toward 
North). It confers bliss on one and all. 


Everyone aspires to attain bliss. In fact, that is the 
very purpose of human life. Life has no meaning if one 
cannot experience bliss. Bliss is your goal. 


Nityanandam, Parama Sukhadam, Kevalam 
Jnanamurtim, Dwandwateetam, Gagana Sadrisham, 
Tattwamasyadi Lakshyam, Ekam, Nityam, Vimalam, 
Achalam, Sarvadhee Ekam, Nityam, Vimalam, 
Achalam, Sarvadhee Sakshibhutam, Bhavateetam, Trigu- 
narahitam (God is the embodiment of eternal bliss, He 
is wisdom absolute, the One without a second, beyond 
the pair of opposites, expansive and pervasive like the 
sky, the goal indicated by the mahavakya Tattwamasi, the 
eternal, pure, unchanging, the witness of all functions of 
the intellect, beyond all mental conditions and the three 
gunas of satwa, rajas and tamas). 


In accordance with the tradition, the newly mar- 
ried sons-in-law visit their in-laws’ house to celebrate 
this festival. 


As Sankranti is the festival of festivals, 

Oh newly married bridegroom, visit your in-law’ 
house, 

Come, spend your time in fun and frolic with your 


4 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


brothers-in-law and sisters-in-law, 
The entire household and the neighbourhood will 
welcome you with love and affection. 


(Telugu song) 


Even those who have not visited their in-laws’ 
house for a number of years will be eager to go for Sank- 
ranti festival. The in-laws extend all hospitality to the 
son-in-law and make efforts to please him. They even go 
to the extent of borrowing money in order to give him 
new clothes and serve him delicious food. The entire 
household spends their time blissfully. But, today that 
spirit of Sankranti celebrations is not noticed anywhere. 
The son-in-law instead of giving joy to his in-laws, quar- 
rels over petty matters with them. 


Sankranti confers joy on human beings, birds and 
animals alike. Not only Bharatiyas, even the people of 
other countries celebrate this festival, but with different 
names. This is the season when cool winds blow and 
the farmer brings home the harvested crop. He spends 
his time in a relaxed manner free from all worries and 
anxieties. There is a saying in Telugu: “One who is free 
from ‘chintha’ (worry) will be able to sleep peacefully 
even in a ‘santha’ (market place). 


Everyone should make efforts to overcome worries 
and enjoy everlasting happiness. This is the message of 
Sankranti. People may interpret it in their own way, but 
few understand its true significance. Amongst the variety 


Your True Nature Is Bliss — Realise It 5 


of festivals, the womenfolk accord a special place to 
this festival. The happiness that one enjoys during this 
season 1s unique. 


Man makes various efforts to experience happi- 
ness. You can find few in this world who do not want to 
be happy. But one must understand that happiness cannot 
be acquired from outside. It originates from the heart. 
Heart is the source of bliss. The happiness we enjoy in the 
external world is only a reaction, reflection and resound 
of the happiness within. Very few understand this truth. 
The apparent joy that one experiences today is artificial 
and temporary. Only the happiness that springs from the 
heart is permanent. 


Happiness Should Mainfest From Within 


Students! 


Behave so as not to cause hindrance to anyone. 
Festivals are meant to experience happiness and share 
it with others. Happiness cannot be purchased in a mar- 
ket nor can it be acquired by worldly means. It should 
manifest from within. It is not the nature of Bharatiyas 
to hurt the feelings of others for their own pleasure. One 
should respect others’ feelings and act appropriately. 
One should share his happiness with his fellowmen. 
You should welcome the arrival of the bounteous month 
of Pushya and celebrate Sankranti in the true spirit by 
manifesting your inner joy and sharing it with others. 
The word ‘Kranti’ means change. It signifies a change 


6 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


from misery to happiness, from restlessness to peace 
and from pain to pleasure. Sankranti bestows joy on 
everyone equally. That is why everyone eagerly awaits 
the arrival of Sankranti with enthusiasm. Even birds 
and animals are happy with the arrival of Sankranti. 
When the farmer brings home the harvested grain, birds 
partake of them and express their joy by chirping mer- 
rily. The neighbours congratulate the farmer for the 
rich harvest he reaped as a result of his hard labour. 
Students! 


It is most essential that you understand the sig- 
nificance of every festival and celebrate them in the 
true spirit. As we do not go deep into their significance, 
we are unable to enjoy true happiness. One should be 
prepared to sacrifice his body to have the experience 
of eternal bliss. Body is a combination of five elements 
and the mind is merely a bundle of thoughts. One should 
neither be attached to the body nor follow the vagaries of 
the mind. Drive away the evil qualities of kama, krodha, 
lobha, moha, mada and matsarya (desire, anger, greed, 
infatuation, pride and jealousy) and manifest your inner 
peace and bliss. Instead of developing peace and bliss, 
man is destroying them. He is giving scope to unrest even 
in trivial matters. Neither asanthi (unrest) nor prasanthi 
(supreme peace) are acquired from outside. People say, 
“T want peace.” Where is peace? Is it present outside? 
If peace were to be found outside, people would have 
bought it by spending any amount of money. But outside, 
we find only pieces! The real peace is within. 


Your True Nature Is Bliss — Realise It 7 


Whether you boil it hard or dilute it with water, 
milk remains white. White symbolises purity. In the con- 
stant manner of milk, your heart should always remain 
pure, bright and peaceful in spite of trials and tribula- 
tions. We should subdue sorrow, keep the evil qualities 
of anger, hatred and jealousy under check and manifest 
our innate bliss. When your desires are not fulfilled, you 
become angry. Hence, desires are the root cause of anger 
and they should be controlled in the first instance. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Everlasting bliss is the goal of everyone. You 
should derive happiness even from what seem to be 
troubles. One need not search for happiness elsewhere. 
It is always with you and in you. You are unable to ex- 
perience it as you have not understood the true meaning 
of happiness. You are under the illusion that happiness 
lies in money, wealth and material comforts. Once you 
have the taste of true happiness, you will not crave for 
worldly possessions. True happiness springs forth from 
the depths of one’s heart. When milk is boiled in a vessel, 
its level starts rising gradually. The milk level subsides 
when you sprinkle a few drops of water over it. It is 
because of its association with water that milk loses its 
value. Likewise, man loses his value when he associates 
himself with bad company. One will always be blissful 
if one is in good company. Before making friendship 
with an individual, one should enquire into his character. 


8 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


You may or may not be aware; I am always in a 
state of bliss. I have no worries or difficulties whatsoever. 
Some people ask, “Swami, do you have any worries?” I 
do not know what worry is. I have never experienced it. 
I am always blissful. You should always think of bliss. 
Then you will see bliss everywhere. The experience of 
bliss is sweeter than sugar, tastier than curd, sweeter 
indeed than honey. People feel sad when they are faced 
with difficulties and at the bereavement of their near and 
dear ones. But at no point of time do I feel sorry about 
such happenings. They come and go like passing clouds. 
Happiness and sorrow follow one another. When you 
contemplate on bliss, there will be no room for sorrow. 


Embodiments of Love! 


There is love in each one of you, but you are di- 
recting it on worldly relationships. You have not tasted 
true love. Love God wholeheartedly. That is true love. 
People may come and people may go, but God neither 
comes nor goes. He is always present. When you are 
engulfed in sorrow, think of happiness. You will certainly 
experience happiness. 


Bliss Is Our Essential Nature 


Bliss is very much immanent in the human be- 
ing. Wherever we are, whatever be the position we 
occupy, our essential nature is bliss. People ask Me 
sometimes “Swami! Did You ever experience sorrow?” 


Your True Nature Is Bliss — Realise It 9 


I am amused at this question. In fact, why should I ex- 
perience sorrow? Should I feel sorry about the body? 
Not necessary. This body is always healthy and ac- 
tive. The nature of the human mind is fickle. The body 
is like a water bubble; mind is like a mad monkey. 
Don’t follow the mind; don’t rely on the body since it 
is like a water bubble. After all, why should one feel 
sorry about the body and mind which are transient? In 
fact, bliss is our essential nature which is permanent. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Cutivate love that will help you to experience bliss. 
“Start the day with Love; fill the day with Love; end the 
day with Love that is the way to God.” If you can achieve 
this, you will not be disturbed by sorrows and difficul- 
ties. The heart is the seat of bliss. True bliss flows from 
a pure and loving heart. Try to experience such bliss. All 
other forms of happiness are momentary. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Children are always happy and cheerful. They do 
not have any inhibitions. When somebody smiles at them, 
they will also smile innocently. They experience bliss 
that is the inherent nature of all human beings. There is 
a difference between happiness and bliss. In common 
parlance, “happiness” is momentary. It comes and goes. 
Bliss is something that wells up from within. It emerges 
from the heart, as a result of one’s union with God. If one 
feels separate from God, one cannot experience bliss. 


10 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


Embodiments of Love! 


You have to experience such bliss in abundance 
in the days to come. Let me remind you once again that 
neither age nor position nor for that matter anything in 
this physical environment can bring about such bliss. 
It is only a pure and loving heart that is the source of 
bliss. The holy festival of Sankranti signifies change 
or transformation of the heart. It is experiencing bliss 
arising out of the realisation of the changeless, Eternal 
Principle. Divinity is the only principle that is change- 
less. God is ever blissful. In fact, He is the embodiment 
of bliss. For example, this is a white cloth. It is only 
when this cloth is dipped in or painted with colour, it 
acquires some colour. Similarly, your essential nature is 
bliss. If you are experiencing sorrow, it is because you 
have immersed yourself in sorrow. Wherever you are, 
you must always be happy and blissful. For example, 
people wish me “Swami! Happy Birthday!” I would like 
to ask one question in this context. Is there real happi- 
ness in celebrating a birthday? I am always happy. Then, 
where is the question of celebrating a particular day in 
a year as “Happy Birthday”. This is only an expression 
in borrowed words. In fact, bliss is our true nature. We 
camouflage our true nature with artificial expressions 
and feel satisfied as though it is real bliss. This is not the 
correct approach. 


Be Blissful By Keeping Desires At Bay 


Embodiments of Love! 


Your True Nature Is Bliss — Realise It 11 


You are full of Love. In fact, your hearts are over- 
flowing with Love. But, you are preventing your love 
from flowing and expressing itself outwardly. Otherwise, 
love has no barriers or hurdles at all! Constantly contem- 
plate on God. Then you will always be happy physically, 
mentally and spiritually. Unfortunately, nowadays you 
are losing such a divine quality of bliss due to various 
desires. If you can keep these desires away from you, 
you will always be blissful. For example, this is a white 
cloth. Whiteness is its nature. But it acquires dirt be- 
cause of constant usage. Similarly, your heart is always 
pure, bright and blissful. But it gets polluted because of 
desires. Therefore, cultivate Love and keep your heart 
always pure. Then you will be blissful every moment 
of your life. But, you have forgotten your innate nature 
of bliss and are always immersed in sorrow and unhap- 
piness. When someone enquires, “How are you?” you 
reply “so, so”. This is not the the correct way. We must 
reply, “I am happy”. It is possible that we may encounter 
some ups and downs in life. But, they should not affect 
our essential nature, which is bliss. Did you observe Me 
carefully? How blissful I am! Not only now, I am always 
blissful and overflowing with bliss. In fact, you can also 
experience such bliss in My presence. However, if you 
approach Me with an evil mind, evil thoughts and de- 
sires, you cannot experience this bliss. These are human 
weaknesses. You must, therefore, try to correct them. 


Dear Students! 


12 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


You should never feel dejected. Supposing you 
fail in an examination sometime, you should not feel 
dejected. Reconcile yourself that perhaps you did not 
write the examination well and therefore you have failed. 
But never get depressed and dejected that you have failed 
in the examination. Similarly, you enquire into yourself 
the reason for your sorrow. You will yourself realise 
that your own thoughts are responsible for the present 
situation. Hence, correct them. You will be happy once 
again. Sorrows and difficulties are like passing clouds. 
You should never attach importance to them. You must 
always be happy and cheerful. Peace and happiness are 
your qualities. In fact, your true nature is bliss. 


Man’s Evil Deeds Cause Calamities 


Embodiments of Love! 


Today is the holy festival of Sankranti. In fact, this 
year 1s particularly important than the previous year. Last 
month several people suffered untold misery and suffer- 
ing on account of a 7sunami. It is only man’s evil deeds 
that are responsible for such a calamity. I, therefore, ad- 
vise you not to indulge in wrong actions and evil deeds. It 
is possible that more troubles may occur during this year, 
compared to last year. However, we must move forward 
unmindful of those troubles. These are all passing clouds 
and you need not be perturbed by these occurrences. Be 
bold and courageous to face them. The calamity of 7su- 
nami that occurred last month was in fact, man-made. It 
was not Divine Will at all! But, man feels that all such 


Your True Nature Is Bliss — Realise It 13 


calamities are thrust upon man by God. Never! God 
always provides happiness to man. He has no anger or 
hatred. His nature is love. The question arises why these 
sorrows and difficulties in the world? Strictly speaking, 
happiness will not have any value without sorrow. Man 
cannot experience happiness without undergoing some 
difficulty or the other. Both happiness and sorrow are 
intertwined. One cannot exist without the other. 


Pleasure and pain, good and bad co-exist, 
none can separate them. You cannot find 
pleasure or pain, good or bad to the 
exclusion of the other. Pleasure results 
when difficulties fructify. 

(Telugu poem) 


God does not cause pain to any living being in His 
creation. All sorrows and difficulties are man-made only. 
God is the protector of all living beings. He provides 
peace and happiness to one and all. Lokah samastah 
sukhino bhavantu (May all people of the world be happy). 
This is the Will of God. How then can God cause sorrow 
to a human being? Unable to understand His divine will, 
you accuse God of causing sorrow. If you can fathom the 
divine will, you will realise that everything is for your 
good only. We are all embodiments of bliss. Day in and 
day out you experience that bliss and share it with others. 
Then only it will increase. 


14 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


Embodiments of Love! 


This Sankranti is prema Sankranti and ananda 
Sankranti. Hence, welcome this Sankranti festival. Wel- 
come God who is the embodiment of bliss. God is not 
satisfied with the appellations like “Karunanidhi” (the 
treasure house of compassion) and “Premaswarupa” 
(embodiment of love). God is always blissful. You 
should not pray to God to fulfil your umpteen desires. 
Just pray “Oh! God! Share Your bliss with me. Make me 
blissful!” Never deride God as “nirdaya” (one without 
compassion). Whatever God does is for our own good. 
Even the sorrows and difficulties we experience are for 
our own good. They are preludes to happiness and bliss. 
If you cultivate such positive outlook, you will always 
be blissful. Share your happiness with all. Contrary to 
this, man today is keeping happiness to himself and dis- 
tributing sorrow to others. This is not what we should 
do. “Suppress your sorrow and manifest inner joy” this 
is the spiritual sadhana one has to undertake. When you 
encounter any difficulty or sorrow or restlessness, do not 
mind them at all. Ignore them. You are always embodi- 
ments of bliss. If you constantly contemplate on this 
reality, nothing will bother you. 

Embodiments of Love! 


May this festival of Sankranti, which is a symbolof 
change, bring about a transformation in your heart and 
provide bliss to one and all, so that you may always lead 
a happy, prosperous and cheerful life. In fact, the very 
name of a human being is anandamaya (full of bliss). 


Your True Nature Is Bliss — Realise It 15 


Manavatva (humanness) is meant for rising to the level 
of daivatva (divinity). 


Students! 


All your dramas and playlets that you have enacted 
here are good. If you analyse properly, where does the 
bad lie? It lies in your mind. Do not think bad and share 
your bad thoughts with others. Bliss is the real food for 
a human being. One should always be hungry to partake 
of that food of bliss. Let your faith in God be firm and 
unshakable. It is only God’s love that is eternal. If you 
can secure that love, all other forms of happiness will 
automatically come to you. good only. 


(Sankranti, 14-1-2005, Prasanthi Nilayam) 


16 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


The mental make-up of a person can be judged 
from the way in which he maintains his immedi- 
ate surroundings. For example, a person whose 
room is full of pictures of his relatives, friends, 
and political leaders can at once be understood to 
be one dominated by rajoguna. He is one who at- 
taches undue importance to human realtionships 
and adores worldly power and pelf, ignoring God. 
Similarly, if the room is full of ugly and obscence 
pictures, the individual is essentially thamasic in 


nature. Both these categories of men are unfit to 
practise the sacred path of meditation. A third 
category of men who have particulars of God 
and holy men adorning the walls of their rooms, 
converting their rooms into shrines, as it were, are 
the sathwic people, the people who are rightfully 
qualified to undertake meditation. 


Baba 





2 


Elders Are A Source Of Wisdom And 
Strength - Revere And Respect Them 


Embodiments of Love! 


he elderly couples who participated in the 

“Bhima Ratha Santhi” celebrations held to- 
day have experienced inexplicable joy and bliss. In this 
context, you must understand the underlying meaning in 
naming this ceremony as Bhima Ratha Santhi. It does not 
mean that all these couples must be physically strong and 
courageous like Bhima, the Mahabharata hero. Bhima 
was the son of Vayu (air), which is all-pervasive. The 
wind by nature is a very strong and powerful element, 
which can uproot even a mighty tree. 


There are certain traditional rules for the perfor- 
mance of this Bhima Ratha Santhi. But there is no age 
restriction as such for this ceremony. By God’s grace, 
everyone has sat sankalpa (good thoughts). Normally, 


18 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


married couples celebrate the Shashtyabda Poorthi cer- 
emony when the husband attains the age of sixty years, 
hoping to lead a peaceful and happy married life. They 
also celebrate when the husband attains the age of 70 
years. Generally, people believe 70 years of age as the 
deadline in the lifespan of an individual. But, there are 
other milestones like 80, 90 and 100 years also to be 
crossed in life. When an individual crosses these impor- 
tant milestones in his married life these blissful occasions 
are named and celebrated as Bhima Ratha Santhi. Unable 
to understand and appreciate the importance of these holy 
occasions, the children in this Kali Age are sending their 
parents away when they cross 60 years in life, under the 
mistaken notion that they should not lead a married life 
and they are fit only to be sanyasis (renunciants). This 
is a Serious mistake. On the other hand, children should 
take greater care of their parents when they attain sixty 
years of age and beyond. Generally, children are under 
the impression that people beyond the age of 70 years are 
useless and a burden to the family as well as to society. 
But, the truth is otherwise. In fact, the enthusiasm, en- 
couragement and mental strength increase after a person 
crosses 70 years. It is only after 70 years that the mental 
faculties and atmic strength express themselves in full 
measure. Prior to that, they also behave like other human 
beings. They will not specially strive to set an example 
to others. The mental faculties, divine force and the will 
power in a person will manifest fully after 70 years and 
prompt him to set a new goal in life. As a result, such 


Elders Are A Source Of Wisdom And Strength ... 19 


elderly persons will be contemplating upon and exploring 
the secrets of life. The divine force latent in these elderly 
persons is beyond the reach of the youth. It manifests 
in ever-so-many ways in their actions. Today, we find 
several youngsters talking ill of their parents and mak- 
ing fun of them. This is a grave mistake. Instead, if one 
can analyse carefully their actions, every action of theirs 
will prove to be purposeful and divine in nature. If the 
youth of today wish to receive proper training to face the 
challenges in life, they must live with their parents and 
constantly observe the noble qualities that manifest in 
their actions. In fact, no one can match their systematic 
life and strict discipline. The blossoming of their intel- 
lect and the divine qualities in them will herald a new 
and meaningful life for humanity. You just observe their 
life closely and you will be thrilled at the changes it can 
bring about in your own life. 

Embodiments of Love! 


These days, we are ignoring these elders, consider- 
ing them to be not useful to society. This is not correct. In 
fact, the strength and energy latent in these elders are not 
to be found in the youth. When you wish to undertake any 
new activity, it will become fruitful only when you take 
the guidance of the elders and walk in their footsteps. 


Nowadays, a human being is unable to recognise 
the qualities of a fellow human being. The term “ma- 
nava”’ (human being) means a person who can make the 
quality of humanness blossom. People generally tend to 


20 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


describe the physical strength of body, whenever a men- 
tion is made of Bhima, the younger brother of Dharma- 
raja, the Pandava King. But that is not the real strength. 


The real strength of elders lies in their wisdom 
and noble thoughts. The ideals set by these elders for 
the younger generation are most valuable. Unable to un- 
derstand their value, people ignore them as useless folk. 
Today, a lot of value is attached to the retired scientists. 
None can match their intelligence and passion for new in- 
ventions. But, their services are not made use of properly 
for the benefit of society and they are being wasted. The 
world can benefit a lot from these elderly people. There 
is immense power in these elders that can be harnessed 
for the good of society. Today, we are making effort to 
reveal the strength and great spiritual power that were 
latent in the ancient rishis. These elderly people reflect 
those great ideals. Hence, we should not neglect them. 
Every thought that emanates from these elders is noble 
and most valuable. The youth cannot have even a minute 
fraction of thoughts and ideas in comparison. Hence, we 
must nourish and nurture these valuable assets and take 
good care of them. 


Unfortunately, nowadays the younger generation 
grudges even to provide one square meal a day to their 
elders. They think it is an avoidable expenditure. Do 
not by any means let this happen. Even if you put them 
on a sustenance diet, they will maintain the dignity and 
reputation of your family as if they are well fed. The 


Elders Are A Source Of Wisdom And Strength ... 21 


concern and enthusiasm displayed by these elders in 
bringing up the children in a proper way is not found in 
others. In the ancient times, kings and nobles made use 
of the great wisdom of the rishis by seeking their advice 
regularly. Even to this day, the great treatises on spiritual 
and temporal matters compiled by the great rishis of yore 
are an authority to the younger generation. Unfortunately, 
they are not able to understand the great truths expounded 
in those treatises. It is Swami’s advice that from now 
on we must popularise this great ancient tradition of 
Bhima Ratha Santhi. It has great significance and value 
for the coming generations. The ritual of Bhima Ratha 
Santhi signifies nourishing and nurturing the quality 
of humanness by undertaking spiritually powerful and 
noble activities. 


A Unique Example Of Forbearance 


During the Mahabharata war, after the gruesome 
massacre of the young Pandava children, Arjuna tracked 
down Aswatthama, the perpetrator of the atrocity and 
dragged him before Droupadi. Instead of cursing the 
evil doer and pronouncing the punishment for him, she 
fell at the feet of Aswatthama, the son of her husbands’ 
most revered Guru and said: 


“Tt is at the feet of your father Dronacharya that 
my husbands have learnt all that they know. Being 
the son of Dronacharya, was it proper on your part 
to kill my children? How could you have the heart 


22 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


to kill them, who were unarmed, young, quietly 

asleep, were not having any grudge against you 

and were not contemplating any harm to you?” 
(Telugu poem) 


When Droupadi was praying like this, Bhima could 
not bear to see this. Exploding in anger, he roared: 


This Droupadi is a stupid woman, for she pleads for 
this wretch’s freedom. She feels no anger against 
this murderer of her sons. 


(Telugu poem) 


Meanwhile, Arjuna was seething with anger and 
was about to kill Aswatthama. Droupadi fell at his feet 
and reasoned with him thus: 


Arjuna! Will my sons be revived by killing As- 
wathama? His mother too would experience the 
same kind of sorrow that I am undergoing now at 
the loss of my sons. Having studied the Vedas and 
Sastras, how is it that you are not able to maintain 
your tranquility? 


(Telugu poem) 


Droupadi further pleaded with Arjuna to forgive 
Aswatthama for his heinous act. Arjuna replied, “You are 
preventing me from keeping up my vow.” To this, Drou- 
padi said, “Tonsuring his head and removing the crown 
jewel from his head is equivalent to killing him.” As per 


Elders Are A Source Of Wisdom And Strength ... 23 


Droupadi’s advice and as a token of punishment, Arjuna 
took the crown jewel from the head of Aswatthama and 
shaved off the hair with his sword. 


In ancient times, the rishis were not shaving off 
their hair since the hair was considered very sacred and 
powerful, spiritually. This body (pointing to Himself) is 
nearly 80 years old. Still, the hair on My head remains 
very strong and powerful to this day. I will tell you more 
about the power of the hair on My head, later. Once, 
Droupadi was alone as her husbands had gone out. She 
took out one strand of hair from her head and dropped 
it in the water, chanting some mantras. That single hair 
with the potency of the mantras could bind all the hills 
around. Later on, a number of yogis assembled together 
and enquired as to how a single hair could bind all the 
hills around. They concluded that it was the strength of 
the hair of Droupadi, and her will power that could per- 
form this stupendous task. It is difficult to comprehend 
such latent divine phenomenon. Unfortunately, today 
man is unable to realise his innate divinity. Man, who is 
heir to the humanness is forgetting the very quality of 
his humanness. He is cultivating demonic qualities. 


Develop Humanness And Rise To Divinity 
Dear students! 


You have to avoid acquiring such demonic nature 
and allow your natural humanness to blossom. Develop 


24 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


humanness and from there rise to the level of divinity. 
Always remember three things unity, purity and divin- 
ity. Unity implies the oneness of human race. When 
there is such unity in humanity, divinity manifests. 


Once, I went on a countrywide tour. During that 
tour I went to the river Sindhu along with a saintly person. 
Linguists know that some people pronounce Sindhu as 
Hindu. I stayed in Goa in the Raj Bhavan when Nakul 
Sen was the Lt. Governor of that State. His wife’s name 
was Indu. I slept in the front hall of the Raj Bhavan. 
Nakul Sen and his wife slept in their bedroom. There 
was a window in their bedroom from where they could 
see what was happening in the front hall. After I slept, 
Nakul Sen’s wife saw through the window a brilliant light 
emerging from My body. Unable to bear the effulgence 
of that brilliant light, she tried to wake up her husband. 
Nakul Sen would not like to be disturbed at that hour. He 
admonished her not to disturb him and to sleep peace- 
fully. But, she insisted that her husband should wake up 
and witness that brilliant light emanating from Swami. 
At last, Nakul Sen woke up and had the divine darshan 
of that effulgence. 


In the early years of the advent of this Avatar, a 
great devotee by name Karanam Subbamma used to serve 
Swami. Her devotion to Swami was unparalleled. In 
those days, caste differences were widely prevalent and 
observed strictly in Puttaparthi. Especially, the Brahmins 
used to keep distance from the Harijans. Since, Subbam- 


Elders Are A Source Of Wisdom And Strength ... 25 


ma was an orthodox Brahmin, she used to meticulously 
observe these practices. One day, I informed Subbamma 
that I would be visiting the Harijanwada. Subbamma 
felt very unhappy and tried to dissuade Me from going 
to that place saying, “Oh! Swami! Why should You visit 
that place?” I asked her, “Why should I not go? Why 
should I not eat the food offered by the Harijans? I will 
certainly go there.” So saying, I started for the Harijan- 
wada. However, as she was a great devotee of Swami 
and was very much attached to Him, she followed. The 
people living in the Harijanwada were very poor. They 
had no chairs or mattresses to make Me seated comfort- 
ably. They spread an old dhoti on the floor and requested 
Me to sit on that. In the meantime, I felt drowsy and 
fell asleep. Thereafter, a big sound emanated from My 
navel, as though the roof over the building was being 
blown off. The people in the house trembled in fear, on 
hearing that big sound. All of them ran helter-skelter. 
Thus, the Divine power manifests from the bodies of 
the avatars, saints and yogis in many different ways. 


Long ago, when I went to some African countries 
on tour, the devotees there presented Me with a comb 
made of iron. However, I had no necessity for it. I do not 
use a comb. If ever I put the brush on My hair, it will get 
stuck. My hair is so thick and strong. Even if one wants 
to pull out one hair, it is not possible. This is the nature 
of the hair of divine personalities. Not only Myself, 
every individual has certain divine powers which he 
should try to nurture. Today, the youth are not making 


26 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


any effort to protect the God-given power. They are 
frittering away the divine power in ever so many ways. 
They waste a lot of power daily with the result they lose 
their energy and become prematurely old. Especially, the 
head is the seat of all power. Hence, one has to carefully 
protect the head. 


Embodiments of Divine Atma! 


You are all men and women of noble qualities 
and strong in body and mind. But, unfortunately, you 
are frittering away your energies in vain pursuits. You 
become weak by wasting your energy. When I clench 
My fist not even ten persons can prise it open. Even at 
the physical level the divine power is immeasurable and 
beyond description. All of you should try to realise this 
innate divinity in you, not for the sake of the physical 
strength, but to enjoy the divine bliss. 


Embodiments of Love! 


The divine power latent in a human being has no 
limits. Whether it is fine arts like music or any other hu- 
man endeavour, when it is suffused with divine power, it 
reaches great heights. Hence, sanctify that divine power 
by dedicating all your efforts to God. 


Bhima Ratha Santhi, 10-2-2005, 
Prasanthi Nilayam 


3 


Experience The All-Pervading 
Divine Consciousness 


The Lord of Kailasa has manifested his Divine 
form with the crescent moon adorning his head, 
the cool water of the Ganga flowing between the 
matted locks, with his radiant eye in the middle of 
the forehead and the purple neck gleaming like the 
sheen of a blackberry. He wears serpent bracelets 
and a snake belt, his entire body is smeared with 
Vibhuti, his forehead is adorned with a Kumkum 
dot, his ruddy lips glow with the juice of the betel, 
diamond-studded gold earrings dangle from his 
ears and his whole swarthy body glows with divine 


effulgence. 
(Telugu poem) 


N; one seems to havemadean effortto recognise 
the meaning and significance of Sivaratri. 
In fact, the very word Sivaratri reveals its meaning. 


28 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


“Siva” means auspicious and “ratri” means night. 
Thus, Sivaratri means auspicious night. Then the ques- 
tion arises, ““Who is Siva?” The divine consciousness 
pervading all the living beings is none other than Siva. 
This Sivatwa (divine consciousness) permeates not only 
human beings, but the birds, beasts and animals as well. 
In fact, every moment in our life can be taken to be Si- 
varatri. We need not wait for Sivaratri on a particular 
day in a year. 


Siva Consciouness Is Transcendental 


Embodiments of Love! 


The Siva-consciousness is all-pervading. How 
can we limit it to a particular time and place? Sarva- 
tah panipadam tat sarvathokshi siromukham, sarvatah 
sruthimalloke sarvamavruthya tishthati (with hands, 
feet, eyes, head, mouth and ears pervading everything, 
He permeates the entire universe). 


If we carefully analyse this aspect once, it will be 
obvious that all that we witness around is Siva conscious- 
ness; nothing else. Siva does not mean a particular form 
with matted hair and tiger skin. Wherever we look and 
whichever form we come across whether a child or an 
elderly person, whether an woman or a man, in every 
form the Siva consciousness is resplendent. How can you 
describe that all-pervading Siva-consciousness or limit it 
to a particular time and place? People display a particu- 
lar dance form to portray the Siva Tandava (the Cosmic 


Experience The All-Pervading Divine Consciousness 29 


dance of Lord Siva and Parvati). But, this is only sym- 
bolic and does not portray the real Siva Tandava. How 
can one describe the transcendental Siva consciousness 
which words cannot describe or the mind cannot com- 
prehend? Lord Siva is described by some as Mukkanti 
(the Lord with three eyes). All of us have only two eyes. 
But, the Lord has a third eye as well. We are aware of 
only the past and the present. We cannot visualise the 
future. Only God can. Lord Siva, who can visualise the 
future with His third eye, i.e., Jnana Netra, is therefore 
referred to as Mukkanti. God is described by different 
people in several ways. He is described to be donning 
several forms. Nevertheless, all those descriptions fail 
to describe Him in full. Each one describes God and as- 
cribes Him a particular name and form, depending on his 
imagination. The nameless, formless God is omnipresent 
and all-pervading. He is avanmanasagochara (neither 
words can describe nor the mind can comprehend Him) 
and aprameya (immeasurable). Who can describe such 
divinity? There is only one sign for divinity, that is, con- 
sciousness. In whichever form this divine consciousness 
permeates, it will assume that form it may be the form of 
a dog, a crow, a crane or a human being. Easwarattwa, 
therefore, can be described as Divine Consciousness. 
This divine consciousness is permeating all the human 
beings, nay, even the insects, birds and beasts and ani- 
mals. One of the names given to this divine conscious- 
ness is Sivatwa (Siva Consciousness). It is not therefore 
correct to describe Sivatwa by such appellations like 


30 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


Mukkanti, Trinetra, etc. Sivatwa means the all-pervading 
divine consciousness. In fact, all the devotees sitting 
in this hall are embodiments of Lord Siva. Sarvam Si- 
vamayam (all that you witness in this objective world 
is a manifestation of Siva). It is pervading all the three 
worlds, the earth, the space and the netherworld. It exists 
in all the three periods of time, the past, present and fu- 
ture. It is indescribable. Any length of time is insufficient 
to describe the Sivatwa. Several people are worshipping 
such an omnipresent and all-pervading divine names and 
consciousness by describing it through different names 
and forms. Just as the all-embracing divine love does 
not make a distinction between living beings, so also the 
divine consciousness does not differentiate. It is only we 
who make distinction between people as my father, my 
mother, my brother, my sister, etc., based on our earthly 
relationships with them. In fact, every living being is an 
embodiment of Divinity. God assumes all names and 
forms. You are God. Once Parvati, the consort of Lord 
Siva enquired of Him, “How can people recognise the 
divine consciousness which is said to be all-pervasive?” 
Easwara replied that the same consciousness that is im- 
manent in Him is permeating all the living beings. He 
also explained that it was permeating every cell even of 
her body. One cannot explain; one has only to experience 
it. Once Parvati could not find her own son Vinayaka 
though he was very much near Lord Easwara. She was 
searching for Vinayaka everywhere, except in the divine 
proximity of Lord Easwara. How strange! Similarly, 


Experience The All-Pervading Divine Consciousness 31 


man today is searching for God everywhere, not know- 
ing that he himself is an embodiment of divine atma. 


God Is Attributeless, Realise His Oneness 


Lord Easwara never tended His hair. He left them 
in their natural position as matted locks. His matted locks, 
His third eye, His ash-smeared body all were left in their 
natural position and colour. But, they appeared differ- 
ently to different people. Who can describe the colour 
and effulgence of Lord Siva’s body? Once, there arose 
a controversy between Lakshmi and Parvati about the 
physical appearance of Lord Easwara and Lord Vishnu. 
Lakshmi, in the course of arguments enquired, “Parvati! 
How did you court this strange person who does not keep 
His body neat and who smears the ash from the crema- 
tion ground all over his body?” Parvati was offended. 
She retorted, “Amma! Your husband Vishnu reclines 
on the serpent, Sesha. He is blue in colour. Why don’t 
you mend His ways and try to change the colour of His 
body?” When they were arguing thus, Saraswati entered 
the scene. She tried to counsel them saying, “There may 
be some differences in their physical appearance. So far 
as I am concerned, I do not find any difference between 
them. The same divine consciousness permeates both 
these forms. I am able to realise it. Since you are not 
able to realise it, you are entering into argumentation. 
Hence, forget all the outward differences.” This type of 
transcendental nature is immanent only in Saraswati. All 
such differences in physical appearance are only in the 


32 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


minds of human beings, but God is attributeless. It is the 
devotees who ascribe different names and forms and at- 
tributes to God. Based on their imagination, they picturise 
God in different forms like the great artist Ravi Varma. As 
you think, so shall be the form of God. People describe 
the form of God as Rudra and Santhiswarupa. But, God 
is always Santhiswarupa (embodiment of peace) only. 
He is always pleasant and smiling. To imagine such an 
embodiment of peace in a different form is only the mak- 
ing of the devotee. If at all there are any such illusions, 
one has to get rid of them. One has to realise divinity by 
cultivating love for God. It is only love that can bind God. 
Through such divine love, the oneness of God has to be 
realised. If the attributeless God has to be described, the 
description would be Ekam, Nitvam, Vimalam, Achalam, 
Sarvadhee Sakshibhutam Bhavateetam Trigunarahitam 
(One without a second, eternal, pure, unchanging, witness 
to all functions of the intellect, beyond one’s imagina- 
tion, beyond the three gunas (satwa, rajas and tamas). 
We are attributing differences to such an attributeless 
God and feel very happy. This is not correct. The oneness 
of God has to be realised. There shall be no confusion 
in this regard, though poets and artists like Ravi Varma 
portrayed God in different forms, giving expression to 
their imaginative skills. Whatever be the different forms 
of portrayal by poets and artists, God is only one. For 
example, Lord Vinayaka appears as only one, wherever 
you see. He has no attributes, whatsoever. One who 
has no gunas (attributes) is Ganapati. He has no leader 


Experience The All-Pervading Divine Consciousness 33 


above Him. That is why He is called Vinayaka. If you 
thus analyse, each name ascribed to God would reveal 
one meaning. Since He has no leader above Him, even 
Brahma, Vishnu and Maheswara worship Him. 


Embodiments of Love! 


People today are promoting differences among 
human beings by attributing different names and 
forms to the nameless, formless and attributeless God. 
This is a serious mistake. Divinity is being divided by 
devotees. The oneness of God is not realised, with the 
result, futile arguments and counter arguments ensue. 
Whether it is Rama, Krishna, Easwara or Vishnu, all 
these are only different names ascribed by devotees to 
God. But, God is only one. These names are ascribed to 
God only for our own satisfaction. Divinity, however, 
has no difference at all! The best sadhana would be to 
realise unity in divinity and worship God as such. You 
may, however, worship God in the form you like. There 
can be no objection to it. But, the underlying unity 
between the different names and forms should never 
be forgotten. It is a misconception to think that Lord 
Rama may be angry if you worship Lord Krishna and 
vice versa. Such differences may be felt by the devo- 
tees, but they are not in Lord Rama and Lord Krishna. 

God does not entertain such negative feelings. 
It is only the human beings who have differences and 
negative feelings. In fact, there is no possibility at all 
for negative feelings to enter divinity. He is all positive 


34 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


only. 
Dear Students! 


Do not ascribe any difference or negative feelings 
to God. You may worship God with whatever name and 
form you like. If by any chance you find any difference 
in divinity, it is the mistake of your negative feelings, 
not that of God. Hence, worship God with single-minded 
devotion. 


Sivaratri morning, 8-3-2005, Prasanthi Nilayam 


4 


You Are All Amrutaputras 
Sons Of Immortality 


In this supremely holy land of Bharat 

Tolerance is the towering quality of our character; 

Of all the religious vows, the foremost is Adherence 
to Truth, which is difficult to practise; 

The sweetest and most respectable feeling in this land 
of Bharat is the feeling towards mother; 

Consigning to flames the moral fabric of our country, 
which ordains self-respect as greater than one’s 
own life, 

The dagger of unrestrained freedom has been given 

to people imitating the Western way of life; Alas! 

What can I say about the rulers of this land of 
Bharat? 


Just as an elephant cannot realise its own strength 
So are the Bharatiyas today. 


36 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


Embodiments of Love! 


N? one has been able to realise uniqueness, 
greatness and sanctity of this holy land of 
Bharat so far. The culture of Bharat is nobler and holier 
than all other cultures in the world. This unique culture 
is pervading from the microcosm to the macrocosm 
equally. Unfortunately, nowadays, the Bharatiyas have 
forgotten this great culture and are practising the alien 
culture. The great human values of Sathya (Truth) and 
Dharma (Righteousness) have declined in this holy land 
of Bharat. However, fortunately, none has been able to 
root out these great human values so far. There is noth- 
ing more sacred than Truth and Righteousness. They 
are like the two eyes to a human being. Unfortunately, 
today, people are losing the vision in these two eyes and 
thereby becoming blind. 


Foster The Human Values At All Cost 


Though the students of the present times are pursu- 
ing higher education and acquiring degrees, they are los- 
ing sight of these great human values. Instead of fostering 
such a sacred and noble culture and leading their lives 
in accordance with the principles laid down in this great 
culture, people are wasting their time in vain pursuits. It 
is only the practice of these great human values of Sathya 
(Truth), Dharma (Righteousness), Santhi (Peace) and 
Prema (Love) that had made the country of Bharat the 
great spiritual leader of the entire world. It is only when 
we foster these great human values, we are entitled to be 


You Are All Amrutaputras — Sons Of Immortality a7 


called Bharatiyas in the real sense. Losing sight of even 
one of these values will not entitle us to the great name 
of Bharatiyas. The real tyaga (sacrifice) is leading a life 
of constant practice of these human values in our day- 
to-day lives. Our life must be a continuous journey from 
Sathya (Truth) to Prema (Love) in the order of Sathya, 
Dharma, Santhi and Prema. These values must enter the 
core of our heart and flow in every cell of our body. 


The whole creation is from Truth, 

In Truth all creation merges. 

Is there a place in this universe where the grandeur 
of Truth is not felt? 

The entire universe is a manifestation of 

Pure consciousness; know this reality. 


(Telugu poem) 


From the time a human being is born from his 
mother’s womb, it is Truth and Righteousness that are 
sustaining and fostering him. The women of Bharat have 
undergone many ordeals in sustaining these great val- 
ues amidst their household duties and domestic chores. 
Yet, they have continuously taught these values to their 
children. Swami knows too well how much suffering the 
parents of these children undergo in bringing them up. 
What the students of the present times are expected to 
acquire is not education and high degrees, but the essence 
of Truth and Righteousness. One has to understand the 
real meaning of Sathya and Dharma. The word “Sathya” 


38 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


consists of three letters “Sa”, “Tha” and “Ya’’. The let- 
ter “Sa” signifies the satwic quality, “Tha”, the quality 
of tyaga (sacrifice) and “Ya” the qualities of yama and 
niyama (inner and outer sense control). Hence, the word 
“Sathya” means fostering the satwic quality with a spirit 
of sacrifice and by observing sense control. Unfortunate- 
ly, today, we are losing sight of such great human values 
which formed the core of Bharatiya culture. Man today 
does not know what Sathya and Dharma are. Dharma 1s 
taken to be duty. This interpretation is not correct. This 
is only an English translation, rather inadequately ex- 
pressed! The real interpretation of Dharma is Dharayati 
iti Dharma (that which sustains is Dharma). It sustains 
the human life. Sathya (Truth) emerges from the hridaya 
nabhi (heart region) of a human being. Thus, when a man 
leads a life of Sathya and Dharma, he becomes sacred. 
The Pandavas and Droupadi led such a noble life by fol- 
lowing Sathya and Dharma. All your present difficulties 
and humiliations are due to non adherence to Dharma. 


One Can Achieve Anything With God’s Grace 


One should obey the divine command with total 
faith and without any disputation for or against. Mar- 
kandeya was born out of a boon granted by Easwara 
to his parents. Easwara asked his parents whether they 
wanted a virtuous son with a short life-span or a son not 
so virtuous but who would live long. The parents opted 
for a virtuous son. Accordingly, Markandeya was born. 


You Are All Amrutaputras — Sons Of Immortality a9 


He was one of good thought, good behaviour and good 
conduct. Easwara informed his parents that he would 
live only for sixteen years. Nevertheless, the parents 
were joyous as they had been blessed with a virtuous 
son. Years rolled by and Markandeya entered his six- 
teenth year. Remembering the words of Easwara, his 
parents became grief-stricken. His mother would often 
shed tears thinking of the impending death of her son. 
Markandeya could not understand the cause of her grief 
and wondered why she was shedding tears. One day, he 
found his parents steeped in sorrow. On enquiry, they 
revealed that his death was very near as willed by the di- 
vine and that was the cause of their sorrow. Markandeya 
felt sorry that Easwara’s will was not revealed to him till 
then because of which he had wasted the precious time 
allotted to him. He did not want to waste any more time. 
He had an early bath, went to the temple of Easwara and 
started chanting the sacred Siva Panchakshari mantra, 
Namah Sivaya, with all sincerity and devotion. He lost 
himself in the contemplation of Easwara. He did not 
expect any reward for his prayers. He considered it as 
his primary duty to contemplate on God. The following 
day was supposed to be the last day of his earthly so- 
journ. Hence he remained in the temple. As he had not 
returned home, his parents went to the temple and sat at 
the entrance. They were shedding tears thinking of the 
impending end of Markandeya’s life. As ordained by 
the Lord, Markandeya left his mortal coil the moment 
he completed his sixteenth year. His parents were in 


40 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


deep sorrow. As Markandeya left his mortal body in the 
external world, his jiva (soul) reached Lord Siva in the 
divine world. The Lord was immensely pleased with the 
sincere devotion of Markandeya. He said, “Markandeya! 
Today marks the completion of your sixteenth year. You 
have come to Me in a happy frame of mind. You have 
bowed down to My Will with implicit faith and obedi- 
ence. Iam pleased with your devotion.” As Easwara was 
speaking to Markandeya in this manner, Mother Parvati 
intervened and said, “Oh Lord! Why don’t You send 
him back to his parents as he has obeyed Your command 
implicitly.” Easwara wanted Parvati also to accompany 
Him. Together they restored life into the body of Mar- 
kandeya. The parents’ joy knew no bounds when they 
noticed some movement in Markandeya’s body. He got 
up and said, “My dear mother and father, Lord Easwara 
and Mother Parvati have brought me back to life.” 


It is only God, who can save the life of a human 
being. Some doctors claim that they can give good 
medicines or perform surgery to save the life of a person. 
They make several such promises, but they fail. Except 
God, none else can save or prolong the life of a person. 
He only can interfere in the law of Karma. With God’s 
grace, one can achieve anything in this world. Dear 
students! You must strive to earn the grace of God right 
from your childhood. When you pray for His grace and 
strive for the same, you will be protected by God. 


Embodiments of Love! 


You Are All Amrutaputras — Sons Of Immortality 4] 


Today is the holy day of Sivaratri. Siva means 
auspiciousness. Where there is Siva (auspiciousness) 
there cannot be sava (inauspiciousness). This holy day 
of Sivaratri must be spent in the constant contemplation 
of God chanting the holy name of Siva right from early 
in the morning till you go to bed. The Lord’s name must 
dance on your tongue. Divinity is eternal. It cannot be 
achieved so easily. Nobody has been able to explain Di- 
vinity so far, though some vague definitions like eternal, 
changeless, etc., have been given. The proper definition 
of Divinity would be Ekam, Nityam, Vimalam, Achalam, 
Sarvadhee Sakshibhutam Bhavateetam Trigunarahitam 
(One without a second, eternal, pure, unchanging, wit- 
ness to all functions of the intellect, beyond one’s imagi- 
nation, beyond the three gunas (satwa, rajas and thamas). 


You Are Children Of Immortality 


One of the names attributed to Lord Siva is Mri- 
tyunjaya, which means one who has transcended death. 
This is from the worldly point of view. But if one wants 
to understand the true and eternal nature of Divinity, one 
has to understand the relationship between Lord Siva 
and Mother Parvati. Once there was a slight difference 
of opinion between them about giving an appropriate 
name to their child. Parvati wanted to name the child by 
a particular name from among the several names Lord 
Siva had. Lord Siva, however, chose to name the child 
as “Amrutaputra” (son of immortality). In fact, every 
human being is an amrutaputra. Even the Upanishads 


42 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


declare him so. The Upanishads reveal the true identity of 
a human being by addressing as Srunvantu viswe amru- 
tasya putrah (Oh the children of immortality! Listen). 


Dear Devotees and Students! 


You are also amrutaputras, not anrutaputras (sons 
of immortality, not falsehood). One who is an amrutapu- 
tra is not affected by change and death. You verily are the 
embodiments of the changeless, eternal principle. Once 
Mother Parvati was putting child Ganapati to sleep by 
rocking the cradle and singing a lullaby, “Oh Amrutapu- 
tra! Sleep my dear! Sleep. If you are awake, the whole 
world will be awake.” Lakshmidevi, the consort of Lord 
Vishnu came there and witnessed the scene. She felt 
that it was rather a strange lullaby. She enquired about 
the name of the child and Parvati told her that His name 
was Amrutaputra. Lakshmidevi further enquired from 
where did she get that name. Parvati replied that it was 
Lord Siva who gave that name to the child. One who 
had descended from Easwaratwa was Easwara Himself. 


Embodiments of Love! 


You are not reading the sacred texts of yore. Unless 
you read those texts also, you will not be able to under- 
stand what is being related to you. Dear Students! You 
are all amrutaputras. People would naturally expect that 
you should live up to that great appellation. In fact, the 
names given to children by elders in our country have 
a lot of significance and meaning. They are not given 


You Are All Amrutaputras — Sons Of Immortality 43 


just casually or for fun. In order to understand the un- 
derlying meaning and sanctity of these names, we must 
read the sacred texts like Puranas. Unable to realise the 
eternal reality of the values of Sathya and Dharma, we 
are taking to wrong ways. We are simply repeating the 
words Sathya, Dharma, Santhi and Prema like a par- 
rot. But, we are not making any effort to understand 
the true import and significance of these great human 
values. All of you are amrutaputras, not anrutaputras. 


Dear students! 


Try to understand the true nature and significance 
of the names. It is a fact that nobody has ever seen Lord 
Easwara in person. People call Him “Kailasavasi”’ (the 
Lord who resides in Kailasa). Where is Kailasa? It is only 
when you contemplate on Him in the depth of silence that 
you can visualise Lord Easwara in Kailasa. Therefore, 
one has to practise “mouna” (silence). And that silence 
implies total stillness of thought and word. 


Embodiments of Love! 


You are all amrutaputras. Hence, constantly 
remain under that awareness. Proclaim yourself to be 
amrutaputras. Whatever name has been already given 
to you, prefix that name with “amrutaputra’. If you 
consider yourself as anrutaputra, it is a great mistake 
and a misnomer. Hence, realise your true nature and call 
yourself amrutaputra. 


(Sivaratri evening, 8-3-2005, Prasanthi Nilayam) 


44 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


You should come with empty hands, without even 
the traditional offerings of pathram, pushpam, 
phalam and thoyam (leaf, flower, fruit and water). 
Come with clean hands that proclaim that they 
have renounced attachment to riches, then, I fill 
them with grace. I must say that I accept certain 
things, before giving you that grace; I demand 
and take sathya, dharma, santhi and prema. I seek 
the gifts of truth, virtue, peace and love. I draw 
you to me and then reform and reshape you. Iam 
a kind of smith who repairs broken, leaky, dam- 
aged hardware. I repair broken hearts and fragile 
minds, warped intellects, feeble resolutions and 
fading faith. 


Baba 





> 
All Are Bound By The Law Of Karma 


Everyone has to face the consequences of one’s own 
karma. Who has made the bats to hang from the 
branches of a tree with their heads downwards? It 
is their fate. Likewise, nobody can escape from the 
consequences of karma. 


(Telugu poem) 


RY human being, insect, bird, beast or animal, 
nay, every living being in this world is bound 
by destiny. None can escape from the consequences of 
karmas, good or bad. It is natural for every living being 
to obey the laws of Nature and the law of karma. For 
example, the bats hang from the branch of a tree head 
downwards. That is their nature. That is how they are 
born to live. Every human being in this world thinks that 
he is undergoing suffering, even though he had not done 
anything bad. He feels, “I have not done anything wrong! 
Why then am I undergoing this suffering?” But, the fact is 


46 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


otherwise. Whatever pleasure or pain undergone by a liv- 
ing being is certainly the outcome of the karma (action) 
performed by it. Every human being performs karma and 
enjoys its fruit as a consequence. Nevertheless, it is not 
clear to him till today whether it is a natural consequence 
of his actions or by any unknown reason. Not only the 
human being, even bacteria, birds, insects, beasts and ani- 
mals are experiencing the consequences of their karma. 


I Always Keep My Promise 


In support of this inevitable law of karma, I would 
like to narrate certain incidents that happened long ago. 
These incidents explain how certain births took place, 
just to demonstrate this truth. There used to be a great 
devotee by name Subbamma in Puttaparthi. She was very 
rich. She had no children. Whatever she had, she used to 
give in charity to one and all with a feeling, “I am only 
sharing my God-given wealth with my fellow human be- 
ings.” She was leading a pious and noble life with a sense 
of equanimity. She had, however, one desire. She used 
to pray, “Swami! At the time of my departure from this 
earthly sojourn, You should quench my thirst by pouring 
a few drops of water into my mouth with Your Divine 
hands.” I promised her that I would do so. Six years after 
I gave that promise to her, I had to go to Chennai once to 
fulfil an engagement in a devotee’s house. That was the 
time of Second World War. Once in every hour, there used 
to be an air raid precaution siren and the streets would 
become empty in no time. I stayed there for three days 


All Are Bound By The Law Of Karma 47 


and started My return journey straight to Bukkapatnam 
from Chennai in a car. Meanwhile, Subbamma fell seri- 
ously ill and was taken to Bukkapatnam from Puttaparthi. 
That was her parental home. There she died. Her relatives 
started making certain sarcastic remarks, “Sai Baba gave 
word to her that He would pour water into her mouth at 
the time of her last moments. Did He come? Where has 
He gone?” Subbamma’s brothers and relatives made all 
arrangements for taking her body for cremation. In those 
days, it was not easy to procure firewood to cremate a 
dead body, especially in the villages. However, they pro- 
cured some firewood and kept everything ready. While 
passing by the house of Subbamma, I noticed several 
people gathered there. I enquired, “Who is going to be 
cremated?” Washerman Subbanna was there. He replied, 
“Swami! Subbamma is dead.” I enquired again, “Is it? 
When did she die?” “Three days ago, Swam1’, he replied. 
I went into her house where her body was kept. Her rela- 
tives were about to take her body out for cremation. Her 
sister saw Me and started wailing. She told Me, “Baba! 
She longed for Your arrival. She yearned that You should 
pour water into her mouth before she breathed her last. 
At last, she died without her wish fulfilled.” I told her 
that there was no possibility of such an eventuality and 
asked her to fetch some water in a tumbler. I put a basil 
leaf in the water. I removed the cloth that covered her 
face. Ants were crawling all over her body. I gently called 
her name, “Subbamma!” She opened her eyes and saw 
Me. She held My hands and wept. She enquired, “When 


48 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


did You come Swami?” I replied, “I came just now.” I 
wiped her tears gently with a towel. I told her, “Sub- 
bamma! Look here.” I then poured a few drops of the 
sacred water into her mouth and said, “Now, close your 
eyes peacefully”. Subbamma drank that water from My 
hands and breathed her last. Thus, I kept My promise to 
Subbamma. While this strange phenomenon was going 
on, all her relatives and the doctors who attended on her 
were watching the happenings with awe. They could not 
believe their eyes. They were wondering, “How come! 
Subbamma died three days ago. There was no breath in 
her body. How is it that she opened her eyes now and 
spoke to Swami? Perhaps it is a divine miracle of Sai 
Baba.” Subbamma was constantly worried during her 
lifetime that Swami was always on the move visiting 
several places and perhaps her last wish might not be 
fulfilled. But, I kept My promise made to her long ago. 
At last, the dead body of Subbamma was cremated by her 
relatives as per their family custom. She was a Brahmin 
lady. I started returning to Puttaparthi. A bullock cart 
was kept ready for My return. Myself and the brother of 
Griham Ammayi (Easwaramma) sat in the bullock cart 
and were returning to Puttaparthi. His name was Chan- 
dramouli (Swami’s physical body’s maternal uncle). We 
saw smoke emanating from the cremation ground where 
Subbamma’s mortal remains were being consigned to 
flames. Chandramouli enquired, “Swami! You were with 
Subbamma’s dead body till now. Why did You not wait 
till the cremation was over?” I told him, ““Chandramouli! 


All Are Bound By The Law Of Karma 49 


I am not a person who goes back on his word. I gave a 
word to Subbamma that I would be present by her side 
during her last moments and pour water into her mouth. 
That I fulfilled. I advised her to depart from this world 
peacefully. I kept My promise and I am now returning 
to My abode.” 


A Very Dedicated Devotee 


Chandramouli felt very happy. In fact, Subbamma 
was held in high esteem by the entire village. She was 
the head of the village, being the wife of the Karanam. 
The entire property of the village was in her name. 
However, since she came into the fold of Swami, she 
had no other interest in life, except Swami. Right from 
early morning till she went to bed, she was constantly 
engaged in Swami’s work only. On certain occasions I 
used to retire into the caves of the nearby hills without 
informing her. Poor lady! she used to go round the hills 
in search of Me. She used to pack upma, dosa, vada, 
idli, etc., in a tiffin carrier and come in search of Me. At 
last, when she could find Me, I used to enquire teasingly, 
“Subbamma! What did you bring for Me?” She used to 
reply, “Swami! I brought the items of Your taste.” Then 
I used to tell her, “Give Me dosa.” She then served dosa 
in a plate and handed it over to Me. I used to tease her 
further saying, “Subbamma! I don’t like this dosa. Give 
Me idli, upma, vada, etc.” 


Poor lady! She used to serve Me all those items. 


50 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


From morning till evening, she used to prepare a number 
of items and wait for Me. Yet, she was anxious to know 
what more did I need. Once I told her “Subbamma! 
You need not fear. I don’t need anything. I have put so 
many questions to you asking for this and that to make 
your devotion and surrender known to the world.” Sub- 
bamma then requested Me, “Swami! I am happy that I 
have been able to serve You food. I am also happy that 
You ate these items with love and affection towards me. 
I will be happy if You can kindly put a small quantity of 
this stuff in my mouth with Your Divine hands.” Then, I 
took a small piece of idli from the plate and put it in her 
mouth with a little chutney. She felt extremely happy. 
Thus, Subbamma experienced great bliss in the divine 
proximity of Swami till her last breath. Chandramouli, 
who was a witness to My showering love and grace on 
Subbamma on a number of occasions, observed, “Swami! 
How compassionate You are towards the devotees! We 
don’t have words to express Your love and compassion 
towards devotees, especially Subbamma.” True! Words 
fail to describe Swami’s love and compassion towards 
Subbamma. The devotion of Subbamma toward Swami 
surpassed even that of Prahlada. 


The Devoted And Deserving Grandsire 


People had by now realised that Swami had 
fulfilled the promise given by Him to Subbamma. They 
felt that Subbamma’s life was sanctified. Taking cue from 
her example, several elderly people used to visit Me with 


All Are Bound By The Law Of Karma al 


the request, “Swami! Please give a word that You will 
pour sanctified water into my mouth with Your Divine 
hands at the time of my departure from this world.” I 
used to tell them, “My dear ones! All people cannot get 
this great boon. If you are destined to get it, you will 
certainly get it. I will come at the appropriate time and 
pour sanctified water into your mouth.” Kondama Raju 
used to observe these people coming to Swami with 
such requests. He also developed a yearning for this 
prapti (deservedness). One day, he approached Me and 
requested Me, “Swami! You are born in our family, in 
our lineage. You have upheld the honour and glory of our 
lineage. But, I also have a request to make to you. I wish 
and pray that my birth in our family should be sanctified. 
I therefore request you to please pour some holy water 
into my mouth with Your Divine hands during my last 
moments of life.” I assured him that I would certainly 
fulfil his request. He felt very happy, for, he knew that 
once Swami had given His word, He would certainly 
stick to it. He lived for 112 years. Every morning, he 
would walk from the village to the New Mandir to have 
My darshan. 


One day I asked him, “Why do you walk all the 
way from the village to the Mandir and back. There 
may be cattle on the way and if they attack you, you 
will fall down and get injured. Won’t you?” He used to 
tell Me very boldly, “Swami! When You are protecting 
me and constantly standing by my side, which animal 


2 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


could attack me?” One day, early in the morning he came 
to the Mandir and had My darshan. He returned home 
and lay down. After a while, he told Easwaramma to go 
near Sathyabhama Temple and see whether Swami was 
coming that side. She went there, returned and told him, 
“Yes, Swami is coming in His car.” Swami had a small car 
then. Kondama Raju said, “Easwaramma! Get a tumbler 
of water and put a tulasi leaf in it.” She did accordingly. 
He held the tumbler in his hand and was waiting for Me. 
He knew that his end was near and that I had come there 
to keep My promise. None else knew this. Holding the 
tumbler, he said, “Swami! I am ready.” I replied, “I am 
also ready.” As I poured the water into his mouth, he 
passed away peacefully. Before passing away, he said, 
“What a great fortune it is to drink water from Your Di- 
vine hands before departing from this world! Even King 
Dasaratha who performed great penance and sacrifice, 
did not have such a fortune. My life is redeemed.” Saying 
thus, he closed his eyes. With this incident of Kondama 
Raju, it was once again revealed to the whole world that 
Swami would certainly keep His word, come what may! 
The lives of Subbamama and Kondama Raju were thus 
redeemed. I manifest My Divine /ee/as in many ways to 
fulfil My word. I go to any extent to fulfil My promise. 
However, some devotees act contrary to their words. 


The Hard Days Of Schooling 
I was taken to Kamalapuram for higher education. 
The elder brother of this body, Seshama Raju was very 


All Are Bound By The Law Of Karma a 


intent on My pursuing higher education. Therefore, he 
took Me along with him to Kamalapuram and admitted 
Me in the school. In those days, I was struggling very 
much to prosecute my education due to paucity of funds. 
Often times I had to manage with empty pockets. Hence, 
I used to make use of My poetic skills to earn a few coins 
to meet My personal needs. In the same village, there 
used to be a businessman by name Kotte Subbanna. He 
used to run a provision shop in which some Ayurvedic 
medicines were also sold. Once a new Ayurvedic medi- 
cine by name “Bala Bhaskara” was introduced for sale 
in his shop. It was a new and very efficacious medi- 
cine. It could fetch him a good profit if popularised. He 
therefore, requested Me to shoulder the responsibility 
of making propaganda for his new medicine. I agreed 
to his request, but asked for some more information 
about the medicine. Then, I composed a song about the 
efficacy of the medicine and gathered a few children 
of My age to go round the nearby villages with plac- 
ards in their hands and sing the song composed by Me. 
The song ran thus: 


There it is! There it is! Oh, children! come, 
come! 

There is the medicine Bala Bhaskara; 

Be it an upset stomach or a swollen leg; 

Be it a joint pain or flatulence; 

Be it any ailment, known or unknown; 

Take this Bala Bhaskara for an instant cure! 

If you wish to know where it is available: There 


54 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


is the shop of Kotte Subbanna; 

It is in that shop that you can pick it up. 

Come here boys! come here! 

It is an excellent tonic 

Prepared by the famous physician Gopalacharya 
himself, 

Come here boys! come here! 


(Telugu song) 


By the time we completed our propaganda tour 
of the nearby villages, all the stock of medicines in 
Subbanna’s shop was sold out. He felt very happy. 
Then he called Me and offered a pair of knickers and a 
shirt stitched for Me. But, I flatly refused them saying, 
“Subbanna! I did not compose that song for the sake 
of new clothes. I don’t need them. I won’t touch them. 
Please take them back. If you thus offer some money or 
articles in return for My services, I will not even step 
into your shop.” He realised My sincerity and strong 
feelings. From then onwards, he used to say, “Raju! I 
don’t want anything in this world, except Your love.” 


Another incident had happened while I was study- 
ing in Kamalapuram. I attended a scout camp in a nearby 
village called Pushpagiri where a big fair was being held. 
I was away from the house for a few days and there was 
nobody to fetch water from a distant well for household 
purposes. Hence, the wife of Seshama Raju had to shoul- 
der that responsibility. By the time I returned from the 
scout camp, Seshama Raju was angry that there was no- 


All Are Bound By The Law Of Karma ne 


body in the house to help his wife. He was then drawing 
lines in a notebook with the help of a wooden ruler. As 
soon as he saw Me, he shouted at Me, “Hey! Come here. 
There was no one in the house to fetch water for the last 
few days. Your sister-in-law had to attend to that job also, 
besides her normal domestic chores.” So saying, he took 
the ruler and beat Me angrily. The ruler broke into three 
pieces. My hand was swollen and it was giving Me a lot 
of pain. I did not give a reply nor revealed the incident to 
anybody. I tied a bandage Myself to My hand with a wet 
cloth. The next day, Seshama Raju’s son died. He gave 
a telegram to Pedda Venkama Raju (Swami’s father). 
Venkama Raju immediately rushed to see Seshama Raju. 
He started from Puttaparthi and reached Bukkapatnam 
and from there to Kamalapuram. The Griham Abbayi 
(Swami’s father) enquired from Me why I was having 
a bandage on My forearm. I tried to explain away very 
casually as if nothing had happened. I told him there was 
a slight pain due to a blister on the forearm and therefore 
I put a bandage on it. There was a lady belonging to the 
Vysya community in the neighbouring house, who used 
to make her living by preparing dosas and selling them. 
She tried to reason with Griham Abbayi saying, “What! 
Venkama Raju! I know you are sufficiently well-off so as 
to get Raju educated at your place. Why should you put 
Him to so much trouble by keeping Him under the care 
of His elder brother at such a distant place? You do not 
know how much suffering the poor boy is undergoing 
here. He has to fetch drinking water from a distant place 


56 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


carrying two big pitchers with the help of a Kavadi on 
his young shoulders daily.” Thus, she narrated several 
incidents where I had to undergo physical strain and 
suffering. Griham Abbayi was deeply moved on hearing 
My plight and immediately called Me and said, “My dear 
son! You start immediately and come along with me. Let 
us go back to Puttaparthi.” All the family members loved 
Me. He therefore lamented, “I have come to know that 
the injury to your forearm was due to your elder brother’s 
beating. I myself never beat You till date. You are under- 
going so much suffering here. Come! Let us go back to 
Puttaparthi.” At the time when this incident happened, 
Griham Abbayi made a comment which still rings in 
My ears even today: “Sathyam! If one is alive, one can 
make a living even by selling salt. I can no longer put 
You to such an ordeal. Can I not provide for Your living 
even with my meagre income?” So saying he shed tears. 
From then onwards, He did not send Me with anyone. My 
formal education stopped with the high school. I did not 
attend any college. Nevertheless, I have been continuing 
My Mission as a Sathya Bodhaka (Teacher of Truth), 
making Puttaparthi My headquarters. 


I composed a beautiful poem depicting the glorious 
history of Puttaparthi, which reads as follows: 


Encircling which town the sacred river 

Chitravathi flows in all its pristine beauty; 

Around which town there are beautiful Mango 
groves symbolising auspiciousness; 


All Are Bound By The Law Of Karma of 


Standing guard on the four sides of which town 
are the deities of Parvati and Parameswara 
constantly protecting; 

Firmly installed in the midst of which town is the 
effulgent Lord Vishnu in all His splendour; 

That world famous town is Puttapuram or 
Puttaparthi 

With its fresh water tank built by Chikkavadiyar 

Standing as an everlasting monument to the glory 
of Bukkaraya. 


(Telugu poem) 


I built a residential colony in commemoration 
of the great love and devotion Subbamma had towards 
Me and named it as Karanam Subbamma Nagar, which 
is next to Gokulam. I also purchased some cows and 
engaged some people to look after them. Some of these 
people were accommodated in a few of those houses in 
Karanam Subbamma Nagar. Thus, I made efforts to see 
that the name of Subbamma is remembered for ever by 
devotees. 


A few years ago, I started a project by name 
““Deenajanoddharana Pathakam’” to adopt some orphans 
to provide food, clothing and education to them so that 
when they grow up they will be able to lead a life with 
honour and dignity. I am looking after these boys with 
all love and care. You must have seen these boys when 
they come for darshan every Thursday and Sunday. I 
also built living accommodation for these boys so that 


58 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


they may stay comfortably in those houses. Besides their 
normal education, they are now acquiring proficiency in 
extra-curricular activities also. Thus, there are so many 
service activities that I have undertaken right from My 
childhood. If they are all to be narrated now, it can go 
on for hours together. 


Dear Students! 


I have great love for you. I wish that all of you 
should come up well and earn a good name. I love such 
boys who earn good name. In fact, I give Myself to such 
boys. I will give you whatever you want. 


Divine Discourse 9-3-2005, Prasanthi Nilayam 


Animal trainers of the Circus can train a tiger to 
perform various tricks, but they cannot change 
its nature. They cannot make it live on grass and 
completely deprive it of meat. But man is differ- 
ent. His nature can be changed by means of his 


own disciplined effort. He can control, by his will, 
the evil thoughts and ideas that arise in his mind. 
This is why birth as a human being is considered 
a rare gift. 


Baba 





6 


Humility Is The Hallmark Of 
Education 


The creation emerges from truth and merges into truth. 
Is there a place in the cosmos where truth is not? 


Visualise this pure and unsullied truth. 


(Telegu poem) 
Embodiments of Love! Students! 


Y° have joined this institution to pursue your 
education. First, make efforts to understand 
the true meaning of education. Humility and character 
are the mark of education. But today students do not 
develop humility. They are interested only in acquiring 
degrees. But our educational institution is an exception in 
this regard. Few students come here with the sole objec- 
tive of acquiring degrees. Most of them come here with 
the single aim of pleasing Swami by striving to follow 
Swami’s ideals and attain exalted position in life. They 
give happiness to their parents by their good conduct. 


60 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


Understand The Meaning Of True Education 


Students! 


Education does not mean mere acquisition of de- 
grees. 


Oh man! Examine and enquire for yourself what 
great happiness you have achieved by spending all 
the time from dawn to dusk in acquiring knowledge 
and earning wealth unmindful of God. 


(Telugu poem) 


One may acquire a high academic qualification such 
as M.A. and B.A. and attain exalted position, 
One may amass wealth, perform acts of charity and 
attain name and fame, 

One may have physical strength and enjoy a long 
and healthy life, 

One may be a great scholar studying and preaching 
the Vedas, 

But none can equal a true devotee of the Lord. 


(Telugu poem) 


Having entered the portals of this educational in- 
stitution, you should try to understand the value and true 
meaning of education. Only when you understand these 
aspects, can you be called truly educated. There 1s a lot of 
knowledge in pustakas (books), but what is the use if the 
mastaka (head) is filled with ‘mud’? Once you fill your 
mastaka with knowledge, you need not refer to pustakas 


Humility Is The Hallmark Of Education 61 


any more. Elders should evince interest in the education 
of their children. They should enquire as to what the 
children are learning in the educational institution and 
constantly monitor their progress. Modern students react 
to the queries of elders in a discourteous manner. They 
indulge in mere verbosity and confuse the elders. 


Students should earn a good name in society and 
uphold the reputation and prestige of the institution in 
which they study. An educational institution is like a 
gigantic tree. Different subjects are like its branches and 
sub-branches. Virtues are like the fragrant flowers that 
you find on the tree. Faith is like the roots. When you 
water the roots of faith, you get the fruit of ananda. 


At present, all educational institutions have begun 
to feel that character is very important for a student. 
The end of education is character. Character does not 
mean good conduct alone. One should consider the 
fellow human beings as one’s own brothers and sisters. 
One should develop bhava shuddhi (purity in feelings), 
which will ultimately lead to jnana siddhi (attainment 
of wisdom). 


Instituions Must Produce Virtuous Men And 
Women 


Our students are highly virtuous. I repeatedly say 
that they are My property. When I have such a property 
with Me, why should I worry about anything? I asked 
the boys who appeared for the GATE ( Graduate Apti- 


62 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


tude Test For Engineering) examination, “My dear ones! 
How did you write the exam?” They said, “Swami, with 
Your grace and blessings we have done well. You say 
that students are Your property. Having been blessed 
with the opportunity of being Your students, our only 
aim is to live up to Your ideals and bring a good name to 
the Institute.” I was very pleased and deeply touched by 
their answer. It is heartening to note that there are such 
ideal students in our Institute. It is because of such noble 
students that the country has progressed and prospered. 
If there are no men and women of virtues, how can the 
world shine with all its brilliance? 


Our students do not indulge in empty rhetoric; they 
are men of action. Their sincerity makes Me happy. I have 
come to impart such ideal education to the students and 
inculcate virtues in them. 


In spite of his education and intelligence, a foolish man 
will not know his true Self and a mean-minded person 
will not give up his evil qualities. 

(Telugu poem) 
Modern education leads only to argumentation, not to 
total wisdom. What is the use of acquiring education 
which cannot lead you to immortality? Acquire the 


knowledge that will make you immortal. 
(Telugu poem) 


Once you acquire the knowledge of the Self, you 


Humility Is The Hallmark Of Education 63 


would have acquired everything else. These words of 
wisdom are imprinted in the hearts of our students. Em- 
bodiments of Love! Students! 


You have proved your worth among lakhs of stu- 
dents and secured high ranks in the GATE examination 
(loud applause). The examiners were highly impressed 
with the intelligence and behaviour of our students. They 
wanted to know whether our students came from East 
or West, North or South. Our students replied, “Sir, we 
are neither from East nor from West, neither from South 
nor from North, we are the students of Sri Sathya Sai 
Institute of Higher Learning.” 


They are not satisfied with what they have 
achieved. They are striving hard to bring more and more 
laurels to our Institute. Wherever you go, you find our 
students leading exemplary lives propagating the ideals 
of our educational institutions. 


Once someone asked our students what type of 
food they like to take, vegetarian or non-vegetarian. 
They replied in one voice, “Non-vegetarian food gives 
rise to evil thoughts and feelings; hence we would never 
touch non-vegetarian food.” They are 100% vegetar- 
ians. Even the students who used to eat non-vegetarian 
food earlier became vegetarians once they joined our 
Institute. Once someone tried to persuade one of our 
students to take non-vegetarian food, saying it contained 
a lot of good nutrients. But, he did not budge from his 


64 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


stand. He said, “I don’t want such vitamins and pro- 
teins. Even vegetarian food has all the vitamins and 
proteins that I need. I want to tread the path of truth and 
non-vegetarian food is not at all conducive for spiritual 
progress. Along with secular education, I want to acquire 
spiritual education and propagate it to the world.” There 
are many such students who are firm in their resolve to 
spread the Sai ideals. It is because of such noble stu- 
dents that our institution has attained worldwide fame. 


Cultivate Healthy Habits Right From Childhood 


Students should develop good habits right from 
their childhood to enjoy good health and happiness. In 
this context, there is a poem which reads as follows: 


Get up early in the morning at the crowing of the cock, 
Have a bath after your morning ablutions, 
Wear a proper dress. 

Eat properly and moderately. 

Go to school and study diligently. 

Earn a good name. 

Dont move out when it is raining, 

And never go near the murky pools. 

Take part in games, 

Run and play. 

If you abide by all these rules, 


You will have both health and wealth. 
(Telugu poem) 


Students should exercise restraint over their food 
habits. Even birds, beasts and animals observe certain 


Humility Is The Hallmark Of Education 65 


regulations in this regard. Born as human beings and hav- 
ing acquired education, is it not expected of you to follow 
proper discipline with regard to food? Students who eat 
non-vegetarian food right from their childhood give up 
that habit when they join our institution. Even their par- 
ents are surprised at their transformation. When one of 
our students went home during vacation, his mother tried 
to serve him non-vegetarian food. He refused to touch it 
and requested his mother not to prepare non-vegetarian 
items in future. He explained to his parents the ill effects 
of consuming non-vegetarian food. 


Non-vegetarian food causes several diseases, like 
cancer. You might have read in journals and newspapers 
that most of the people in Singapore eat fish. Consequent- 
ly, they are infected by several harmful micro-organisms. 
Similar instances were reported from various parts of 
Bharat. It is because of unhealthy food that people suffer 
from diseases. Many are under the mistaken notion that 
non-vegetarian food gives them strength, but in reality 
it makes them weak. Once you spoil your health by par- 
taking of non-vegetarian food, you will never be able to 
regain your health even if you spend the rest of your life 
in forests eating fruits and tubers. 


These were the answers given by our students when 
they the were asked questions about their food habits. The 
explanation given by our students made such an impact 
on the audience that many of them became total vegetar- 
ians. As is the food so is the mind. As is the mind so is the 


66 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


man. Hence, one must necessarily partake of sacred and 
satwic food to lead a happy and healthy life. Of late, there 
is a growing awareness among the Bharatiyas about the 
influence of food on one’s mind. Consequently, people 
are changing their food habits for the better. Our body 
is made up of flesh. Why should you feed it again with 
flesh? Such unsacred food gives rise to unsacred thoughts. 


Students! 


It is not enough if you observe regulations with 
regard to food alone; you should cultivate good hab- 
its also. You should participate in sports and games 
regularly. Take part in such games which will help in 
the blossoming of your physical and mental faculties. 
Healthy food and good habits will take you to exalted 
position in life. 


Dear Bangaru Students! 


Truly, you are like gold. It is not possible to de- 
scribe your sacred feelings. You speak from the depths 
of your hearts. The language you speak is not ordinary. 
It is atma bhasha (language of the spirit). You are lead- 
ing your lives with sacred feelings. However, keep away 
from bad company. It is said, “Zell me your company, 
I shall tell you what you are.”’ “As is your company, so 
you become.” Hence, always keep good company. Be 
in the company of those who speak good words. Never 
utter harsh and unsacred words. If you use unkind words, 
people will treat you like an enemy. If you speak softly 


Humility Is The Hallmark Of Education 67 


and sweetly, people would enjoy your company and 
talk to you for any length of time. When you are in the 
company of others, make sure that your body is clean 
and your mouth does not emit bad smell. You should 
take proper care of your health in every possible way. 
When your body is clean and healthy and when your 
thoughts, words and deeds are pure, you will be loved 
by one and all. 


Students! 


Wherever you may go, ensure that you are present- 
able and acceptable in every way. Only then will you earn 
the respect of others. Always keep your mouth clean. Bad 
breath leads to various diseases. Not merely that, it will 
cause inconvenience to others. If your mouth emits foul 
smell, people will try to avoid you. Hence, the moment 
you get up from bed in the morning, you should brush 
your teeth and clean your tongue thoroughly. When you 
keep your mouth fresh and clean, you will enjoy good 
health. Though I don’t sleep in the night, I brush My 
teeth before going to bed. I brush My teeth at regular 
intervals so as to keep My mouth fresh and clean. That 
is why I don’t have any health problem. I don’t have any 
pain whatsoever. 


You should take care that no food particle sticks be- 
tween your teeth. Some people use a hard brush to clean 
their teeth. As a result, their gums start bleeding. But I 
use a very soft brush. Even now My teeth are so strong 


68 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


that I can crack a betel nut. My students are struck with 
awe and wonder when they witness My physical power. 


Students! 


It will be a matter of shame that you spoil your 
health and submit yourself to the hands of a doctor. 
Hence, each one has to take care of one’s own health. 
One should never be dependent on others. This is what 
I teach to My students quite often. Get up early in the 
morning, do some jogging and exercise so as to keep 
your body fit. During examination time, students try 
to keep themselves awake in the night even during late 
hours to study. They keep dozing with books in front of 
them. Such studies will take you nowhere. Do not force 
yourself to study when you feel sleepy. Keep the books 
aside and go to bed peacefully. You should study only 
when your mind is fresh and attentive. 


Oh man! Do not feel proud of your education and 
scholarship. If you do not offer your salutations to 
God and not contemplate on Him with devotion, of 
what use is all your education? 

(Telugu poem) 


Education And Educare Must Go Hand In Hand 
Students! 


First and foremost, take care of your health. Your 
education will prove a mere waste if you do not maintain 
proper health. Do not rest content with secular educa- 
tion. You should also acquire Educare. Education is 


Humility Is The Hallmark Of Education 69 


related to gathering outside information, whereas Edu- 
care relates to inward transformation. Educare is that 
which makes the human values blossom from within. 
Whether you have acquired educare or mere education 
will become evident in your speech. A word of caution 
in this regard - you should not talk loosely; especially 
when you speak to elders, you should carefully frame 
your sentences and speak with all humility and respect. 
True education 1s not limited to textual knowledge. You 
should manifest the human values of truth, righteousness, 
love, peace and non-violence. Truth should not be con- 
fined to mere words. It should be translated into deeds. 


Students! 


Having come here and acquired education of the 
highest standard, lead a life of virtues. Share your knowl- 
edge with others. 


Let us all move together, let us all grow together, 

Let us all stay united and share our knowledge, 

Let us live together with friendship and harmony. 

(Telugu poem) 
This is what you have to learn today. Always have 

a smiling countenance and be a good friend to others. A 
good friend is one who always has good thoughts, speaks 
good words and performs good deeds. When you lead 
your life in such a manner, you will be an ideal person 
and a source of inspiration to others. 


(Divine Discourse 16-3-2005, Prasanthi Nilayam) 


70 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


Heart must understand heart, heart must be 
drawn to heart, if friendship must last. Friend- 
ship must bind two hearts and affect both of them 
beneficially, whatever may happen to either — loss 
or gain, pain or pleasure, good fortune or bad. 
The bond must survive all the blows of fate and 
be unaffected by time, place and circumstance. 
Each must correct the other; for each must wel- 
come criticism and comment from the other; 
for each knows that they come from sympathy 
and love. Each must be vigilant that the other 
does not slide from the ideal, that the other does 
not cultivate habits that are deleterious or hide 
thoughts and plans that are productive of evil. 
The honour of each is in the safekeeping of the 
other. Each trusts the other and places reliance 
on the other's watchful love. Only those deserve 
the name — friends — who help in uplifting life, 
cleansing ideals, elevating emotions and stren- 
thening resolves. 


Baba 





7 


Love And Unity - Your True And 
Eternal Property 


The creation emerges from truth and merges into 
truth, 

Is there a place in the cosmos where truth does not 
exist? 

Ponder this pure and unsullied truth 
with wonder and joy. (Telugu poem) 


The body is made up of five elements and is bound to 
perish sooner or later but the indweller has neither 
birth nor death. The indweller has no attachment 
whatsoever and is the eternal witness. The indweller 
in the form of the Atma is verily God Himself. 


(Telugu poem) 


he melodious songs and bhajans of the devo- 
tees from Hyderabad this morning was a joy 
for the ears and feast for the heart. 


Te Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


Divine love is the most precious thing in this world. 
No amount of extolling its virtues will exhaust its great- 
ness as no living thing of this world can be devoid of the 
influence of love. Saint Thyagaraja sang: 


“From an ant to the Brahman, in Siva or in Kesava, 
You do indwell in pure unsullied form of love, Oh! 
Rama, please be my protector too. 


(Telugu poem) 


What is the form of an ant and what is the form of 
Brahman? Brahman is infinite. On the other hand, ant 
is a tiny creature. From the physical point of view, there 
can be no comparison between the form of an ant and the 
form of Brahman. But from the spiritual point of view, 
Divinity is immanent in both. 


Humanness Shines When Selfishness Is Given Up 


A hungry bear once went to an anthill and pleaded 
with an ant saying, “I am unable to bear the pangs of 
hunger. Please give me some food.” The ant could not 
control its laughter. It said, “How can a tiny creature like 
me alone provide food for you? I don’t have sufficient 
food to satisfy your hunger, wait, let me see what can be 
done.” It is natural for ants to store food for six months in 
their anthills. It went inside and with the help of its fel- 
lows brought out some of the food that had been stored. 
The bear wondered, “How could a tiny creature like an 
ant store so much food?” If one has the will and puts in 


Love And Unity — Your True And Eternal Property 73 


the necessary effort, one can amass anything; it does not 
matter whether one is big or small. It is said, Jantunam 
nara janma durlabham (out of all living beings, human 
birth is the rarest). Ants, though tiny in form, are able 
to acquire food, share it with friends and also store for 
future. But, modern man, in spite of being endowed with 
intelligence, is frequently unable to earn his food even for 
a single day. Is it not a matter of shame? In this world, 
there is nothing superior to the human intelligence. But 
they are unable to make proper use of their intelligence. 
They conduct themselves in an unworthy manner be- 
cause of their selfishness and self-interest. Humans do 
not lack anything in their life. There is everything at their 
disposal. They lack the discrimination to make proper 
use of the resources available. They are not able to give 
up their petty nature and rise to a higher level. There is 
a lesson to be learnt even from ants. When an ant bites 
one’s leg, one feels the irritation and immediately tries 
to kill it. But they are not making efforts to kill the evil 
qualities within themselves which are making their lives 
miserable. 


Embodiments of Love! 


In this vast world, no matter where you look, you 
cannot find any motive power more powerful and valu- 
able than love. Deep-rooted selfishness and self-interest 
are making man’s intelligence perverted and leading him 
astray. When you give up selfishness, humanness will 
blossom in you and your latent powers will manifest. 


74 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


Your power of intelligence will become manifold. 


Attain Divinity By Serving Society 
Embodiments of Love! 


Nowadays students are reading a wide variety of 
books. But there is little use in studying a pustaka (book), 
if the mastaka (head) is filled with rubbish. Students are 
filling their heads with useless information and in the 
process are misusing their energy. There is no point in 
going through a number of textbooks over and over again. 
They cannot save you from the cycle of birth and death. 
You should acquire such knowledge, which will make 
you immortal. Present day students have become profi- 
cient in bookish knowledge. They have the intelligence 
to answer any question from the textbook. But they are 
not making efforts to translate their bookish knowledge 
into practical knowledge. 


One may acquire a high academic qualification such 
as M.A. and B.A. and attain exalted position, 

One may amass wealth, perform acts of charity and 
attain name and fame, 

One may have physical strength and enjoy a long and 
healthy life, 

One may be a great scholar studying and preaching 
the Vedas, 

But none can equal a true devotee of the Lord. 

(Telugu poem) 


Love And Unity — Your True And Eternal Property 75 


The knowledge one acquires should be utilised 
for the benefit of society. We should utilise our wealth 
and knowledge not for selfish purposes, but for the 
welfare of others. God has given you the human body 
not merely to eat, sleep and enjoy worldly pleasures. 
Paropakarartham idam sariram (human body is meant 
to do good to others). The body is given to you so that 
you make proper use of your intelligence and power of 
discrimination and manifest your innate human values. 
Of what use is your education and intelligence if society 
is not benefited by them? Presently man is making new 
discoveries and inventions but till this day he has not 
really understood the purpose of human birth. What 
is the meaning of the word manava (human being)? 
‘Ma’ means ajnana (ignorance), ‘Na’ means without, 
‘Va’ means Varthinchuta (vrittih yasya sah-to conduct 
oneself). Hence, manava is one who conducts himself 
without ignorance. But these days we hardly find 
anyone leading a life of wisdom in consonance with the 
name manava. In spite of being endowed with a high 
degree of intelligence, man is frittering away his life 
in vain pursuits. Before undertaking any task, enquire 
whether it would befit the title of a human being. Accept 
everything as the Will of God. God has blessed man with 
intelligence, knowledge and wealth so that he will work 
for the welfare of others. But, man is acting contrary to 
God’s wish and thereby ruining himself. Animals like 
bulls and buffaloes render service to man in a number 
of ways. But man lacks the spirit of service that even 


76 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


animals possess. Without understanding the purpose 
of human birth, man is developing demonic qualities 
and leading a miserable life. Vyashti (individual) 
signifies humanness and Samashti (society) symbolises 
divinity. Hence, one can attain divinity only by serving 
society. 


Embodiments of Love! 


You may be highly educated and intelligent, yet 
there is so much you can learn from ants, birds and 
animals. These lessons of life cannot be taught in the 
classroom. Even teachers are not making efforts to un- 
derstand the principle of divinity within. Education is 
not meant to merely eke out a livelihood. You have to 
share your knowledge with others, give joy to one and 
all and thereby rise to the level of the Divine. Samatwa 
(equal-mindedness) is the hallmark of a true human be- 
ing. Manavatwa without samatwa cannot attain divyatwa 
(divinity). Hence, develop samatwa in the first instance. 
Divine power is latent in every human being. But man is 
becoming weak as he is unable to realise his latent divine 
power. In order to manifest the divine power, one should 
cultivate sacred feelings. Manavatwa has not come into 
existence in the recent past, it has been there since ages. 
Human being is born from the womb of the mother, but 
humanness has originated from divinity and has been 
present at all times. There is divinity in every human 
being. As he is unable to recognise his innate divinity, 
man is forgetting his very human nature itself. What is 


Love And Unity — Your True And Eternal Property 77 


the use of being human only in form but not in practice? 
Human birth will find fulfilment only when we practise 
human qualities. All the sacred texts such as Upanishads 
and Sastras are meant to show mankind the path of re- 
demption. Man should manifest his latent divinity by 
following their teachings. The sacred texts will bring out 
the hidden treasures of divinity from within. That is why 
Bhagawan has introduced Educare programme in the 
educational institutions. Education is related to worldly 
knowledge. It can be acquired by going through books, 
whereas educare is meant to externalise the latent divin- 
ity in man. Education has temporary benefits, whereas 
educare bestows everlasting happiness. One cannot be- 
come great by mere acquisition of education. One should 
practise educare and manifest the latent values. 


Strive For Transformation 


Embodiments of Love! 


Educare is the need of the hour. Only through 
educare can you realise divinity which is present in 
every atom and every cell of your body. In fact, you are 
seeing divinity every moment but are unable to recognise 
this truth. You can call yourself educated only when 
you recognise divinity which is all-pervasive. Secular 
knowledge is related to education which can be acquired 
from outside. It is mere bookish knowledge, whereas 
educare cannot be acquired from books. No benefit 


78 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


accrues by gathering information from books. What is 
required is transformation and it is possible only through 
educare. Acquisition of information which cannot lead 
to transformation is a mere waste of time. But man has 
developed a taste for such information which is but a 
waste. Man’s intelligence, knowledge and power are all 
the gifts of God. They have to be nourished and made 
proper use of, through educare. Truly, God has endowed 
man with immense potential. That is love. It is beyond 
all description and measure. There is no greater power 
than this. But man is giving up such power without 
realising its value. He is under the mistaken notion that 
love means physical and worldly relationship. True 
love lies in unification of two hearts. People utter this 
word repeatedly without actually knowing its meaning. 
Love does not hurt anybody. It always helps. Hence, 
consider love as your true wealth. There is no property 
greater than love in this world. You are misusing the 
God-given gift of love by diverting it on worldly matters 
and sensual pleasures. Your foremost duty is to make 
proper use of love by following the dictum, Help Ever, 
Hurt Never. There is no greater Dharma than this. 
Embodiments of Love! 


Love is your only true and eternal property. But, 
you are diverting it on mean and worldly pursuits. It 
should be treasured in your heart and utilised for sacred 
purposes. You may share it with any number of people, 
it will never diminish. You are unable to understand and 
experience love in its true spirit. Love is the life-breath 


Love And Unity — Your True And Eternal Property 79 


of every being. In order to understand love, you have 
to dive deep into the ocean of love. Love cannot be un- 
derstood from a superficial level, you have to immerse 
yourself completely in love. Worldly love is such that 
you can just taste it and give it up, but once you taste 
divine love, you will never give it up. Love is God, God 
is love. Hence, you cannot separate love from God. Live 
in love. That is the only way you can understand love 
and experience God. 


Embodiments of Love! 


It may be easy to give lectures on love, but it is 
difficult to understand it. Make every effort to experience 
love. If you understand the nature of your love, you will 
under stand the love of others. Love is in you, with you 
and around you. Once you understand love, you will 
become the very embodiment of love. 


Students! 


The more you understand the principle of love, 
the nobler you will become. Once you understand the 
principle of love and put it into practice, others will also 
try to emulate you. 


Unsullied fraternal love is the core of Ramayana 


In the epic Ramayana, not only the four brothers, 
Rama, Lakshmana, Bharata, Satrughna, but also their 
wives played important roles. They demonstrated great 


80 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


ideals to the world. People extol only Rama and ignore 
the model conduct of the others. In fact, each of them 
was as great as Rama Himself. You might have heard 
of Sumitra, the mother of Lakshmana and Satrughna. 
People do not attach much importance to her role in the 
Ramayana. In fact, her name does not figure prominently 
in the epic. She was a paragon of virtues. Her name Sumi- 
tra itself signifies that she was a good friend to one and 
all. She shared her happiness with everyone. Kausalya 
and Kaikeyi had one son each, whereas Sumitra had two 
sons. 


When we enquire into the reason, we can under- 
stand the mystery behind it. When Dasaratha performed 
the Putrakameshti Yaga, the Yajna Purusha appeared and 
handed over the vessel of sacred pudding to Vasishtha. 
Vasishtha gave the sacred pudding to Dasaratha who 
in turn distributed it equally between his three wives. 
Kausalya and Kaikeyi took their share of the pudding 
to their respective puja rooms. Each of them was happy 
thinking that her son would be the heir apparent to Ay- 
odhya’s throne. But Sumitra had no such thoughts. She 
carried her bowl of pudding to the terrace and placed 
it on the parapet wall while drying her hair in the sun. 
Suddenly, an eagle swooped down and carried away 
the bowl of sacred pudding. She immediately ran down 
and informed Kausalya and Kaikeyi about what had 
happened. Kausalya and Kaikeyi came to the rescue 
of Sumitra and shared their sacred pudding with her. 


Love And Unity — Your True And Eternal Property 81 


Kaikeyi gave half of her share to Sumitra. Kausalya did 
the same. In due course, Kausalya gave birth to Rama, 
Kaikeyi to Bharata, and Sumitra to Lakshmana and Sa- 
trughna. The sons of Kausalya and Kaikeyi were happily 
playing in their cradles whereas Sumitra’s sons were 
crying all the time, day and night, without even taking 
food. Sumitra went to sage Vasishtha and told him about 
her predicament. Sage Vasishtha closed his eyes. His 
yogic vision enabled him to know the truth. He said to 
Sumitra,” As you partook of the sacred pudding given 
by Kausalya, you gave birth to Lakshmana who is an 
amsa (part) of Rama. Similarly, Satrughna is born out 
of the share of pudding given to you by Kaikeyi. So, he 
is apart of Bharata. Put Lakshmana by the side of Rama 
and Satrughna by the side of Bharata. Then they will rest 
peacefully.” Sumitra did as instructed by Vasishtha. The 
children became peaceful and stopped crying. Sumitra 
felt very happy at this and said to Kausalya and Kaikeyi, 
“Lakshmana and Satrughna are your gifts. My children 
will serve your children. Lakshmana will serve Rama and 
Satrughna will serve Bharata. It is my good fortune that 
my sons will serve their brothers.” This was the basis of 
the intimate relationship between Rama and Lakshmana, 
Bharata and Satrughna. 


Sumitra used to experience ineffable bliss, since 
her two sons Lakshmana and Satrughna were always in 
the company of Rama and Bharata. She was never de- 
pressed by the separation of her children. No one knows 


82 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


why certain things happen and for what purpose. As the 
four sons of King Dasaratha were growing Lakshmana 
always used to accompany Rama and Satrughna would 
accompany Bharata. Both Lakshmana and Satrughna 
were mighty warriors. Without them, there could be no 
Ramayana at all! Lakshmana was born to serve Rama 
and Satrughna was born to serve Bharata. Lakshmana 
was the embodiment of Love. Similarly, Satrughna used 
to serve Bharata with all the power at his command. 
Thus, the four brothers Rama, Lakshmana, Bharata and 
Satrughna were inseparable. Hence, it is not correct to 
say that Rama was born to Kausalya, Bharata to Kai- 
keyi and Lakshmana and Satrughna to Sumitra. Though 
their mothers were different, they always used to move 
about in the company of one another. The four brothers 
Rama, Lakshmana, Bharata and Satrughna were parts 
of the same substance and facets of the same Divinity. 
Similarly, their mothers Kausalya, Sumitra and Kaikey1 
used to move always in the company of one another. 
There was no discord between them. The unity between 
the four brothers was in fact the sum and substance of 
the story of Ramayana. None can describe in full the 
glory of Ramayana. Each one attempted to describe the 
glory of Ramayana in his own unique style. With the 
result, a number of literary works on Ramayana have 
become available today. The human nature is not limited 
to the mere form. It consists of the body, mind, intellect, 
senses and, above all, the heart the seat of love. The Ra- 
mayana is a great story of intense interaction between 
these five aspects of human nature. It is not possible for 


Love And Unity — Your True And Eternal Property 83 


anyone to fully describe the interplay of these factors 
in Ramayana, however much one may strive. 

Once, Kausalya was engaged in some work. 
Meanwhile, Bharata came running and sat on the lap 
of Kausalya and started crying. Kausalya was a bit sur- 
prised about the reason for Bharata’s agony. She tried 
to console him and enquired as to what made him cry. 
Bharata replied that they were playing a ball game and 
each time Rama was purposely getting defeated in order 
to ensure the victory of other brothers. Thus, the unity, 
love and affection between the brothers were such that 
they always tried to please others. They used to experi- 
ence supreme bliss in the company of one another. It was 
only Lakshmana who could understand fully the nature 
of Rama and it is only Satrughna who could understand 
fully the nature of Bharata. 


The women in Ramayana were also exemplary 
in nature. When Rama was going to the forest to fulfil 
the wishes and command of his father, King Dasaratha, 
Sumitra asked Lakshmana to accompany Rama. Im- 
mediately, Lakshmana followed him. He experienced 
great joy in accompanying his elder brother Rama to 
the forest. Similarly, Satrughna also experienced great 
joy in the company of Bharata and accompanied him 
wherever he went. What does the name ‘Satrughna’ 
imply? It means the one who destroys the enemies. 
Rama, Lakshmana, Bharata and Satrughna were ideal 
brothers. It is not enough to merely extol their ideals, 
but we must also try to experience that great bond of 


84 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


love in our day-to-day lives and share it with others. 
The great epic Ramayana is not a mere story. It also 
explains and expounds the Atma Tattwa. One has to 
experience that Atma Tattwa with reaction, reflection 
and resound. The Ramayana Tattwa has to be under- 
stood properly and translated into our day-to-day lives. 


Ramayana Is More A Story Of Human Relation- 
ships 


Embodiments of Love! 


The Ramayana cannot be compared with other 
Puranic texts. It is not merely a great poetic work, but 
a great treatise on human relationships between parents 
and children, between brothers, husband and wife and 
the king and his subjects. It is only when we are able to 
understand the significance of Ramayana in this larger 
context, that the country will prosper with love and af- 
fection between the citizens. In a few years’ time, nay, 
very shortly, the whole world will realise the greatness of 
Ramayana and try to emulate the ideals set in Ramayana. 
Today, we find a wide variety of nations, religions and 
castes in the world. No. No. The situation will certainly 
change. Within a short span of time, the world will 
realise the truth: 


There is only one religion, the Religion of Love. 
There is only one caste, the Caste of Humanity. 
There is only one God, He is Omnipresent. 


The greatest truth propounded by Ramayana is 


Love And Unity — Your True And Eternal Property 85 


the oneness among humanity. When there is such unity, 
there will be mutual love between people. When that 
mutual love between different people develops, the 
whole world can experience great joy and happiness. 
Thus, it is only Ramayana that can provide great 
joy to the entire humanity. Hence, let every indi- 
vidual chant the Divine Name “Rama! Rama! Rama!” 


Urmila, the wife of Lakshmana was a good painter. 
She was painting a picture to be presented to Sri Rama 
on the occasion of His coronation. Exactly at that mo- 
ment, Lakshmana entered her room. She wanted to get 
up and look who was the visitor. In the confusion, the 
paint got spilled over the unfinished painting. She felt 
very bad. “How come this painting got spoiled when 
actually I wanted to portray the beauty and majesty of 
Sri Rama on the occasion of His coronation and show it 
to the world”, she thought. 


Urmila had a very compassionate heart. She 
always entertained noble thoughts. She did not feel 
sad even for a moment when her husband Lakshmana 
accompanied Rama to the forest. She was always con- 
templating on Sri Rama during His exile to the forest. 
Not only she, the wives of Bharata and Satrughna, (Man- 
davi and Srutakeerthi) were also engaged in constant 
contemplation of Sri Rama and praying for His return 
to Ayodhya. Thus, when they were in constant contem- 
plation of Rama, their strength increased day by day. If 


86 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 Love And Unity — Your True And Eternal Property 87 
It is therefore, very essential for every human being 
to emulate the ideals set by Lord Sri Rama in their 
day-to-day lives. 


you analyse the underlying meaning of every incident 
in the Ramayana, all of them point to only one principle 
the principle of unity; unity between the brothers, unity 


between their wives, etc. Even in times of calamity like 
when Lakshmana fell unconscious during the war with 
the rakshasas (demons) in Lanka, Rama did not lose 
heart; nor Sumitra, the mother of Lakshmana. She was 
always confident that no danger would ever befall Lak- 
shmana, since he was in the service of Lord Rama. Thus, 
during the entire period of 14 years of Rama’s exile to 
the forest, all the brothers and their wives were always 
thinking and wishing for the well-being of Rama only; so, 
were their mothers. Such was the nobility of their hearts. 
Embodiments of Love! 


Any amount of narration of the greatness and no- 
bility of the characters in the Ramayana will not suffice 
and do justice to the cause. The story of Ramayana cannot 
be fully described since it is “His Story”. 


The stories of Lord Vishnu are amazing, 

They purify the lives of the people in all the three 
worlds, 

They are like the sickles that cut the creepers of 
worldly bondage, 

They are like good friends who help you in times 
of need, 

They are like shelters for the sages and seers doing 
penance in the forest. 


Ugadi, 9-4-2005, Prasanthi Nilayam 


Why drag on your existence as a mere consumer 
of food, a moving burden encumbering the earth 
and obstructing others? Eat — but, transform 
that precious matter into good thoughts, sweet 
words and beneficent service. Move — but do not 
cause pain to others. Move, in order to lessen 


misery and promote joy. Do not demean yourself 
as weak, sinful, conceited, wicked. When you de- 
mean yourself and condemn yourself, remember 
you are demeaning and condemning Me who is 
your inner Self. 


Baba 





88 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


Those attached to God, aspiring for God, aware of 
God, adoring God have certain distinct marks by 
which they can be identified. Such people have a 
compassionate heart. Ifa person turns the rosary 
on the fingers, and is intently engaged in watching 
the tip of his nose unmindful of the distress that 
dances around him, we can at best name him a 
sloth, that is all. Get up, place the rosary in its 
bag, and activate yourselves in relieving distress 


— that is the true spiritual path. Do not waste all 
your years with stone images, pictures or idols. 
Learn to see in every living vital active person, the 
embodiment of all energy, all beneficence, namely, 
God. God is subtler than ether, filling the smallest 
crevice with His majesty. Know this and serve His 
manifestations, wherever you meet them. 


Baba 





8 
Understand The Spirit Of Service 


Of Karma born, in Karma grown, in Karma does man 
die. So rules Karma, all stages of human life as though 
it is the very deity of human existence. Of joy and sor- 
row, the master is Karma 


(Telugu poem) 


- all creation human beings are the highest. It 
is said Jantunam nara janma durlabham (of all 
living beings, birth as human is the rarest). It is the hu- 
man creation that has caused major changes in the world. 
Joy does not exist alone; it is entwined with sorrow and 
vice versa; the human being is the root cause for both 
happiness and sorrow. 


Practical Knowledge Is Real knowledge 
Embodiments of Love! 


Nowadays man is unable to realise his true nature 
because he is giving importance to only the physical form 


90 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


He has lost his reasoning faculty. As he calls himself a 
human being, it is his duty to realise the uniqueness of 
humanness. A person cannot be called a human being 
merely on the basis of his birth and educational quali- 
fications. Actually, real humanness cannot be found in 
academic degrees. Even birds and beasts can be taught 
certain skills to perform wonderful feats imitating hu- 
man beings. It is no credit to a human being deriving 
satisfaction simply by empty rhetoric, quoting scrip- 
tures and relating to others. Real humanness consists 
in practising ideals in one’s life and setting an example 
to others. Man has no authority to teach ideals to others 
without putting them into practice himself first. There is 
immense divine power in human beings. He is not sim- 
ply a dehadhari (one who has assumed a human body). 
He is endowed with vijnana (higher wisdom), prajnana 
(constant integrated awareness) and sujnana (discrimina- 
tory knowledge). He is, therefore, expected to channelise 
these higher forms of knowledge in the right path. First 
and foremost, one has to understand the true meaning of 
jnana. Some people think that knowledge acquired by 
reading numerous books is jnana. No, this is not correct. 
Real jnana is the knowledge that emerges from one’s 
own self and which is experienced and taught to others. 
Finally, this would enable the person concerned to be 
greatly benefited and enlightened. 


One has to realise the importance of the term 
“human quality” first. Human quality emerges from one’s 


Understand The Spirit Of Service 91 


own self. It cannot be acquired by reading textbooks or 
listening to others. 


Embodiments of Love! 


You have come all the way from Kerala and as- 
sembled here to acquire jnana and to know the real mean- 
ing of the terms prajnana, vijnana, and sujnana. Mere 
textual knowledge without practical knowledge becomes 
‘allergy’. On the other hand, when bookish knowledge 
is transformed into practical knowledge, it becomes 
“energy”. In otherwords that which has been acquired by 
practice is the real knowledge. That alone would entitle 
you to the epithet manavatwa (humanness). 


Embodiments of Love! 


All that we teach to others must be supported by 
practice. Everything is reaction, reflection and resound 
of one’s own inner being. Every word we utter is the 
resound of the inner being. Reflection is that which is 
contemplated upon, experienced and put into practice. 
The third aspect, reaction is however, very important. 
Reaction comes out of action. Hence our actions must 
always be pure and sacred. The three aspects “reaction’’, 
“reflection” and “resound” occupy a place of prominence 
in the life of a human being. Whatever man learns today 
comes under the category of resound, meaning, they are 
taught by the teacher from textbooks. This is bookish 
knowledge. Resound comes out of reaction and reaction 
transforms itself into reflection. The unity of all these 


a2 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


three aspects constitute humanness. Hence, a human be- 
ing should not waste his time by empty rhetoric. Every 
word he utters must be backed by deep contemplation 
and knowledge of its inner meaning. It is only after that 
he should try to teach others. Unfortunately, these days 
mere bookish knowledge is considered as true knowledge 
and a lot of time is spent in acquiring it. Real knowledge 
should emerge from the mastaka (head and heart). One 
should, therefore, cleanse his head and heart and remove 
the impurities therein. Then only is it possible to under- 
stand things in the right perspective and acquire wisdom. 


Exult not on your erudition oh man, without hum- 

ble prayer and devotion to your indwelling God, 

all your learning is just a load in your head. 
(Telugu poem) 


Real Education Must Enable One To Realise One’s 
Own Nature 


Embodiments of Love! 


It may be necessary for you to adapt yourself 
to new techniques and practices from time to time. At 
present the world is undergoing phenomenal changes. 
All those changes may not be relevant to you. Never- 
theless, you are required to acquire several branches of 
knowledge in the modern times to cope with the rapid 
changes in science and technology taking place all over 
the world. However, they do not constitute real vidya 
(knowledge). Real education is that by which one is able 


Understand The Spirit Of Service 93 


to realise one’s own nature. Avidya breeds avidya. Hence, 
one cannot become great by pursuing secular education. 
One has to make efforts to distinguish between vidya and 
avidya. Vidya is that by which one can develop the power 
of reasoning and discrimination and realise the truth. On 
the other hand, avidya constitutes indiscriminate usage 
of words and vain argumentation. One has to acquire 
practical knowledge as well by which one can gain expe- 
rience. This experience can be shared with others. Such 
practical knowledge and experience confer strength on 
a person. However, this strength is not to be construed 
as mere physical strength. It is like the electrical energy 
latent in a wire. Just as there is electrical energy in a live 
wire, there is latent energy in the human body which 
manifests in different ways. It can be harnessed for dif- 
ferent purposes like reading, writing, walking, talking, 
etc. It has, however, no form. Nevertheless, it travels 
throughout the body of a human being from head to toe. 
By tapping this energy, an ajnani (ignorant person) can 
become jnani (one of wisdom). 


Embodiments of Love! 


You are all students and you continue to be so 
throughout your life. It is a mistake to think that you 
have finished your education and are now engaged in 
service activities. You are not servants working under 
somebody. In fact, you are leaders. It is a mistake to 
confer doership on yourselves for any service activity 
undertaken by you. This should never happen. In fact, 


94 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


whatever service activities you are undertaking are for 
your own upliftment. These service activities must be 
undertaken with self-confidence, self-satisfaction, self- 
sacrifice and ultimately for the purpose of self-realisation. 
Thus, the spirit of service develops from the self. Service 
is not any way construed to be helping others. You may 
think that you are helping others by joining the Sathya 
Sai Seva Organisation and undertaking service activities. 
This is not correct. Also, you need not seek the help of 
others in these service activities. You can depend upon 
your own innate strength and energy. The power of your 
own self will help you in all your endeavours. In fact, 
you are the beneficiary of all your service activities 
and not others. Your own self will protect you in your 
endeavours. 


Service Actually Is For Self-Fulfilment 
Members of the Seva Dal! 


You may think that you have come here for un- 
dertaking service. This service is not for others. You are 
coming here for serving your own self, just as you eat 
food for filling your own stomach. Man undertakes every 
activity for his self-fulfilment. 


There are several things which you have to learn 
in these two days. We will discuss these matters later. 
Since this is the first day, I spoke to you in detail so 
that you may understand the spirit of service. There are 


Understand The Spirit Of Service 95 


several other things which you have to learn. What is 
Seva Dal? Each member of the Seva Dal is like a Dal 
(petal) in a beautiful flower. There are several skills to 
be learnt by the members of the Seva Dal. If you plant a 
sapling, it will grow into a plant in due course and yield 
beautiful flowers. However, the sapling by itself is not 
attractive. When the plant grows and yields flowers, the 
beauty of the flowers and fragrance therein will provide 
joy to one and all. There are several petals in a flower. 
The flower appears beautiful as long as there are petals 
in it. Once the petals fade and fall down, the flower 
ceases to exist. Hence, you should be like the petals of 
a beautiful flower. Let everyone experience the beauty 
and enjoy the fragrance of the flower in which you are 
like the petals. There are several things still to be told 
to you which Mukundan will tell you. Later on, I will 
provide any clarifications you may require. 


Divine Discourse, 11 April 2005, 
Prasanthi Nilayam 


96 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


The word Dharma, which is really bound up 
with an infinite variety of meanings, is being 
inadequately described by one word, duty, in 
the modern age. Duty is something which is 
connected with an individual, a predicament, or 
with a particular time or country. On the other 
hand Dharma is eternal, the same for everyone 
everywhere. It expresses the significance of the 
inner atma. The birthplace of Dharma is the 
heart. What emanates from the heart as a pure 
idea, when translated into action will be called 
Dharma. If you have to be told in a manner that 
you can understand, one can say, “Do unto oth- 
ers as you want them to do unto you” — that is 


9 


Love Is God, God Is Love, Live In 
Love 


God is love and love is God. When you hold on to this 
principle of love and develop love to love relationship, 
you will attain the state of non-dualism. 


(Telugu poem) 


Embodiments of Love! 


Dharma. Dharma consists in avoiding actions ou have come here with a lot of expectation 
which would hurt others. If anyone causes hap- xy, take part in the conference. Though your 
stay at Prasanthi Nilayam is short, your experiences are 
profound and you have described them at length in your 
speeches. However, you deserve much more. 


piness to you, then you in turn should do such 
things that will cause happiness to others. When 
we recognise that what others do will cause dif- 
ficulties and if we do the same things, that would 
be adharma. 


The day on which all the devotees gather and sing 
the glory of God melodiously, the day on which the 
sufferings of the poor are lovingly removed and 
all people live like brothers and sisters, the day on 
which groups of dasas (servants of God) who con- 


Baba 





98 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


stantly contemplate on God are served a sumptu- 
ous feast, the day on which noble souls visit us and 
narrate the stories of God lovingly, enjoy that day 
as the real day. All other days are mere death an- 
niversaries. Do I need to say more, oh noble souls! 


(Telugu poem) 
Give Up Duality 
Embodiments of Love! 


In this conference, you have dealt at length on 
various aspects such as the duties and responsibilities 
of youth and how they should mould their character. Let 
all your activities be suffused with love. Modern youth 
fail to understand the true meaning of love. Love can- 
not exist if there is a feeling of duality. Ekatma Prema 
(non-dual love) is true love. Give and take relation- 
ship does not reflect the true spirit of love. One should 
keep giving and giving, without expecting anything 
in return. That is true love. To retreat in times of dif- 
ficulty is the sign of selfish love. Yathartha prema (true 
love) will reign supreme only when you give up swartha 
(selfishness) and strive for parartha (welfare of others). 
You should know the difference between padartha (mat- 
ter) and yathartha (reality). Reality transcends matter. 
Sarvam khalvidam Brahma (verily all this is Brahman). 
Consider everything as divine and treat the dualities 
of life such as pain and pleasure, loss and gain with 
equanimity. Sukhadukhe samekruthwa labhalabhau 
jJayajayau (one should remain unaffected by happiness 


Love Is God, God Is Love, Live In 99 


and sorrow, gain and loss, victory anddefeat). Never be 
carried away by the vagaries of the mind. When you 
follow the mind, you see only matter, but not the reality. 
Mind is related to matter. You should not have anything 
to do with matter. When you associate yourself with 
the mind, you can never visualise unity. You cannot de- 
velop true love and devotion unless you give up duality. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Understand that the same principle of love exists 
in you and others. A true devotee is one who understands 
the principle of unity and acts accordingly. Non-dualism 
is true devotion. Share your love with others without 
any expectation. Love everybody only for the sake of 
love. When you extend your love to others, you can attain 
the state of non-dualism. The love that you experience 
at physical and worldly plane day in and day out is not 
true love at all! True love is that which is focused on 
one form, one path and one goal. It is a great mistake 
to divide love and divert it in different directions. Love 
is God. God is love. Live in love. Only then can you 
realise the principle of oneness and attain fulfilment in 
life. Prema muditha manase Kaho Rama Rama Ram... 
(Sing the sweet name of Rama with your heart filled 
with love). You may choose any name you like, but 
you should call Him with all love. Love is most sacred, 
sweet and non-dual. It is a great mistake to divide such 
love and associate it with multiplicity. Your love should 
remain steady in pleasure and pain. Love and devotion 


100 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


do not give any scope for differences. All differences 
are the making of your mind. Develop the feeling of 
oneness that I and you are one. Never think that I and 
you are different. That is the sign of true devotion. 


The letter ‘I’ stands for oneness. ‘You’ (individual 
identity) will not exist when you develop purity and ex- 
perience oneness with divinity. Hence, give up dualistic 
feeling. The principle of oneness has to be experienced 
through love. It cannot be explained in words. But you 
have not understood the true meaning of love. You are 
interpreting it in the physical and worldly sense. Con- 
sequently, your love is never steady. It keeps changing 
every now and then. Love should not be tainted with 
body attachment. Body is made up of matter. All that is 
related to matter will never give you peace and happiness. 
Hence, transcend the matter and see the reality. Develop 
Ekatma bhava (feeling of oneness). All are one, be alike 
to everyone. It is a big mistake to attribute worldly feel- 
ings to love. There is no scope for dualism in love. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Your names and forms are different but the princi- 
ple of love is the same in all of you. That is why I address 
you as the “embodiments of love’. Love is always one, 
it should not be divided. Consider God as one and love 
Him wholeheartedly. Such one-pointed love towards God 
can be termed as true devotion. Devotees like Jayadeva, 
Gauranga and Eknath developed such divine love and 
sanctified their lives. Likewise, Mira and Sakhubai had 


Love Is God, God Is Love, Live In Live 101 


unwavering love and devotion toward God. They did 
not worship various names and forms. They followed 
one path. They installed one name and one form in their 
heart and contemplated on their chosen deity incessantly. 
Those who are dual-minded and change their path every 
now and then are bound to ruin their lives. Hence, never 
be dual-minded. Experience divinity with ekatma bhava. 
You may choose any name you like Rama, Krishna, 
Easwara, etc., and contemplate on the form. You will 
certainly reach the goal of life. Lead your life with your 
mind always focused on the goal. 


True Love Alone Is The Godward Path 


Once Radha could not find Krishna anywhere. As 
she was deeply attached to Krishna’s physical form, she 
went in search of Him everywhere. She always yearned 
and pined for His physical proximity. The name and the 
form are one and the same. However, people are unable 
to enquire deeply and experience such oneness. 


The power of love is unparalleled. It is beyond the 
ken of human understanding. Love can be understood 
only through love. Mira’s husband Rana had built a 
mandir for Krishna. Being a great devotee of the Lord, 
Mira was always found in the Mandir singing His glory 
ecstatically. Consequently, she earned the wrath of Rana. 
He commanded her to leave the Mandir. This came as 
a great shock to Mira. She thought to herself, “When 
Krishna is all-pervasive and not confined to this Mandir 


102 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


alone, how can Rana take me away from Him?” She 
left her home and hearth and set out to Mathura. Where 
is Mathura? It is not some geographical location. The 
heart suffused with nectarous love is Mathura. She sang, 
Chalo re man Ganga Yamuna teer (Oh mind! Go to the 
confluence of Ganga and Yamuna). Here Ganga and 
Yamuna symbolically mean ida and pingala (left and 
right nostrils). The central part of the eyebrows where 
ida and pingala meet stands for Mathura. This is the 
esoteric meaning of the song. She proceeded towards 
Mathura chanting the name of Krishna incessantly cross- 
ing rivers, hills, dales and forests. When she ultimately 
reached Brindavan, she found the temple doors closed. 
In spite of her repeated prayers, the doors did not open. 
Then she said, “Oh Krishna, my heart is Your temple. I 
have installed You in the altar of my heart.” She banged 
her head against the temple door, calling out to Krishna. 
She had the vision of Krishna and merged in Him. King 
Rana repented for having driven away Mira from the 
temple. He prayed to Krishna for forgiveness. 


People these days do not enquire into the inner 
meaning of certain words they use. They are carried 
away by the worldly meanings and interpretations. You 
should take into consideration the feelings that emerge 
from your heart which is true and eternal. This is how 
Mira experienced oneness with Krishna. If one wishes 
to tread the path of devotion, one should hold on to the 
principle of love firmly. Ordinary mortals do not have 


Love Is God, God Is Love, Live In Live 103 


such firm determination, but a true devotee will never 
deviate from the path of love under any circumstances. 
No other path except love can take us to God. Develop 
love more and more. Wherever you are, love is your 
sole refuge. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Fill your hearts with love and let love be the guid- 
ing principle in all your activities when you return home. 
When you have love in your heart, you do not need to 
worry about anything. God will always be with you, in 
you, around you and will look after you in all respects. 
When you say, “Krishna, I will follow You.” It means 
that Krishna is separate from you. It is possible that you 
will lose your way. Hence, you should pray, “Krishna, 
please be with me always.” In fact, He is always in you. 
When you enquire deeply, you will experience this truth. 
It is impossible to be away from Him. Many devotees 
proclaim, “Oh God, I am in you, I am with you and I am 
for you.” They repeat these words like parrots, but do 
not say from the depths of their heart. Actually, God is 
never separate from you. Pray to Him wholeheartedly 
with the conviction that He is always in you, with you, 
above you, below you and around you. When you 
offer such a prayer to God, He will certainly redeem 
your life. 


We have one more day left. I will explain all these 
in detail so that you will understand them better. Do not 


104 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


feel satisfied with what you have experienced so far. 
There is much more to be experienced which will fill 
your heart with bliss. How can you say that your hunger 
is satisfied by eating a little? There is a lot of scope for 
you to experience divinity in full measure in the days to 
come. 


Divine Discourse, 13 April 2005, 
Prasanthi Nilayam 






The most beneficial thing that can happen to a 
person is that he can draw God love to himself. 
His love for God is less importance, because it is 
an imperfect mixture of divine and worldly love. 
The most important action whereby to gain Gods 
love is righteousness (dharma). There may be 
gold, silver, copper, iron filings, diamonds, rubies, 
silks and other things of value spread out on flat 
surface. But a magnet pays no attention to all the 
riches; it selects only the iron filings. It is the same 
















Ce OTee OW Coe O Pleo QO “vemava ‘a 


wealth. He looks to the purity of heart. 


10 
Ramayana - A Sacred Way Of Life 


Sweeter than sugar, tastier than curd, sweeter indeed 
than honey is the Name of Rama. Constant repetition 
of this sweet Name gives one the taste of divine nectar 
itself. Therefore, one should contemplate on the name 
of Rama incessantly. 


(Telugu poem) 


he Ramayana represents a sacred path, sacred 

door to Divinity, a sacred way of life. The 
Ramayana is not merely the biography of an individual. 
All characters in the Ramayana are equally important. 
Dasaratha distributed the sacred pudding he received 
from the Yajna Purusha equally among his three wives. 
Kausalya received her share of pudding joyfully and took 
it to her puja (worship) room. Kaikeyi also did the same. 
Each of them was happy thinking that her son would be 
the heir apparent to the Ayodhya throne. However, Sumi- 
tra had no such desire. She carried her bowl of pudding to 


106 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


the terrace and placed it on the parapet wall while drying 
her hair in the sun. All the while, she was contemplating 
on God. As she watched helplessly, an eagle swooped 
down and carried away the bowl of sacred pudding. She 
was shocked and disturbed thinking of the reprimand she 
would have to face from her husband for being careless. 
She at once rushed downstairs and informed Kausalya 
and Kaikeyi about what had happened. Unlike the co- 
wives of the present time, the three queens had utmost 
love and affection for each other. Kausalya and Kaikeyi 
hugged Sumitra and consoled her, saying, “Sister, why 
are you disturbed so much? We three are one and we will 
share our pudding with you. Kausalya and Kaikeyi at 
once went into their respective shrine rooms and brought 
their pudding bowls. Each of them gave half of her share 
of pudding to Sumitra. Sumitra felt greatly relieved and 
expressed her gratitude to her sisters. The three queens 
offered their pudding to God and partook of it. Very soon, 
they conceived. It was Kausalya who developed labour 
pains first and gave birth to a male child. Then Kaikeyi 
was blessed with a son. Soon Sumitra developed labour 
pains and gave birth to two sons. In fact, Sumitra never 
had any desire to have children. But she was blessed 
with two sons. She accepted it as the Will of God and 
was very happy about it. The three queens were wait- 
ing for King Dasaratha to come and bless the children. 
Dasaratha went to each of them and showered his bless- 
ings on the children. It was then that Sumitra revealed to 
King Dasaratha about the incident of the eagle carrying 


Ramayana — A Scared Way Of Life 107 


away her bowl of pudding, and her sisters Kausalya and 
Kaikeyi giving half of their share of pudding to her. That 
was the reason she was blessed with two sons. 


The Naming Ceremony 


King Dasaratha requested Sage Vasistha, the fam- 
ily preceptor, to christen the newborn children. Sage 
Viswamitra was also invited for the function. Many sag- 
es, Vedic scholars and eminent personalities who attended 
the naming ceremony were spellbound by the ethereal 
beauty of the children. Sage Vasistha, Sage Viswamitra 
and other sages blessed the children by chanting Vedic 
mantras. Everyone was wondering how Sumitra had 
two sons while Kausalya and Kaikeyi were blessed with 
only one son each. How can anybody comprehend the 
ways of God? Everything happened according to God’s 
Will. Sage Vasistha named Kausalya’s son as Sri Rama 
as He had the power of attraction in Him. Ramayathi ithi 
Ramah (that which attracts is the principle of Rama). The 
name ‘Rama’ was given to Him according to His birth 
star. His form was highly brilliant and resplendent. As 
per tradition, Vasishtha wrote the name Rama on rice. 
Then Vasistha named Sumitra’s first son as Lakshmana 
as he looked valorous and his face shone with all auspi- 
cious attributes. He named her second son as Satrughna, 
saying he would destroy all satrus (enemies). Vasistha 
then went to the place where Kaikeyi was seated with 
her son on her lap. She was bubbling with joy as she 
remembered the promise made by Dasaratha that her 


108 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


son would be made the crown prince of Ayodhya. She 
was thinking that her son would rule over the kingdom 
of Bharat. Keeping this in mind, Vasistha named her son 
as Bharata. In this manner, the naming ceremony came 
to a happy conclusion. 


The sons of Kausalya and Kaikeyi were having 
timely food and sleep and were happily playing in their 
cradles. On the other hand, Sumitra’s sons were crying 
all the time, day and night, without even taking food. 
Sumitra became restless seeing the plight of her sons. 
When she mentioned this to King Dasaratha, he consoled 
her saying, “Everything happens according to God’s Will. 
Pray to Him. He will take care of the rest.” There was 
little he could do about it. Three days passed, the situation 
remained the same. Sumitra could no longer bear the 
suffering of the children. She went to sage Vasishtha and 
told him about her predicament. Sage Vasishtha closed his 
eyes. His Yogic vision enabled him to know the truth. He 
said to Sumitra,” As you partook of the sacred pudding 
given by Kausalya, you gave birth to Lakshmana who is 
an amsa (part) of Rama. Similarly, Satrughna is born out 
of the share of pudding given to you by Kaikeyi. So, he 
is a part of Bharata. Put Lakshmana by the side of Rama 
and Satrughna by the side of Bharata. Then they will rest 
peacefully.” Sumitra did as instructed by Vasishtha. The 
children became peaceful and stopped crying. Everyone 
heaved a sigh of relief. As the children grew up, it became 
very clear to Sumitra that Lakshmana was an amsa (part) 


Ramayana — A Scared Way Of Life 109 


of Rama and Satrughna, an amsa of Bharata. One day, 
she told Kausalya and Kaikeyi, “Dear sisters, your sons 
may ascend the throne of Ayodhya in future. I have no 
such ambitions. I am happy to see my sons being in 
the company of their elder brothers and serving them.” 
Accordingly Lakshmana and Satrughna were always 
in the company of Rama and Bharata, respectively. 
They served them and spent their time blissfully. King 
Dasaratha and the three queens were very happy to see 
such unity and harmony among their children. 


The Princes On A Mission 


It is but natural that both happiness and difficulties 
follow each other. As King Dasaratha was spending his 
time blissfully, one day Sage Viswamitra came with a 
request which caused great anxiety to the king. Viswa- 
mitra said, “Oh king! I want you to do me a favour.” 
Without a second thought, Dasaratha promised to do the 
needful. Then the sage said, “I have decided to perform 
a Yajna. I request you to send your son, Rama to protect 
the Yajna from the demons.” Dasaratha was in a dilemma. 
He thought, “Rama is very young and tender. He knows 
no hardship. How can I send Him to the forest with the 
sage? How can He fight the cruel demons?” When he 
expressed his feelings to the sage, Viswamitra became 
furious and said, “Oh King! It is a great folly to go back 
on your word, for no one in the noble lineage of Ikshvaku 
has, until now, ever broken his word. You are tainting 
their glory by breaking the promise given to me.” 


110 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


Dasaratha became frightened on hearing the words 
of Viswamitra. He consulted Sage Vasishtha in this regard 
and ultimately decided to send Rama with the sage. He 
left everything to God’s Will. He called Rama to his pres- 
ence. Rama came there with all courage. It was natural for 
Lakshmana to follow Rama wherever He went. Hence, 
Lakshmana also came to Dasaratha with Rama. Nobody 
had called Lakshmana. He came of his own accord and 
sat next to Rama. The king did not want to dissuade 
Lakshmana from following Rama. The Ritwiks chanted 
Mantras and blessed Rama and Lakshmana before the 
two brothers set out with Sage Viswamitra. 


When they reached the banks of the Sarayu, Sage 
Viswamitra said, “My dear ones! This is a very sacred 
place. Hence, you may perform Sandhya Vandana here.” 
Rama and Lakshmana offered their prayers as instructed 
by the sage. They closed their eyes and sat in meditation 
for some time. Then Viswamitra thought that it would 
be very difficult for the royal princes, who are used to 
palatial comforts and luxuries, to keep awake day and 
night to guard the Yajna. They cannot even think of food 
as they have to be on high alert all the time to fight the 
demons. It was then that the sage taught them the sacred 
mantras of Bala and Atibala which would help them 
overcome sleep and hunger. 


Viswamitra, accompanied by Rama and Lakshma- 
na reached Siddhasrama and started the performance of 
the Yajna. Rama and Lakshmana guarded the Yajna night 


Ramayana — A Scared Way Of Life 111 


and day chanting the mantras taught by the sage. They 
never felt the pangs of hunger nor did they feel sleepy. 
They were on high alert all the time in all enthusiasm 
and exuberance. All of a sudden the demons appeared 
in their frightening forms and tried to disrupt the Yajna. 
They were making deafening sounds. But, the princes 
were least perturbed. They fought the demons with great 
valour and ultimately vanquished them. Viswamitra was 
very happy that he could complete the performance of 
the Yajna without any interruption. He showered his love 
and blessings on Rama and Lakshmana. 


In the meantime, a letter arrived from Janaka, the 
king of Mithila, inviting the sage to take part in a Yajna. 
Viswamitra told the princes, “My dear ones! We have 
received an invitation from the noble King Janaka. I am 
proceeding to Mithila and I wish that you two should 
accompany me.” At first, Rama was not inclined to go to 
Mithila and said to Lakshmana, “Dear younger brother, 
our father instructed us to follow Sage Viswamitra and 
protect his Yajna. We don’t have his permission to go 
to Mithila and take part in the Yajna performed by King 
Janaka.” When the same was conveyed to Viswamitra, 
he convinced them saying, “My dear ones, your father 
commanded you to follow me and it is your duty to 
follow me wherever I go.” The princes had no option 
but to obey the command of Viswamitra. 


The Celestial Wedding 


2 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


The arrival of Rama and Lakshmana in Mithila cre- 
ated a sensation. People admired them and began talking 
about them. As they were moving in the streets, they at- 
tracted everybody’s attention. “Who are these handsome 
princes? They look strong and valorous. Have they come 
to marry the daughters of King Janaka?”, people started 
talking to themselves in this manner. They reached the 
royal palace allotted to them and rested. The Yajna was 
to commence on the next day. A meeting was also being 
arranged for which the gallant heroes of Bharat were 
invited. It was to see if anyone could break the bow of 
Siva. The victor could win the hand of Janaka’s daughter, 
Sita. One after the other, the princes tried to lift the bow 
of Siva, but had to return to their seats humiliated. At 
the instance of Viswamitra, Rama gently walked towards 
the bow, and raised it with His left hand. There was a 
thunderous applause. When He bent the bow to tie the 
string, it broke with a thunderous sound. Sita was brought 
there ready with a garland. Then Viswamitra asked Rama 
whether He was ready to marry Sita. He was ready to 
undertake any task entrusted to Him by Viswamitra, but 
was certainly not prepared for the marriage. Rama offered 
His salutations to Viswamitra and politely said, “Swami! 
You have brought us with you to safeguard your Yajna 
and not for performing our marriage. I would not think 
of marriage unless I get the consent of my father.” The 
sage was in a fix. There was absolute silence in the as- 
sembly. Everyone was surprised at Rama’s reply. Rama 
was firm in His stand. Thereupon King Janaka sent his 


Ramayana — A Scared Way Of Life 113 


messengers along with a few disciples of Viswamitra 
with an invitation to King Dasaratha. Viswamitra’s dis- 
ciples narrated to Dasaratha all that had happened. The 
king, the queens and the people of Ayodhya were filled 
with joy and jubilation at the prospect of the marriage 
between Rama and Sita. Dasaratha accompanied by his 
queens, Bharata and Satrughna and a host of others, ar- 
rived at Mithila. 


The womenfolk proceeded to the venue of the 
wedding in all enthusiasm, singing joyously, exhorting 
each other to witness the celestial wedding of Sita and 
Rama. 


Welcome to all for Rama’ wedding; together we 
shall witness the joyous scene. 

Many have gathered already, decked up in all their 
finery. 

With necklaces the ladies are adorned of jewels 
pure and gleaming. 

Rama shall tie the knot today to beauteous Sita, oh 
what a fine match they make. 

Father Dasaratha has made ready bounteous 
feasts. 

All learned sages are assembled with Vasishtha 
presiding. 

Oh, what a multitude has assembled to rejoice, 
hearts with joy overflowing. 

Wedding of the holy pair Rama and Sita, such a 
sight is indeed rare. 


114 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


The sight shall confer great merit. 

Rama looks the cool full moon, and Sita is a 
matching pair. 

The compassionate Rama who loves all will confer 
his grace on us all. 

Come quickly to witness the holy wedding of Rama 
and Sita. 


(Telugu song) 


The folk men were also ecstatic and joined the festivity 
by singing thus: 
Come let us go and see the marriage of Rama and 
Sita, 
The sight shall confer great merit. 
The lives of those who see this marriage will be 
sanctified. 
Oh come one and all to see the sacred marriage, 
Rama, who is riding on an elephant, is shining 
effulgently. 
Mother Sita is by His side, 
The brothers are at their service. 
Sita and Rama will smilingly enquire about our 
well-being; What else can we aspire for! 
Come let us go anon to see the holy wedding of 
Rama and Sita. 


(Telugu song) 


Sita was Janaka’s foster daughter. He had another 
daughter by name Urmila. His brother Kushadwaja also 


Ramayana — A Scared Way Of Life 115 


had two daughters by name Mandavi and Srutakeerthi. 
With the consent of King Dasaratha, it was decided that 
the four brides would be given in marriage to the four 
brothers. Dasaratha was happy that all his four sons who 
were born on the same day were getting married on the 
same day and same time. The marriage function was 
celebrated in all grandeur. 


Sweet notes of auspicious music reverberated in 
the air. The Vedic priests chanted the sacred mantras full- 
throated and blessed the couples. King Dasaratha shed 
tears of joy. Everyone was filled with divine bliss watch- 
ing the marriage proceedings. It is customary during the 
occasion that the bride and the bridegroom exchanged 
garlands. Sita had to garland Rama first, before the other 
brides could garland their respective bridegrooms. Sita, 
being short in stature, could not garland Rama who was 
ajanubahu (tall personality). Unless Rama bent His head 
before Sita, she could not garland Him. But He did not 
want to bend His head lest people should blame Him for 
not maintaining the honour of His lineage. Unable to gar- 
land Rama, Sita was holding the garland in her hand for a 
long time. There was another secret in this act of Rama. 
Lakshmana was the incarnation of Adisesha who carried 
mother earth on his hood. Rama looked at Lakshmana as 
if to say, “Look, why don’t you raise that part of the earth 
where Sita is standing to enable her to garland Me.” Then 
Lakshmana indicated to Rama that it was not possible to 
raise any particular area. If he tried to raise that part of 
the earth where Sita was standing, simultaneously Rama 


116 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


would be raised and so also others. Lakshmana, being 
endowed with intelligence, thought of a plan to solve the 
problem. All of a sudden, he fell at the feet of Rama and 
did not get up for a long time. Then Rama had to bend 
to lift Lakshmana up. Sita seized the opportunity and 
lost no time in garlanding Rama. Then the other three 
brides garlanded their respective grooms. The four broth- 
ers and their brides shone like brilliant gemstones. The 
onlookers shed tears of joy watching the grand spectacle. 


Confrontation With Parasurama 


As they were returning to Ayodhya, they heard a 
loud and frightening sound. Rama instructed Lakshmana 
to be ready for the battle. Parasurama appeared on the 
scene and challenged Rama saying, “Oh Rama! I have 
heard that you have broken the bow of Siva. It is of no 
consequence and is not at all difficult to lift. Ifyou really 
have strength, you should break this weapon of mine. 
So saying, Parasurama hurled his weapon at the feet of 
Rama. Rama calmly picked it up and broke the weapon. 
Parasurama at once fell at the feet of Rama. The people 
of Ayodhya welcomed the newly-wed couples. At the 
main entrance, Kausalya, Sumitra and Kaikeyi offered 
the brides and grooms mangalarati and took them in- 
side. The entire city of Ayodhya bore a festive look and 
everyone rejoiced. 


Today, everyone is celebrating the marriage of 
Sita and Rama. But after the marriage Rama had to face 


Ramayana — A Scared Way Of Life 117 


many ordeals; He overcame them all with fortitude. He 
decimated the demonic forces. Lakshmana was His main 
weapon. With his help, Rama emerged victorious in the 
battle with demons. Many a time He lavished praises on 
His brothers saying, “My brothers are greater than Me. 
I owe My victory to them. I could win over the enemies 
because of the strength of unity among us.” The lives of 
Rama, Lakshmana, Bharata and Satrughna demonstrated 
the ideal brotherhood to the entire world. Such ideal 
brotherhood is not noticed today. Many wonderful events 
took place in the life of Lord Rama. 


The stories of Lord Vishnu are amazing, 

They purify the lives of the people in all the three 
worlds, 

They are like the sickles that cut the creepers of 
worldly bondage, 

They are like good friends who help you in times 
of need, 

They are like shelters for the sages and seers doing 
penance in the forest. 


(Telugu poem) 


It is not enough to merely celebrate the Rama Na- 
vami as the birthday of Sri Rama. You should understand 
the purpose of His birth and practise the ideals He dem- 
onstrated. Rama Kalyana does not mean the marriage of 
Rama and Sita at physical level. Rama Kalyana is Atma 
Kalyana; it signifies the merging of atma (individualised 


118 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


soul) with Paramatma (universal soul). The Ramayana 
is not the story of an individual. Rama symbolises the 
cosmic and universal spirit. 


Sri Rama Navami, 18-4-2005, Prasanthi Nilayam 


Even if you cannot love others, do not hate them, 
or feel envy towards them. Do not misunderstand 
their motives and scandalise them; if only you 
know, their motives may be as noble as yours, or 


their action might be due to ignorance, rather 
than wickedness or mischief. Pardon the other 
man § faults, but deal harshly with yours. 


Baba 





11 


Win The Love Of Your Mother 
To Win The Love Of God 


“When man is born out of his mother’s womb 
he has no garland of any kind around his neck. 
Neither of pearls, nor gold, nor a string of gems 
nor a necklace of topaz or of rubies or other pre- 
cious gems can be seen even for a sample. There 
is, however, a garland around his neck, carrying 
the unbroken link of the effects of the good and 
bad deeds of his past lives strung together by Lord 
Brahma.” 

(Telugu poem) 


Embodiments of Love! 


he love of the mother is nobler and supreme 
than the love of all the friends and relatives 
in the world. The power of love the mother is unparal- 
leled. That is why we are calling the native country as 
Motherland. The country of Bharath is like our mother. 


120 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


In this sacred land of ours, several types of energy have 
been developing since ancient times. Great and holy men 
like Ramakrishna Paramahamsa and Vivekananda could 
acquire great spiritual power only due to the strength of 
their mothers’ blessings. The sacredness of a mother’s 
heart and the strength of her blessings are unparalleled. 
But, unfortunately people are unable to understand prop- 
erly the love of a mother, not only in our country but in 
every country. 


Revere Your Mother First 


It is a great sin to ignore the mother endowed with 
such a divine power. It is only to remind the people of 
the nobility and sacredness of the mother that she has 
been given the foremost place in the spiritual field, by 
exhorting people to worship the mother first as God. It 
is said, “Mathrudevo bhava” (worship the mother as 
God); “Pithrudevo bhava” (worship the father as God); 
“Acharyadevo bhava” (worship the teacher as God); 
“Athithidevo bhava” (worship the guest as God). Thus 
the mother has been given the first place in that order. 
It is only when we uphold the honour and dignity of the 
mother that we will be entitled to be called true sons. 
The life of a person who could not win the love of his 
mother is a mere waste. Hence, we must first acquire 
the deservedness to win the love of the mother. No one 
can describe the love of a mother in words. It is only by 
the strength of a mother’s will that a son would come up 


Win The Love Of Your Mother To Win The Love Of God 121 


well in life. Hence, one should respect and love one’s 
mother. She must be given the pride of place. It is only 
such people that can really lead the country. We may or 
may not worship other deities, but we must certainly 
worship our mother as God. We should never forget the 
love of our mother. The love of a mother is supreme. 
It is only by the love of the mother that divine feelings 
develop in the children. Where there is a mother of 
noble qualities, there will surely be all kinds of peace 
and prosperity. It is foolish to crave for the love of 
the people, ignoring the love of one’s own mother. 
One should, therefore, revere and respect the mother. 
One should try to experience the love of the mother. 


The mother of Sri Ramakrishna Paramahamsa was 
a noble lady. Even in dire circumstances when she had 
no food and drink, she developed unflinching faith and 
devotion to God and spent her time engaging herself in 
cultivating noble thoughts and performing noble deeds, 
thereby earning God’s grace. It is only when one respects 
his mother and wins her love, that he can be called a hu- 
man being in the real sense. There is no God greater than 
one’s mother in this world. Unfortunately, today people 
forget this truth and go to different places in search of 
God. Instead of craving for the unseen God, one should 
worship and serve the living divinity that is right in front 
of him. Several people undertake different activities like 
penance, pilgrimage to holy places, worship and other 
rituals in order to have the holy darshan of God, but 


122 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


they will be of no use. One cannot win the grace of God 
without first winning the love of his mother. The love 
of the mother flows as an undercurrent in every human 
being. You go through the history of any great person; 
it is obvious that they could reach such great heights 
in life only with the help of their mother’s love. When 
one leads his life in accordance with his mother’s noble 
thoughts, one will be relieved of all kinds of suffering. 
One may or may not respect any other person; but one 
must definitely respect one’s mother. One should dedicate 
his entire life to win the love of his mother. The mother’s 
love is always selfless. We must learn to cultivate such 
love. Wherever you go, whoever you may see, you can 
find that they have become prosperous only with the 
blessings of their mother’s love. If one cannot win the 
love of his mother, how can he hope to win the grace of 
God? Hence, first and foremost you must strive to win 
the love of your mother. You should not undertake any 
work that will hurt the feelings of your mother. The heart 
of a mother is very tender. Therefore, one should not hurt 
the feelings of the mother. 


The culture of Bharat has laid great stress on the 
teaching “Mathrudevo bhava’ (revere the mother as God) 
and “Pithrudevo bhava’ (revere the father as God), more 
than all other aspects. A person who could win the love 
of his mother can win everything else. Sri Ramakrishna 
Paramahamsa could earn such a great name for himself 
only because he could win the love of his mother. How 


Win The Love Of Your Mother To Win The Love Of God 123 


many great people are there in the state of West Bengal? 
How many people of noble qualities, rich and educated 
are there? But, they could not succeed in life due to lack 
of faith in God. It was only Ramakrishna Paramahamsa 
who could lead an ideal life by loving his mother and 
obeying her commands, due to his implicit faith and 
devotion to his mother. He used to teach people that 
there is nothing greater and nobler in this world than 
mother’s love. The mother is God, verily. It is, therefore, 
not proper to hurt the feelings of a mother who is the 
embodiment of love. It is only when we develop love 
towards our mother, our life will become happy and 
prosperous. Hence, first and foremost, we must strive to 
win the love of our mother. Whatever the mother does 
is for our own good. We must develop such firm faith. 
You take the history of any great person in this world; 
he owes his greatness to his mother. 


Mother Embodies Sacrifice 


Students of the present time are unable to win 
their mothers’ love. The mother can undergo any great 
ordeal, she is even prepared to undertake hard labour to 
earn a few rupees to bring up her children and educate 
them. What a great sacrilege it is to forget the love of 
such a noble mother! It is only a person who could win 
the love of his mother that can earn God’s love as well. 
We are not born from the earth or the sky; we are born 
from the womb of our mother. It is possible that differ- 
ences may arise between a mother and a son, at times. 


124 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


But, the mother does not hate her son on that count and 
forsake him. There may be sons who hate their mothers, 
but there are no mothers who hate their sons. The mother 
will always aspire for the welfare of her son. Even if they 
go to the court in a matter of dispute, the mother will 
say “He is my son and I am his mother”. They cannot 
refer to each other in any other manner. The mother will 
always strive for the safety, health and welfare of her 
children. Man, today, is undergoing several difficulties 
on account of ignoring the love of such a noble mother. 
If you strive to win the love of your mother, you can win 
the love of all other people. The love of your mother will 
always be with you, constantly guarding and guiding 
you in all your endeavours. Unfortunately people are 
not able to realise this truth. They think, “it is enough 
to provide a few morsels of food to that old lady”. They 
are so narrow-minded and selfish. It is a great mistake 
to think that their responsibility will end by providing 
some food to their mothers. The mother should always 
be held in high esteem and served. She must be made to 
feel happy and contented. 


The One-Pointed Filial Devotion of Pundarika 


Pundarika was a great devotee of Lord Pan- 
duranga. He always held the view that service to the 
parents was of paramount importance. One day, he was 
serving his parents by massaging their feet. In order 
to test his love towards his parents, Lord Panduraga 
appeared before him. But, Pundarika did not want to 


Win The Love Of Your Mother To Win The Love Of God 125 


be distracted from his duty and continued to serve his 
parents. Then Lord Panduranga enquired of him, “My 
dear son! I appeared before you to give you My darshan; 
but you are not looking at Me. Whom are you serving 
with such single-minded devotion?” Pundarika replied 
that he was serving his parents. Then, Lord Panduranga 
queried, “Is not God greater than the parents? Won’t 
you have My darshan at least for one second?” But, 
Pundarika was not disturbed. He replied, “My parents 
are living divinities for me. I cannot have your darshan, 
unless I put my parents to sleep. If you wish to give me 
your darshan, you stand there on this brick till then.” 


So saying, he pushed a brick towards Lord Pan- 
duranga. The Lord then commended his love ad devotion 
towards his parents and declared “The world will always 
remain safe and prosperous if all people cultivate such 
love and devotion towards their parents. May such noble 
sons like you proliferate in this world.” From then on, 
great and noble ideas of sacrifice and detachment began 
to develop in Pundarika. He spent his time happily serv- 
ing his parents and winning their love. 


Lifelong Lesson From A Noble Mother 


Putlibai was the mother of Mahatma Gandhi. She 
continued to observe a vow right from her early days. 
She never used to take her food in the afternoon, with- 
out hearing the singing of the cuckoo bird. Gandhi was 
a child then. One day, it was already 3 0’ clock in the 


126 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


afternoon and his mother did not take her food, since the 
cuckoo did not sing. Gandhi could not bear to see his 
mother being hungry. He, therefore, thought of a plan. 
He went behind their house and imitated the call of a 
cuckoo. Then he went into the house and pleaded with 
his mother, “Mother! The cuckoo sang. You can now 
take your food’. His mother, however, could realise that 
her son was lying. She grew very angry. She caught hold 
of him and slapped on his cheek twice. She could not 
contain her anger and anguish. She chided him saying, 
“it is my misfortune to have given birth to a liar like 
you”. Gandhi then repented for his mischievous act and 
begged his mother to forgive him. He also took a vow 
that he would never speak a lie thereafter in his life. 
Thus, mothers of old times used to teach their children 
good behaviour and put them in the right path. Such 
ideal mothers are very rare in present times in the world. 
The present-day mothers would always think, “My son 
should get good marks and ranks in the examination. He 
should acquire high degrees and earn lakhs of rupees. He 
should rise to a high position in his career.” There are 
hundreds of such mothers now-a-days. But, there is not 
even a single mother who teaches her son “My dear son! 
You pray to God daily. Never forget God.” That is the 
reason why the country of Bharat is facing innumerable 
difficulties. The Bharatiyvas of yester years always used 
to pray daily. “Oh! Rama! Krishna! Govinda!” They 
used to chant the divine name incessantly. But, things 
have changed. Now, there is no such contemplation on 


Win The Love Of Your Mother To Win The Love Of God i27 


the divine name. On the other hand worldly desires have 
proliferated. The culture of Bharath always exhorts the 
people, “Sathyam vada” (speak the truth) and “Dhar- 
mam chara” (follow righteousness). Unfortunately, 
today people act contrary to such noble ideals. They 
are distorting those ideals as “Sathyam vadha’” (kill the 
truth) and “Dharmam chera” (Imprison righteousness). 


The Chosen Mother’s Gesture 


Once Easwaramma came to Me and requested, 
“Swami! Several poor mothers have come here along 
with their children. They have no food to eat. Kindly 
bless them.” Then I rendered them proper help and thus 
fulfilled Easwaramma’s wish. On another day, she came 
to Me and expressed her anguish thus: “Swami! Small 
children of five years’ age are daily walking to Bukkap- 
atnam and back for attending their school. How can they 
study after walking such a long distance daily?” Then, 
I called their parents and advised them: “These tiny tots 
can learn more from their mothers than from their teach- 
ers in a school. Instead of sending these small children to 
such a long distance for education, you first teach them 
what little you know. You teach them at least two or three 
alphabets which you know”. Later, I established a school 
in Puttaparthi and fulfilled the wish of Easwaramma. 


Mothers Of Old Times Were Patriotic And 
Prayerful 


128 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


The mothers of those days, though they were 
innocent and illiterate, never gave up praying to God. 
Love God. There is no use wasting your time in worldly 
matters. We should never try to imitate others. We must 
try to develop faith in the Truth that manifests from our 
own heart. It is not good to develop hatred towards other 
castes and religions. One should develop faith in one’s 
own religion and follow it diligently. 


Once, when this body was a student, some political 
leaders approached Me and requested, “Raju! We un- 
derstand that you write good poetry. We have arranged 
a meeting where a number of our people are expected to 
participate. We request you to please write a good song 
that can inspire our people.” Those were the days of the 
Second World War. Adolf Hitler was marching forward 
to conquer various countries in Europe. He was trying 
to march into Russia. India was then under the control 
of Britishers. Taking the situation into account, I wrote 
a small playlet. In it, I kept a rubber doll in a cradle and 
sang the following song rocking the cradle gently: 


“Don’t cry my child, don’t cry 

If you cry, you will not be called the valorous son 
of Bharat... 

Did you cry because the murderer Hitler 

Invaded the immortal Russia? 

The Red Army and the brave Stalin 

Are there to crush Hitler; don’t cry 


Win The Love Of Your Mother To Win The Love Of God 129 


Why do you cry my child, why do you cry? 
Do you cry because our people lack in unity... 
All the people will unite and fight 

For our freedom; don’t cry. 

India will certainly attain freedom 

Don’t cry my child, don’t cry...” 


The mothers of those days used to sing such inspiring 
patriotic songs and teach their children good things. 
They used to mould their character to make them as 
heroes of the country. There used to be no place at all 
for untruth in their talk. By their truthful words, they 
used to train their children in the path of truth. 


Once, the village of Puttaparthi was affected by in- 
fectious diseases like cholera and plague. Several people 
died on account of these diseases. Then, I warned the 
children in the village that these diseases would spread 
through polluted water and impure food and therefore 
they should take proper care in this regard. 


I exhorted them, “Purify the water and then drink. 
You eat only clean and wholesome food, though in small 
quantities. Not only that, keep your mouth always fresh 
and clean. Several diseases will affect you due to un- 
clean mouth. It is not good for you to eat anything that 
you come across, when you feel hungry. Whether it is 
for keeping good health or happiness, God’s grace is 
important. Hence, always pray to God.” Happiness can 
be attained only through constant contemplation on God; 
nothing else. It is not something that can be attained by 


130 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


external objects. It can only spring from one’s own heart. 
In order that we may attain good health and happiness, 
we must constantly contemplate on God and thereby 
sanctify our time. 


It is only the parents who led ideal lives that nour- 
ished and nurtured our country of Bharath, since ancient 
times. Unfortunately, today you do not find sons who 
obey their parents. The youth of today brush aside their 
parents’ words as insane talk and ignore them. This is 
not correct. They are not insane words; they are verily 
truthful words spoken from the depth of their hearts. God 
will certainly hear the prayers said with purity of con- 
sciousness and shower His Grace on such people. Hence, 
one should always pray to God in whichever form one 
likes and sanctify one’s life by the grace of God. Since 
ancient times, the women of Bharat offered such prayers 
to God, in all sincerity and devotion. That is the reason 
why the country of Bharat could attain great heights. 


Help The Children Learn Healthy Habits 


Embodiments of love! If you wish that you or the 
children to be born to you must be sacred, constantly 
contemplate on God. It is only when the parents lead a 
good and noble life, their children will be good and noble. 
Hence, the parents must be good, in the first instance. 
Unfortunately, today the parents are unable to set an ex- 
ample to their children, with the result, the children are 
taking to bad ways. Such sacred teachings have become 
extinct in the country of Bharath, today. The mothers in 


Win The Love Of Your Mother To Win The Love Of God 131 


ancient India used to teach good things and good habits 
to their children thus: 


Get up early in the morning at the crowing of the 
cock, 

Have a bath after your morning ablutions, 

Wear a proper dress.Eat properly and moderately. 
Go to school and study diligently. 

Earn a good name. 

Dont move out when it is raining, 

And never go near the ditches. 

Take part in games, 

Run and play. 

If you abide by all these rules, 

You will have both health and wealth. 


(Telugu poem) 


Both the elders as well as the children are not 
brushing their teeth properly, today. That is why all sorts 
of diseases are spreading from ourselves only. For both, 
good and bad, we only are responsible. They do not come 
of their own accord. When we cultivate sacred feelings 
in us, we will be rewarded with good results. If sacred 
feelings are to take root in us, we have to cultivate good 
habits. 


“Better indeed is knowledge than mechanical prac- 
tice. Better still is meditation. But, better than meditation 
is surrender of the fruit of all actions. For, such renun- 
ciation of the fruit of all actions would indeed result in 


132 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


liberation.” (Gita — Ch.12 — Sloka 12) 


Right from early morning till we go to bed, if 
we are engaged in good activities, that itself will auto- 
matically become a practice. In fact, the country needs 
such youth. Who are youth? People generally think that 
boys and girls aged between 18 and 20 years constitute 
youth. This is not correct. It is only people with noble 
thoughts, who can be considered as youth. Hence, one 
must cultivate noble thoughts. As soon as you get up, 
your first action shall be chanting the divine name 
“Rama! Krishna! Govinda!” Again, before you go to 
bed, you must chant the divine name. When you do 
such chanting of the divine name, you will always have 
good thoughts. Unfortunately, today people totally forget 
chanting of the divine name. People think that they are 
highly educated and have high degrees, but they will not 
enable you to tread the right path. Education that will not 
develop enquiry into one’s own self is not education at 
all! It will only lead to agitation! Mere book reading does 
not constitute education. Book reading will contribute 
only to acquiring bookish knowledge. That is artificial 
knowledge. Real knowledge comes out of the heart. 
When the young men and women realise and propagate 
this Truth, the country will progress in all directions. 


Always Contemplate On The Divine 


Embodiments of Love! Do not waste your time 
in reading voluminous books, thinking that such books 


Win The Love Of Your Mother To Win The Love Of God 133 


will help you in acquiring great knowledge. One should 
read such books which will help in the contemplation 
on the divine name. Do not be satisfied with acquir- 
ing mere bookish knowledge. Such knowledge is only 
a superficial knowledge. What you need really is the 
knowledge of Self. Strive to acquire that knowledge. 
It manifests from within. It cannot be acquired from 
external sources. Is it not a fact that the more you dig in 
the river bed, the more the water that comes out of the 
sand! Similarly, the more you remove the bad thoughts in 
you, the more the sacred knowledge and sacred thoughts 
that manifest in you. Purity, Steadiness, Wisdom and 
such other noble qualities manifest only from one’s own 
heart. First and foremost you have to cultivate sacred 
and noble thoughts. But, you need not give credence to 
all such talk. You have to always tread the sacred path. 


The mothers in the ancient times used to teach their 
children such sacred things. That is why the children 
of those days used to engage themselves in constant 
contemplation on God, with the result, the country was 
constantly protected by God. It is not the body that is 
important for us, it is the thought and the feelings. Several 
people question “Where is God?” I tell such people “My 
dear! I am God; you are also God”. This is the Truth. 
Why should we be afraid of speaking this Truth? God 
is omnipresent. All are embodiments of God! There is 
divinity in every human being. If not, we cannot live 
in this world. It is only because of our faith in God, 


134 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


we have been able to survive in this world till today. 
A small story to illustrate the point: There used to be a 
husband and wife in a village. The wife was constantly 
chanting the divine name “Rama! Krishna! Govinda!” 
and worshipping God daily. The husband, however, was 
not doing any worship or contemplation on God. But, 
he used to attend to his daily chores. The wife used to 
feel “Alas! My husband is not chanting the divine name 
atleast once in a day’’. One night, the husband could not 
get sleep and was turning this side and that side on the 
bed restlessly. At that time, he casually said “Rama!” His 
wife was overjoyed on hearing the divine name coming 
out of the mouth of her husband, though unintentionally. 
The next day, as soon as she got up from her bed, she 
collected all the rice available in the house, cooked it and 
fed the poor people, in jubilation. The husband who was 
observing this feeding of the poor, enquired her “What 
is the matter! You are cooking and feeding the poor 
today. What is the special occasion?” The wife replied. 
“Last night, I heard the divine name of ‘Rama!’ emerg- 
ing from your mouth. My heart overflowed with joy on 
hearing the divine name from your mouth. Hence, this 
celebration”. On hearing his wife’s reply, the husband 
felt sorry and thought to himself “Alas! I have installed 
Rama in my heart and worshipped him there all the 
while. Has my Rama gone out from my heart today?” 
Several people do not give expression to their love and 
devotion to God. They keep their devotion to themselves. 
However, one day or the other it manifests outside. 


Win The Love Of Your Mother To Win The Love Of God 135 


Embodiments of Love! 


Contemplate on the divine name, irrespective of 
the religion, caste, creed or sex. You can always chant the 
divine name of your liking. The mother of Ramakrishna 
Paramahamsa taught her son good things and shaped 
him into a great yogi. All the mothers should take her 
as an example and strive to put their children in the 
right path. If you constantly contemplate on and chant 
the divine name, that itself will purify your thoughts 
and feelings. Never forget the divine name. If you 
constantly contemplate on the divine name, your life 
will surely be sanctified. Embodiments of Love! You, 
therefore, contemplate on the divine name constantly. 


Eswaramma Day, 6-5-2005, Kodaikanal 


Thyaga is a supreme virtue in man. One who has 
no spirit of sacrifice will be sick in body and mind. 
What does thyaga do to man? It eradicates his 
selfishness. As long as self-interest is dominant, 
one cannot understand the Reality. A self-centred 
man cannot attain the supreme. Hence, we must 
cultivate a broad mind and serve our fellow- 
beings. Even in the pursuit of mukti (liberation), 
there is no place for concern with one self. To 
be concerned with naa mukti (my salvation) will 
lead only to na mukti (no salvation). Those who 
aspire for their individual liberation will never 
achieve it. 


136 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


God manifests in man in three forms described as 
Bhur Bhuvah Suvaha. Bhu is the material form 
(padartha). Bhuvah is spandana shakthi or prana 
(life principle). Suvaha is the form of prajna. 
Prajna shakthi is the radiation which through 
vibration (prana shakthi) gives the material form 
represented by the body. God mainfests in all 
these three forms. The body is a combination of 
water, iron, lead, phosphorus and other things 
which are but inert matter. The body is inert but 


is made to function actively through vibration or 
the Life Force. Prajna shakthi is conscience. It 
occupies a special place in the body. God, in the 
form of conscience, activates the body. If only 
man understands this truth of spirituality, he will 
never indulge in bad deeds. The functioning of the 
body is itselfa mystery. 


Baba 





12 
Develop The Spirit Of Oneness 


Embodiments of Love! 


Mc” dignitaries from Sri Lanka have spoken 
to you about the great teachings of Buddha. 
First of all, you have to understand that God is omnipres- 
ent. There is no place where you do not find God. The 
essence of the teachings of all scriptures is that God is 
present everywhere. Out of their ignorance, some people 
argue that God is limited to a particular place. 


Divinity Indwells In All Beings 


Truly speaking, Divinity is present in everyone and 
is all-pervasive. This is the basic truth of all doctrines 
and philosophies. See God everywhere. If you see God 
everywhere, nothing bad will happen to you. This ekatma 
bhava (principle of oneness) should be understood by 
the Bharatiyas. 


138 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


See no evil; see what is good, 
Talk no evil; talk what is good, 
Hear no evil; hear what is good, 
Do no evil; do what is good, 

Be always with God. 


Some people call Him Rama, some others adore 
Him as Krishna and still some others worship Him as 
Buddha. Names and forms may vary, but God is one. 
God is not limited to a particular name, form, region 
or religion. There is only one God who pervades every 
atom of the Creation. Words fail to express the glory and 
grandeur of Divinity. People may describe Divinity in 
a number of ways, but no description can ever portray 
Divinity in full measure. In fact, to describe Divinity 
is a sign of delusion. Where is God? You are all the 
embodiments of God. God pervades all beings as their 
life-breath. Such transcendental principle of Divinity 
cannot be described. One may do one’s best to describe 
it at any length, yet all descriptions will fall short of what 
reality is. Water is infinite; a container cannot hold more 
water than its capacity. As is the size of the container, 
so is the quantity of water collected. Likewise, God is 
infinite, but each one describes Him based on his limited 
understanding. Divinity is much more than what human 
mind can comprehend. 


Embodiments of Love! 


It is impossible for anyone to describe Divinity in 
full measure. God is one, but people may describe Him 


Develop The Spirit Of Oneness 139 


in various ways depending on their feelings. Divinity is 
one. It is a sign of ignorance to divide God in the name 
of religion and limit Him to a particular name and form. 
God is limitless and boundless. He is sarvantaryami 
(all- knowing inner reality). He is sarva bhutantaratma 
(indweller of all beings). How can anyone describe 
such Divinity? God is present in everyone in the form 
of atma (Self). Develop self-confidence and spirit of 
oneness. Ekam sat viprah bahudha vadanti (truth is 
one, but the wise refer to it by various names). (Point- 
ing to the tumbler, Swami said) This is water. Telugu 
people call it neeru, Tamilians call it thanni, so on and 
so forth. Different people call it by different names, but 
water is the same. Likewise, the same God is extolled 
by various names. The indweller is the same in all be- 
ings. People worship God by different names and forms, 
but God is one. The principle of the atma which resides 
in everyone is the true divine power. Only those with 
self-confidence are true bhaktas (devotees). You can- 
not call yourself a devotee if you lack self-confidence. 
Without self-confidence, you cannot achieve anything 
in life. Therefore, first and foremost, develop firm and 
unshakeable self-confidence. From self-confidence arises 
self-satisfaction. Self-satisfaction shows you the path of 
self-sacrifice which ultimately leads to self-realisation. 
Self-confidence is the basis for self-realisation. 


There Is Nothing Like My God And Your God 


140 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


Today many people practise meditation without 
knowing what it is. In the process, they waste a lot of 
time. What is meditation? Is it to sit cross-legged with 
closed eyes? No. Not at all. People undertake meditation 
with a deluded mind. Consequently, they are unable to 
achieve the desired result. What is meant by meditation? 
To think of God at all times and under all circumstances 
is true meditation. You should install God in your heart 
and discharge your duties with the feeling that God is 
the basis of everything. Only then can you be called a 
true devotee. Wherever you go, whatever you may do, 
recognise the truth that there is only one God and He 
is all-pervasive. Never give scope for differences say- 
ing my God and your God. Where is your God? Where 
is my God? All are one; be alike to everyone. There 
is only one God and He is present in everyone. It is a 
big mistake to think that God is different for different 
people. You should have firm faith that God is one. The 
process of inhalation and exhalation as indicated by the 
Soham principle is one and the same in everybody. So- 
ham means “I am God.” This clearly demonstrates that 
God 1s not different from you. When man comes into the 
world, the first word he utters is “Koham, Koham” (who 
am I?). He should constantly keep asking this question 
until he realises his true identity. He should realise his 
true nature and proclaim, “Soham, Soham” (I am God) 
before leaving the world. 


Never attribute multiplicity to Divinity on the basis 
of different names and forms such as Rama, Krishna, 


Develop The Spirit Of Oneness 141 


Jesus, Allah, Buddha, etc. You may call Him by any 
name, but God is one and the same. But these days, we 
do not find teachers who can make lasting impression on 
the hearts of people by imparting such sacred teachings. 
All the time, man keeps searching for God elsewhere. 
How can you find God elsewhere? Some people may 
call Him Allah; others may call Him by some other 
name. Does God become different for different people 
just because they call Him by different names? No, no. 
These are only names. To think that God is different for 
different people is a great delusion. You may call Him 
by any name. God is one. 


Sri Lanka Will Be Safe And Secure 


When you develop such spirit of oneness, you 
will certainly have sakshatkara (vision of the Divine). 
Everyone should develop ekatma bhava (spirit of one- 
ness). Easwarah sarva bhutanam (God is the indweller 
of all beings). It is sheer ignorance to say, “My God is 
different from your God”. Those who quarrel with each 
other in the name of religion are foolish people. For some 
time now, certain types of differences have cropped up in 
Sri Lanka. Whatever others may say, we have to firmly 
believe that God is one. It is a great mistake to develop 
differences on the basis of our deluded thinking. 


Once an old woman went in search of Jesus. When 
she met him, she asked, “Are you Jesus?” Jesus replied, 
“That is the name given to me. But you can call me by 
any name, I shall respond.” Names and forms are bound 


142 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


to change. When you are born, people call you a child. 
As you grow up, you are called a boy, then you becomea 
man and later on a grandfather. But the child, boy, man 
and grandfather are one and the same. Childhood, youth 
and old age are merely the different stages of your life. 
But you are one and the same. Similarly, names and forms 
may be different, but God is one. 


Embodiments of Love! 


You have come here all the way from Sri Lanka 
because of your love for Me. My love for you is hundred 
times more than the love you have for Me (prolonged 
loud applause). Sri Lanka had to face many hardships, 
even from the time of Ravana. But Sri Lanka can never 
be put to harm. It will always be safe, secure and pros- 
perous (loud prolonged applause). God is the leader of 
your country. As long as you have faith in God, you have 
nothing to fear. May you all enjoy safety and security! 
Wherever you go, whatever you do, have firm convic- 
tion that God is always with you, in you, around you, 
above you, below you. Do not be carried away by what 
others say. Have God firmly installed in your heart. You 
can never be put to any harm. No danger can ever befall 
you. Lead your lives with such courage and conviction. 
God will certainly bless you with success. 


Embodiments of Love! 


The hearts of the people of Sri Lanka are sacred. 


Develop The Spirit Of Oneness 143 


You are the embodiments of Love. Where there is love, 
there cannot be any adversity. Love is God. God is Love. 
Hence, fill your hearts with love. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Very soon I will visit Sri Lanka and bestow eternal 
bliss on all of you (thunderous applause). In the present 
situation, it is difficult for Me to walk. However, dif- 
ficulty is only for the body. It comes and goes. I do not 
care for such physical constraints. I will certainly come 
to your country very soon and fulfil your long cherished 
dream. Right from a child to an old man, devotees in Sri 
Lanka think of Swami always. Your prayers and penance 
will certainly find fulfilment very soon. Cherish this sa- 
cred feeling in your heart. The passage of time will not 
affect the intimate relationship that exists between you 
and Me. It is eternal and everlasting. 


Buddha Purnima, 23-5-2005, 
Brindavan (Whitefield). 


144 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


There are some mothers who feed the baby only 
when it starts crying. The more considerate and 
loving type of mother knows when the baby is 
hungry; she need not be called to its side by a 
loud wail. This Sai Matha is that type of mother. 
I have come because I felt I had to come; I re- 
solved upon this. There is no need now for tears 
or despair, either among the repositories of the 
Vedic wisdom or among the good who suffer from 
the cruel winds of adharma. This campaign will 
succeed; it will not fail. The welfare of the world 
will be ensured through the fostering of the godly 
everywhere, and more particularly of these reser- 
voirs of the ancient wisdom of this land. 


Baba 





13 


Understand The Principle Of 
Fundamental Truth 


he Present Vice Chancellor and the former 

Vice Chancellor have narrated their experi- 
ences. When vyashti (individual) identifies himself with 
samashti (community), he realises Parameshti (God). 
It is very difficult to understand Parameshti which is 
beyond both vyashti and samashti. There will be har- 
mony between vyashti and samashti when one develops 
equanimity. 


Know What Is True And Eternal 


One should realise that samashti is the basis of 
everything. People are not able to understand what is 
meant by ‘I’ and ‘you’. ‘Where are you studying? Where 
am I studying?’ In these two sentences, there are two 
different identities of the same principle of Samashti. 
Few have truly understood the principle of Samashti 
so far. But there lies in it the transcendental principle 


146 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


of Parameshti. However, the transcendental principle 
of Parameshti is much more difficult to understand. 
Our Gokak (Prof. V.K. Gokak, first Vice Chancellor of 
Sri Sathya Sai Institute of Higher Learning) also found 
himself in such a situation. He had read volumes of 
great books. He knew answers to many intricate ques- 
tions. But he could not understand what was true and 
eternal. Similarly, he could not understand the differ- 
ence between atma (Self) and anatma (non-Self). Truly 
speaking, anatma has no existence. There is only Atma 
everywhere. After some time, Gokak realised this truth 
and understood it clearly. I provided help to him at that 
time. Man wants help of many types for the sake of 
clarity. This help will provide a lot of lasting strength 
to a true devotee. This help is not temporary. It is true 
and eternal. When you keep on enquiring what is true 
and eternal, gradually the veil of Maya will be removed. 


After some time, Gokak came close to Me. All his 
doubts disappeared and he held on to the principle of 
divinity which is formless, true, eternal, pure and unsul- 
lied. It is not possible for all to understand this divine 
principle. This principle of truth is present in you, Me 
and everyone equally. One who takes truth as the basis 
will never become unsteady. Everything may change, 
but truth will remain changeless. 


Attain The State Of Doubtlessness 


The principle of Karma (action) is difficult to 


Understand The Principle Of Fundamental Truth 147 


understand. One type of karma may be responsible for 
all your doubts. But another type of Karma will destroy 
your doubts and take you to the state of unity. Gokak 
realised this truth and became doubtless. When you attain 
the state of doubtlessness, you realise the truth. This is 
the royal path of attaining moksha (liberation). What is 
the real meaning of moksha? Moha kshaya (removal of 
attachment) is moksha (liberation). So long as one has 
attachment, one cannot think of liberation. Hence, one 
should strive for detachment in the first instance. 


Gokak firmly held on to the principle of truth. 
One day, he came to Me and asked, “Swami! Am I the 
knower or is conscience the knower?” I told him, “There 
is something else between conscience and conscious. 
That is maya.” Maya is responsible for all delusion. 
Do not become a victim of maya. When you cast aside 
maya, then truth will manifest from within. What type 
of truth is it? Truth can neither be heard nor seen though 
it appears that it is seen and heard. But it transcends 
both. All that is seen or heard cannot be experienced 
by the heart. When you transcend the senses, you see 
the dawn of consciousness. Truth is that which is close 
to consciousness. Next morning, he came to Me again 
and said, “Whatever doubts I had yesterday, have been 
removed. But I am finding it difficult to understand the 
origin of doubts.” Then I told him, “Take for, example, 
bats; they move about like birds, gather their food like 
birds. But contrary to the nature of birds, they hang head 


148 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


downward from the branches of trees. You may doubt 
whether they are birds or animals. Doubts come to man 
in the same manner. At one point of time, all these doubts 
will stop coming to you. This is not something related to 
Me and others; it is related to you and Me.” 


Vyashti constitutes samashti and samashti is the 
collective form of vyashti. In the final analysis, samashti 
is the expansion of vyashti. One who understands the 
relationship between vyashti, samashti and parameshti 
can know the truth. This is what Gokak understood ul- 
timately. Everyone has to make an effort to understand 
this truth. We are leading our lives in fun and frolic, but 
this is not the reality. We can understand the reality only 
when we transcend worldliness. Total change cannot 
come instantly. Gokak understood this truth fully well. 
Hence, he held on to this principle of fundamental truth 
firmly. In the end, he forgot everything else. 


Dawn Of Truth And Experience Of Bliss 


At that time, Gokak was studying Savitri (an epic 
poem written by Sri Aurobindo). All his inner thoughts 
were focused on Savitri. There exist inner thoughts in 
every human being which cannot be seen. One day or 
the other, truth becomes manifest all of a sudden when 
you are consistent in your sadhana. At that time, Guru 
Purnima was fast approaching. He said, “Swami, I can 
see light approaching me on the path I am proceeding.” 
After saying this, he closed his eyes. He did not utter a 


Understand The Principle Of Fundamental Truth 149 


word. I went near him and touched his head. I told him, 
“My dear, now you go home, have a cup of coffee and 
come.” But he did not say anything. He had transcended 
the state of duality. He went home, prayed to Savitri and 
came back. Ultimately, he could get all the answers from 
Savitri. From then onwards, he started contemplating on 
Savitri. He used to come to Me both in the morning and 
in the evening. One day when he came to Me, he was all 
smiles. I asked him, “You seem to be very happy, what 
is the reason?” “Swami! This bliss is Your blessing. It 
has not come from me’, he replied. 


Nityanandam, Parama Sukhadam, Kevalam Jnana- 
murtim, Dwandwateetam, Gagana Sadrisham, Tattwa- 
masyadi Lakshyam, Ekam, Nitvam, Vimalam, Achalam, 
Sarvadhee Sakshibhutam (God is the embodiment of 
eternal bliss, wisdom absolute, beyond the pair of op- 
posites, expansive and pervasive like the sky, the goal 
indicated by the mahavakya Tattwamasi, One without 
a second, eternal, pure, unchanging, witness of Il func- 
tions of the intellect). 


On Experiencing Illumination 


I told him to remain in that state forever. Next 
morning, he came again. He said, “Swami, I have been 
in the same state.” He said that he did not even think 
where the blissful state had come from. Knowing very 
well that he should not speak much at that time, I asked 
him to go home and come later. He left. Next morning 


150 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


at Brahmamuhurtha time, he came again. He knocked at 
the door thrice, but I knocked six times. He understood 
the meaning and left the place silently. After this, no 
scope was left for questions and answers. Thereafter, he 
stopped asking questions. He went on contemplating on 
Savitri. Ultimately, he attained the state of non-duality. 


One day when he was meditating with closed 
eyes, I slapped hard on his head twice. Then he started 
experiencing illumination. As illumination dawned on 
him, he lost interest in all worldly matters. He remained 
in that state. On another day, I told him to close his eyes. 
He did accordingly. As he closed his eyes, I pressed his 
Bhrumadhya (centre of the eyebrows) with My thumb. 
Instantly, all his doubts disappeared. He said, “Swami, I 
am one, God is one, love is one. I do not require anything 
else.” I told him to go and come the next morning. Gokak 
was very punctual and always came at the correct time. 
As he came again and again in this manner, he had the 
vision of Savitri. He could visualise Savitri every now 
and then, but not continuously. He considered Savitri as 
the fundamental principle. He held on to this principle 
firmly. In this manner, he could attain the state of divin- 
ity. As you proceed on the path of sadhana continuously, 
certain powers will manifest in you. You should not at- 
tach any importance to them. Once you understand the 
fundamental principle, you will have everything. That 
fundamental principle is one, and not two. Truth is one, 
not two. Everything else is untruth; it is like passing 
clouds. He forgot everything else. He focused his mind 


Understand The Principle Of Fundamental Truth 151 


only on the fundamental principle. 


Once when I was at Kodaikanal, he sent a lengthy 
telegram to Me. I then sent him a telegram with the mes- 
sage, “I know, this is right. Don’t change your mind.” 
From then onwards, there was no further correspondence 
between us. However, once he asked his wife to write a 
letter to Me. Her name was Sharadamma. She was also 
a Mahajnani (one of great wisdom). She used to write 
in such a way that two words written by her would have 
four different meanings. Thereafter, only atmic relation- 
ship existed between us. He attained the state of absolute 
silence. He did not touch any book nor did he ask any 
question. He did not write any letter either. All that he 
said was, “Swami! All Your answers have touched my 
heart.” Then I told him, “Both of us understand the re- 
lationship that exists between us. You don’t worry about 
anything else.” After that, the relationship between us 
at physical level ceased to exist. At the same time, our 
relationship at spiritual level became more intimate. 
Before leaving his mortal coil, he wrote these words, “I 
have reached You.” 


Divine Discourse 23-6-2005, Prasanthi Nilayam. 


152 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


An Avatar assumes the form that is beneficial to 
and within the reach of human beings, for man 
cannot normally comprehend the Formless and 
Attributeless Absolute. But, unfortunately, even 
when the Formless Absolute assumes a form there 
are persons who, impelled by their own attitudes, 
attribute their own human foibles to the avatar. 


“When He has the same form as ours, the same 
Physical features, and eats, talks and moves about 
like any of us, what is the difference between the 
avatar and ourselves ?”’, they ask. Because of this 
narrow-minded approach, these persons distance 
themselves from the Divine. 


Baba 





14 
Pray For The Welfare Of All 


Everyone has to face the consequences of his ac- 
tions. Who has made the bats to hang from the 
branches of a tree with their heads downwards? 
Has anyone done it out of hatred? No. It is their 
Karma (fate). Likewise, nobody can escape from 
the consequences of Karma. 


(Telugu poem) 


irds fly in the sky with the help of wings. 

Likewise, bats too fly in the sky, but unlike 
other birds, they hang with their heads downwards from 
the branches of trees. Is it not their fate? One may perform 
any activity, but one is bound to face the consequences 
of one’s action. This is the law of nature. 


One Cannot Escape From Ones’s Karma Phala 
Students Boys and Girls, 


People may act as they please, but they cannot 


154 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


escape the consequences of their actions. Whether he is 
a pamara (simpleton) or a mahaneeya (noble soul), he 
has to face the results of his actions. Let no one be under 
the illusion that one can commit sin and still go scot-free. 
Hence, one should enquire before undertaking any activity 
whether it is good or bad. Wherever you go, the results of 
your actions will follow you like your shadow. However, 
it is possible to escape from the consequences of action 
by the grace of God. God is always by your side saying 
“Tathastu!”’, “Tathastu\” (so shall it be!). Man is not tak- 
ing cognisance of this truth and is indulging in wicked 
deeds. He knows pretty well what is good and what is 
bad, yet, he is unable to give up his evil ways. One’s 
experiences in life, good and bad, depend on his actions. 


No one can comprehend the ways of God. They are 
beyond description. You may think that you can commit 
a mistake surreptitiously and feel that no one has seen 
you. But you cannot hide your actions from God. The 
consequences of your actions will haunt you wherever 
you go. 


One should not be judged by his external appear- 
ance. One may look noble and speak in a pleasing man- 
ner, but his actions may not be in consonance with his 
words. We may undertake a number of good activities, 
yet we cannot escape from the consequences of our past 
deeds. We have to bear this truth always in mind. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Pray For The Welfare Of All 155 


The world is full of wonders and mysteries. The 
law that governs human life and the world at large is 
beyond the ken of human understanding. The principle 
of divinity is not visible to the naked eye, but that is 
what prompts you to perform action and experience the 
consequences thereof. 


The story of the Lord is amazing, 

It purifies the lives of people in all the three 
worlds, 

It is like the sickle that cuts the creepers of 
worldly bondage, 

It is like a good friend who helps you in time 
of need, 

It is like a shelter for the sages and seers doing 
penance in the forest. 


(Telugu poem) 
Embodiments of Love! 


You may not be able to comprehend fully all that 
is being said. But you will understand it through experi- 
ence. It is impossible to escape karma phala (fruits of 
action). We read a number of books, but do we put into 
practice whatever we have learnt? No. No. We put into 
practice only that which is convenient and necessary for 
us and ignore the rest. 


God’s Grace only can nullify karma’s effect 


156 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


Students! 


You may wonder if there is a way to escape from 
the consequences of karma. Yes, it is possible for those 
who earn the grace of God. Once you become the recipi- 
ent of God’s grace, you will not be affected by karma 
phala. Hence, you should strive to earn divine grace. 
Scholars say, it is impossible to escape karma. What they 
say is true to a certain extent. But once you earn Divine 
grace, even if you have to experience the consequences 
of karma, you will not feel the pain. Take for instance a 
bottle containing medicine. You find the expiry date men- 
tioned on the bottle. After the expiry date, the medicine 
will lose its potency. Likewise, God’s grace will make the 
karma phala ‘expire’, 1.e., itnullifies the effects of karma. 
Hence, it is possible to escape from the consequences of 
karma. Man should cultivate necessary strength and will 
power to deserve divine grace. You will be free from the 
shackles of karma once you earn divine grace. 


Lord Easwara had granted only sixteen years of 
life-span to Markandeya. But Markandeya was unaware 
of this. One evening, he found his parents in great sorrow. 
On enquiry, they revealed that his end had approached 
and that was the cause of their sorrow. They said, “Lord 
Easwara had ordained that you would live only for 
sixteen years and today happens to be the last day of 
your earthly sojourn. Tomorrow our earthly ties will be 
snapped.” Markandeya was surprised to hear this. He 
also felt sorry that he was not made aware of it earlier. 


Pray For The Welfare Of All 157 


He said, “I would have made proper use of my time if 
I had known that I would live for only sixteen years.” 
He went to the temple of Easwara without wasting even 
a moment, hugged the Siva Linga and started chanting 
Om namah sivaya wholeheartedly. At the appointed 
hour, Lord Yama (God of death) cast his noose around 
the neck of young Markandeya. As he was hugging 
the Linga, the noose fell around the Siva Linga also. 
Easwara manifested there and remonstrated with Yama, 
“How dare you cast the noose around Me?” Pleased 
with the devotion of Markandeya, He blessed him with 
the boon of immortality. In fact, it was Easwara who 
had stipulated 16 years of life-span for Markandeya. 
But on account of Markandeya’s intense devotion and 
total surrender Easwara had to change His decree. Mar- 
kandeya’s episode bears ample testimony to the fact 
that one can escape even from the God of death if one 
becomes the recipient of Lord Easwara’s grace. Hence, 
contemplate on God and chant His name incessantly. 


Once when Lord Yama was going round the world, 
he noticed that everyone was chanting the divine name. 
Wherever he went, he found devotees contemplating on 
the Lord. “If everyone starts chanting the Divine Name, 
how am I to discharge my duties? How can I cast my 
noose around a devotee?”’, he wondered. He started pray- 
ing to Lord Easwara thus. Then Easwara appeared before 
him and said, “You may cast your noose on anyone at the 
appointed time. But, remember that only those who have 


158 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


to experience the fruits of their actions will be ensnared 
by your noose. It cannot touch those who have no trace of 
karma phala (fruits of action). That is why Markandeya 
became My property and I showered My grace on him.” 


That is why people start chanting the divine names 
such as “Rama, Krishna, Govinda...” as the end ap- 
proaches. As demonstrated by Markandeya, devotees 
can alter the Will of God by their sincere prayers. In 
matters relating to divinity, the word ‘impossible’ does 
not exist. God can accomplish anything. If you surrender 
to Him completely, He can cancel the consequences of 
your actions and confer His grace on you. One need not 
feel depressed or dejected thinking that he is bound by 
karma phala. God can cancel your karma phala if your 
prayers are sincere. In this manner, God protected the 
lives of many devotees and alleviated their suffering in 
response to their prayers. Some people out of their ego 
doubt the power of God and try to test Him. They think, 
“Let us see, how He will do this.” But God cannot be 
understood or experienced by such tests. Such tests are 
futile exercises. Evil qualities like ego, jealousy and ha- 
tred will ruin man’s life. One should make every effort 
to earn the grace of God. Sarvada sarva kaleshu sarva- 
tra Hari chintanam (everywhere, at all times, under all 
circumstances contemplate on God). 


Chant The Name Of God Incessantly 


Pray For The Welfare Of All 159 


That is why Swami is exhorting you to undertake 
spiritual sadhana. Nagar sankirtan is one of the sadha- 
nas that is prescribed for devotees. No one knows when 
one’s end approaches. Yama has no consideration of 
what one is doing, good or bad, at the time of casting 
his noose. One may leave his mortal coil even when one 
is doing nagar sankirtan. Hence, one should always be 
prepared to face Yama by chanting the divine name. You 
should undertake spiritual practice and earn the divine 
grace so as to be free from karma phala. One need not 
feel depressed and resign to one’s fate. One can easily 
overcome fate with sincere prayers. The story of Mar- 
kandeya proves this point beyond doubt. Everything 
depends on God’s grace. 


Embodiments of Love! 


You may undertake any number of spiritual prac- 
tices, but never forget God’s name even for a moment. 
Only then will you be protected. Never do anything that 
will take you away from God. You can achieve anything 
through prayer. You need not pray loudly; it is enough 
if you pray mentally. Some people have a mistaken no- 
tion that God will not come to their rescue if they do 
not pray loudly. God resides in your heart. He listens to 
your prayers. If you aspire to attain His grace, you have 
to contemplate on Him incessantly. Worldly difficulties 
come and go. One should not attach much importance to 
them. However, through prayer one can overcome any 
difficulties. Only God’s grace is true and everlasting. 


160 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


One should strive to attain it. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Chant the name of God day in and day out. That 
alone will protect you at all times. Just as air is all- 
pervasive, God is present in you, with you, around you, 
below you, above you. Hence, you should be in constant 
communion with divinity. When you develop faith in di- 
vinity, you will naturally have unity. Consequently, there 
will be no scope for enmity. You need not perform any 
rituals in order to win the grace of God. It is enough if 
you do namasmarana (chanting the Divine Name) from 
the depth of your heart. Hari Bhajana bina sukha santhi 
nahin... (one cannot attain peace and happiness without 
singing the glory of God). If you incessantly chant the 
divine name “Rama”, no harm can ever befall you. 


Chant Any Name, I Shall Respond 


Embodiments of Love! 


It is because of your good fortune that you all have 
gathered here today. Do not fritter away this opportunity. 
Make the best use of your stay here and get the maximum 
benefit out of it. Remember that God is always with you 
wherever you are. 


God is your sole refuge wherever you may be, in a 

forest, in the sky, in a city or a village, on the top 

of a mountain or in the middle of deep sea. 
(Telugu poem) 


Pray For The Welfare Of All 161 


Students, 
Embodiments of Love! 


I am very much aware that you think of Swami 
always. It does not matter whether you sing the divine 
name loudly or silently. I see only the feeling behind it. 
Nothing can come in the way of God and His devotee. 
Rishis of yore went to the Himalayas in order to spend 
their time in contemplation of God. Wherever you are, 
God listens to your prayers. Do bhajans sincerely. Swami 
will certainly listen to you. Never give room for any type 
of weakness. Be always courageous. When you adhere 
to Swami’s words, the power of Sai will manifest in you. 
Chant any name of your choice, Easwara, Rama, Krishna, 
etc., but always remember that God is one. I will never 
force you to chant a particular name. One should not limit 
God to a particular name or form. You may call Me by 
any name, I shall respond. 


Recently, a strange incident took place. Subrama- 
niam of Larsen & Toubro and Chief Engineer Kondal 
Rao had gone to East Godavari and West Godavari re- 
gion in connection with the Water Supply Project works. 
As they were conducting a survey in a forest area, they 
were confronted by a group of naxalites. The naxalites 
questioned them, “Who are you? Why have you come 
here? Who has sent you here? How dare you enter our 
area without our permission?” They replied, “We have 
come here in your own interest. As there is scarcity of 


162 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


water in this region, Bhagawan Sri Sathya Sai Baba has 
sent us to make arrangements for the drinking water 
supply.” On hearing this, the naxalites were stupefied 
and overjoyed. They said, “We are living in the forests 
and hence are not aware of the magnificent service 
activities that Swami has undertaken.” They guided 
the engineers as to where to lay the pipes and fix the 
taps. They are all coming here for Swami’s darshan. 


Your Welfare Is My Welfare 


The Water Supply Project works in East and West 
Godavari districts are nearing completion. We have al- 
ready drawn plans for a water supply project in Krishna 
District also. I am taking up these projects and complet- 
ing them of My own accord, without anybody’s asking. 
Water is very essential for the survival of everyone. It is 
the sustainer of life. What else can be of greater service 
than providing drinking water to the needy? It is the 
source and sustenance of life. I do not expect any rituals 
or worship from you. I am doing it out of My love for you. 
East Godavari, West Godavari and Krishna districts are 
now being covered under Sri Sathya Sai drinking water 
supply project. The people of those districts are extremely 
happy. There can be no greater service than providing 
drinking water. That is what I have been doing. You 
need not ask for it. Iam giving it out of My own accord. 
Till today no government or anyone for that matter has 
taken up the task of providing drinking water to Krishna 


Pray For The Welfare Of All 163 


district. Itis only Sai who is providing water to all. lam 
always engaged in such humanitarian projects. I do 
not involve Myself in any other work. Water is essential 
for human life. Hence I am prepared to provide water for 
all. Devotees should pray that everybody should have 
water to drink. Pray for the welfare of all. Prayer is the 
need of the hour. You may be worried that Swami is not 
able to walk. But always remember that Swami is not the 
body. I have no connection with the body. I am always 
happy and healthy. Do not pray to God for the fulfilment 
of your desires. Pray for the welfare of all. When I had a 
fall, the people of East Godavari and West Godavari came 
and prayed, “Swami, we want only Your health and not 
water.” I told them, “Your welfare is My welfare.” They 
are bringing a helicopter for Me with the prayer that I 
should pay a visit to East Godavari and West Godavari 
districts. Very soon, I will be visiting these districts. 


Guru Purnima, 21-7-2005, Prasanthi Nilayam 
Life is a jungle, where there is a great deal of 


dry wood which harbours worms and insects. 
No one cleans the floor of the forest or cuts away 


the undergrowth of bush and bramble. To wade 
through the thorns and the leech-ridden floor of 
the jungle, one has to wear boots. So too, one has 
to wear the boots of sense-regulation, if one has 
to pass through the jungle of life, without harming 





164 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


There are three desires which every “I” cannot 
escape from. ‘I must live’ is the first. The will to 
live is over-powering and paramount. This is the 
urge for immortality. ‘The desire to know’ is the 
second. This too is unquenchable thirst and is an 
indication of the position of which the “I” is the 


inheritor. ‘The desire for joy’ is the third, prompt- 
ing man behind the senses into the outer World 
for pleasures. This evidence shows that, deep in 
the core of the ‘I’, there is a spring of ‘Ananda 
which seeks its mate and its fulfilment. 


, 


Baba 





15 
Unity, Purity, Divinity 


During his childhood man develops absorbing in- 
terest in play in the company of other children. In 
youth and middle age, he is entangled in worldly 
matters and deeply engrossed in earning money. 
Finally, in old age, he craves for this and that 
without contemplating on God even at that ripe 
age. Thus, he wastes his precious human birth. 


(Telugu poem) 


[’ this world, there are millions of educated 
people. Right from a child to a learned old man, 
everyone is interested in reading books and acquiring 
knowledge. But in what way are they benefited by the 
acquisition of bookish knowledge? Such education 
can only help you to eke out a livelihood. Right from 
a pauper to a millionaire, everybody wants his children 
to be well educated. Parents are prepared to spend any 
amount of money and they even borrow money (even 


166 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


beyond their means) to provide quality education to their 
children. In spite of the fact that the parents face a lot of 
hardship in educating their children, the children do not 
have any gratitude towards their benefactors. They do 
not introspect, “Who is responsible for all my develop- 
ment? Who has made me what I am today?” Under these 
circumstances, we should enquire into the true purpose of 
education. One may study a number of books and master 
various branches of knowledge, but does he enjoy peace 
and tranquillity? All the knowledge that we acquire from 
books can only take care of our physical needs. The fact 
is, true knowledge is latent in everyone. Women do not 
lag behind men in academic excellence. People think 
that education confers on them respect and esteem. But, 
people lack true wisdom in spite of their high academic 
achievements. 


Education Must Result In Transformation 


In the present, parents want their children to pursue 
solely job-oriented education. But, what is the use of such 
education which does not bring about transformation 
among children? Neither are the children benefited nor 
are they able to render any help to their parents. Modern 
man develops ego on account of his educational achieve- 
ments. Humility is the hallmark of true education. If a 
man lacks viveka (discrimination) and vinaya (humility), 
all his education is of no value. You should understand 
that your education is meant for the welfare and prog- 
ress of society. But, in what way is society benefited by 


Unity, Purity, Divinity 167 


educated people? Actually, you are learning many things 
from society and derive benefit from it. But power of 
discrimination which is found even in uneducated people 
is not to be found in the so-called educated people to- 
day. When this is the true state of affairs why should the 
educated get inflated with ego? There is scarcely any 
humility among students today. They show no respect 
towards elders. They do not realise their responsibilities 
towards society. What is the use of merely acquiring 
bookish knowledge if one does not respect elders and 
serve society? One who leads such a life is not true to his 
nature. His walking, talking, reading, writing, everything 
becomes an affectation. If this is the result of academic 
education, why should one go to college at all? Every 
student must enquire into himself, “What am I doing in 
the college? What am I supposed to do?” Only when he 
conducts such self-enquiry, can he understand the true 
meaning of education. Mere bookish knowledge is not 
true education. It is merely transfer of what is contained 
in pustaka (book) to mastaka (head) and vice versa. In 
this manner, people are entangled between pustaka and 
mastaka without really understanding the true meaning 
of education. They are wasting their time in the pursuit of 
bookish knowledge instead of acquiring practical knowl- 
edge. No doubt there is a lot of information in pustaka, 
but what purpose does it serve if the mastaka is filled 
with filth? You can never achieve the desired results from 
such an education. The same was explained by the chief 
guest in his address. “Though all people learn and study, 


168 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


what is the ultimate result out of this?” he questioned. 
People spend thousands of rupees for acquiring academic 
education. What is the role the educated people play in 
society today? Do they contribute for peace in society? 
Do they try to bring about transformation in individu- 
als? No. In fact, they are unable to inculcate discipline 
in their own children. Most children may pretend to be 
well behaved and humble in the presence of their par- 
ents, but they behave like rowdies once they step out of 
their houses. 


Students should strive to earn a good name in 
society. Today’s education is making the students mate- 
rialistic. It does not prepare the students to turn inward 
to listen to their inner voice. One should acquire Atma 
prabodha (atmic knowledge). That is true education. 
Without awareness of the Self, all other knowledge is 
useless. Why should one pursue such education? 


Deeds Must Follow Words 


People are interested in exercising their influence 
and power; they are not making efforts to cleanse their 
mind and heart. This is the result of modern education. 
People have learnt to talk sweetly, but they do not trans- 
late their words into action. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Mere learning by rote the contents of books is not 
important. You should imbibe the gandha (essence) of 


Unity, Purity, Divinity 169 


all granthas (texts). That is true education. People read a 
number of books, but what is the use? They merely quote 
what others have said. Is this what you are supposed to 
learn? You should listen to the prompting / utterance of 
your inner voice and share it with others. But, scarcely 
anybody thinks on these lines today. 


Embodiments of Love! 


You must put into practice at least one or two 
principles of what you have learnt and set an example 
to others. There are many learned scholars, but do they 
practise what they have learnt? They appear to be people 
of eminence (‘chief’), but they are cheap in their behav- 
iour. The end of education is character. We should 
consider character as our very life-breath. Education 
without character is useless like half-cooked rice. We 
should practise at least one or two principles and only 
then venture to preach to others. 


There are three important principles in every hu- 
man being Manas (mind), Buddhi (intellect) and Atma 
(Self). What is the nature of Self? It is all-pervasive. True 
education is that which originates from the heart. The 
reference in this context is to the spiritual heart and not 
the physical heart. There are many noble souls who are 
setting ideals to society by translating their knowledge 
into action. If you do not act in a principled manner, all 
your education becomes useless. It is what you practise 
that matters, not what you speak. Wherever you may 
go, your behaviour should be exemplary. That is what 


170 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


pleases Me. 


Strive To Acquire Spiritual Knowledge 


Happiness is union with God. You are not ordinary 
mortals. All are essentially divine. In order to realise 
your true nature, practise what you preach. Only then 
can you experience bliss. Verily, bliss is the true nature 
of man. Why should you give up that which is natural 
to you and lead an artificial life? Wherever you see, in 
colleges and schools, students lack practical knowledge. 
They give importance only to bookish knowledge and 
become ‘books’ themselves. True education is that which 
originates from the heart. Heart is very important for 
human existence. When a child is born, the first thing 
that people observe is the heart beat. You should rely 
more on your spiritual heart than on the physical heart. 
Conscience is another name for spiritual heart. Keep 
your heart pure. That should be your main endeavour. 
Whatever is done with love and purity of heart will con- 
fer bliss on you. In fact, bliss is latent in everyone. But 
man is unaware of this truth. One should make every 
effort to manifest one’s innate bliss in him. What is the 
nature of this bliss? Nityanandam, Parama Sukhadam, 
Kevalam Jnanamurtim, Dwandwateetam (God is the 
embodiment of eternal bliss, He is wisdom absolute, 
beyond the pair of opposites). It transcends duality. So 
long one is immersed in duality one cannot experience 
bliss. First of all one should understand the principle of 
unity. Unity leads to purity and purity leads to divinity. 


Unity, Purity, Divinity 171 


A true human being is one who strives for unity, purity 
and divinity. Otherwise, he is no better than birds and 
animals. First, purify your senses and develop unity. 
Consider all as your brothers and sisters and live in 
harmony. In public meetings we hear the speakers ad- 
dressing people as brothers and sisters. But do they really 
mean what they say? Do you find unity among broth- 
ers and sisters today? No. True happiness lies in unity. 
Human life can be compared to a tree. Our relations are 
like branches and sub-branches. Contemplation of God 
is like a flower from which you will get the fruit of bliss. 


Students! 


You can certainly acquire secular knowledge. But 
you should not rest contented with that. You should turn 
inward and acquire spiritual knowledge as well. Only 
then can you attain peace. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Love is the essence of education. Bereft of love, 
education is artificial. Therefore, develop love in the 
first instance. Understand that the indweller is the same 
though bodies are different. Hold on to this fundamental 
principle and experience ananda (bliss). So many of you 
have assembled here. Everyone’s attention is focused on 
Swami. In the same manner, let your mind be focused on 
divinity always. Contemplate on God. Serve your fellow- 
men. If a person who has been starving for ten days is 
served a sumptuous feast, you can well imagine the joy 


172 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


he experiences. When all the tanks and lakes are dried 
to a trickle, you can imagine the joy that a continuous 
downpour brings with it. Similarly, serve those who are 
in desperate need of your help. Give them happiness. You 
can attain divinity only through service. Human life is 
most precious. But, man is behaving like an animal and 
thus wasting his life. 


Students! 


Being vidyarthis, you should endeavour to aquire 
true vidya (education). There is no point in merely going 
through books without understanding the true meaning of 
vidya. Always contemplate on the fundamental principle 
of life. Beings are many, but the divine principle is one 
and the same. Hence, recognise the principle of divinity 
that is present in all in the form of atma. Atma is adhara 
(support) and body is adheya (the supported). Consider 
atma as the basis of your life and everything else will be 
taken care of. Everyone can have the vision of the atma. 
All are endowed with such power. Enquire into yourself 
what have you achieved by going through a number of 
voluminous books? You have become hard-hearted. If 
that is the result of your education why should you study 
at all? First of all, develop love. When you have love in 
you, everyone will become your friend. If your heart is 
not suffused with love, your life will become artificial. 
Life is meaningless without love. If everyone shares his 
love with his neighbour, there will be no room for ha- 
tred at all. Share your love with everyone and live like 


Unity, Purity, Divinity 173 


brothers and sisters. Today we find conflicts and differ- 
ences even among brothers and sisters, because they lack 
proper understanding. 


Understand The Principle Of Oneness 


People do not understand the true meaning of love. 
Their love is tainted with physical and worldly feelings. 
When you understand the principle of love and develop 
love to love all will become one. The Veda says, “Sahasra 
seersha Purushah ...” It means that all heads, all eyes, 
all feet are His. Once you understand the principle of 
oneness that is present in all, you can live in tune with 
the true spirit of brotherhood. 


Our hand has five fingers and each of them has a 
specific duty assigned to it. All the fingers work in unison 
and harmony while performing a task. Once an argument 
ensued among the five fingers of the hand as to which 
finger among them was great. The thumb claimed, “It is 
not possible to undertake any work without me. Hence, 
I am the great.” Then the index finger smiled and said, 
“Look here, Oh thumb! How can you perform any task 
without my support? Moreover, I am used as pointer to 
identify individuals. Hence, I am greater than you.” The 
middle finger intervened and said, “There is no point in 
what you say. I am the tallest among all the fingers. Two 
of you on one side and two on the other are serving me as 
Aide de Camps. Hence, I am the greatest.” Then the ring- 
finger said, “I feel like laughing at your ignorance. Don’t 


174 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


you know that people adorn me with gold rings studded 
with precious stones like diamond, emerald, topaz, etc.? 
Hence, I am your king.” In the end, the little finger said, 
“T always lead from the front when it comes to teaching 
a lesson to someone and punishing the guilty. Hence, I 
am your leader and you have to follow me.” As the fin- 
gers were arguing among themselves in this manner, the 
heart intervened and said, “Oh ignorant ones! Each one 
of you is as important as the other. One cannot perform 
any task if there is no unity and harmony among you. In 
fact, you represent the five human values which are like 
five life-breaths of a human being.” Hearing these words 
of wisdom, the five fingers realised their mistake and 
bent their head in shame. A deep enquiry reveals that the 
heart is the greatest of all. Body, mind and intellect are 
mere instruments. Hence, one should follow the advice 
of the heart in all his endeavours. Understand that all are 
one and each one is equally important. Do not become 
egoistic thinking that you alone are very important. Do 
not waste your precious time in vain argumentation. Be 
friendly with all and face the challenges of life with unity 
and harmony. 


Students! 


You have to lead your lives in an ideal manner. In 
fact, all ideals are latent in you. They cannot be learnt 
from books. The principle of ‘TP is common in all. If 
someone asks, “Who is Sai Baba?” I respond saying, 
‘Il’. If someone asks who is the Vice Chancellor? He will 


Unity, Purity, Divinity 175 


say, ‘I’. The single letter ‘I’ represents the principle of 
atma. The Veda declares, Ekameva adviteeyam Brahma 
(God is one without a second). True spirituality lies in 
knowing your true Self. But you are unable to know 
your true Self as you identify yourself with the body. 
Identification with the body gives rise to ego. One with 
ego cannot know the reality. Your welfare and also of 
others will be ensured when you have a firm conviction 
that all are one. Develop such a spirit of unity. You cannot 
expect divinity to manifest in you unless you cultivate 
such unity. The Veda has exhorted: 


Let us all move together, let us all grow together, 
Let us all stay united and share our knowledge, 
Let us live together with friendship and harmony. 


(Telugu poem) 


Some students do not share even their textbooks 
with others. How can they attain happiness if they are so 
self-centred and narrow-minded? You should all stand 
united. Where there is unity, there is bliss. 


Embodiments of Love! 


There is only one thing that you have to learn. 
Develop love. The same principle of love is present in 
you, in Me and in everyone. I see only love in others. 
Hence, all are one for Me. You too should develop such 
feelings of love and equality. All are one, be alike to 
everyone. This is what you have to learn today. 


176 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


Embodiments of Love! 


Along with the acquisition of secular knowledge, 
you should also make efforts to understand the principle 
of oneness. Only then can you achieve unity and har- 
mony. Take for instance this rose flower. It consists of a 
number of petals. Likewise, our heart can be compared 
to a flower and the virtues are like petals. The petals of 
a rose flower may fade and fall by the next day, but the 
flower of heart remains ever fresh. It symbolises the 
principle of oneness. People worship the navagrahas 
(nine planets) to invoke their blessings. You might have 
observed that there is perfect unity and harmony among 
the nine planets. (Bhagawan with a wave of his hand 
materialised a gold ring studded with nine types of gems.) 
Here you see a navaratna ring. Whoever wears this ring 
will be protected by the Navagrahas wherever he goes. 


Develop unity. Be courageous and develop the 
necessary strength to face the vicissitudes of life. I don’t 
want to take much of your time. Whatever you have 
learnt here, let it be imprinted in your heart. Only then 
can you attain peace and your education will become 
meaningful. 


Embodiments of Love! 


I shower My love and blessings on one and all. 
Be always united and spend your time in bliss. Make your 
parents happy. Your body is given to you by your parents. 
Hence, first of all, express your gratitude to them for this 





Unity, Purity, Divinity 177 


gift. Only then can you find fulfilment in life. 


International Conference Of Educationists, 
17-8-2005, Prasanthi Nilayam 


All men are Mine; so the whole World has to be 
saved from the consequences of ignorance or 
limited knowledge. I will get all My people near 
Me, for they are Mine, and I am theirs. Then, I 
will start teaching and training them, until they 
become entirely ego-free. For the last 25 years, 
it has all been sweetness, kindness, soft persua- 


sion; hereafter, it will be different. I will drag 
them, place them on the table and operate. That 
is to say, I have no anger of hate. I have only love. 
It is Love that prompts Me to save them and to 
open their eyes, before they get deeper into the 
morass. 


Baba 


178 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


You should not pray to God for seeking this fa- 
vour or that. The reason is that no one knows 
what immensely precious, divine, and magnificent 
treasures lie in the treasure house of Divine grace. 
No one can know what God intends or desires to 
give to a devotee. In such a situation, by asking 
for trivial and petty things, man is demeaning his 


divine estate. No one can understand what valu- 
able, sacred, and divine favour God chooses to 
confer on a deserving devotee. Hence, man should 
not seek from God nor desire nor pray for some 
petty trifiles. More precious and desirable than 
anything else is God’s love. 


Baba 





16 


Eschew Body Attachment 


The Effulgent Lord who shines in every atom 
and pervades the entire universe will protect 
you always. He is the Omnipotent Lord of Parthi 
who will grant you Bhakthi (devotion), and will 
certainly help you in all your endeavours. What 
else is to be conveyed to this assembly of noble 
souls? 


(Telugu poem) 
Embodiments of Love! 


an thinks that he is able to lead a comfortable 

life with the help of wealth, food, clothing, 
houses, etc., he has acquired. This is not true. The very 
survival of a human being is dependent on God’s grace. 
There are many wealthy people in this world. Do they all 
lead a comfortable life? It is a fact that none can achieve 
anything in this world without God’s grace. Hence, first 
and foremost man must contemplate on God. One may 
read a number of books, acquire a number of academic 


180 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


degrees and visit a number of countries, but these cannot 
help a human being to lead a comfortable life. 


Education Sans Educare Is No Education 


People think that they have acquired high academic 
qualifications, but they enable them to acquire only book- 
ish knowledge. At present, you find that everyone is en- 
gaged in acquiring bookish knowledge. But, they forget 
the fact that people led a happier and better life without 
bookish knowledge in the past. People think that pursuing 
academic education and acquiring bookish knowledge is 
real education. No, that is not real education. Education 
devoid of educare is not real education. What is educare? 
Educare is that which brings out the latent divinity in a 
human being. Divinity is also known as consciousness. 
It is only because of the consciousness present in him 
that every individual is able to know the nature of the 
world around him. But, unfortunately, no one is able to 
recognise this all-pervading consciousness. In fact, it is 
only this consciousness that is protecting every human 
being. In spite of one’s education and scholarship, one 
is not able to realise this truth. Education is negative and 
artificial, whereas educare is positive. People are going 
to foreign countries to acquire such artificial education. 
What is the use of acquiring such education? Instead, 
everyone should strive to acquire educare. One need not 
go to foreign countries for acquiring educare. It wells up 
from within and protects the person constantly. Educare 
is the unity of thought, word and deed. 


Eschew Body Attachment 181 


Awareness Of The Atma Tattwa Is Real Education 


One who has realised his own nature is an edu- 
cated person in the real sense. One may enquire, “Who 
are you?” “Who is he?”, etc., but one may not know 
one’s own self. One might have acquired encyclopaedic 
knowledge about everything in this world. But, of what 
use is it if he does not enquire into himself by question- 
ing “Who am I?” Real education constitutes enquiring 
into oneself about his true nature. You may question 
someone, “Sir! Where did you come from?” The person 
replies, “I am from India’. That very reply that he came 
from India connotes a negative sense. The real ‘I’ is to 
be explored. That ‘I’ is the real source. Without realising 
this source if one simply states that he came from this 
place or that place, it is not the correct answer. The reply 
that he came from India refers to the body. The body 
must have travelled from India. But, the consciousness 
is all-pervading. When someone questions, “Who are 
you?” The correct answer would be, “I am I’’. If someone 
replies that he came from America or India, it connotes a 
negative sense. We often make a statement that this is my 
body, my mind, my intellect, etc. These are all artificial 
and not real. Nowadays, a lot of research is being made 
into the nature of the mind. But the mind is never steady. 
The mind is like a mad monkey and the body is like a 
water bubble. You are not this mad monkey. You are not 
this water bubble. The name given to the human race is 
“mankind”. But, today that kindness is gone and mankind 
has become monkey mind. You don’t find even an iota 


182 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


of kindness and compassion in human beings today. 


Realising one’s innate divinity is educare. That 
innate divinity in man has been referred to by several 
people as atma. Without realising the nature of the atma 
one cannot understand the nature of the body. Educare 
consists of realising the nature of the atma. When some- 
one questions you what is the meaning of the word “self”, 
you answer ‘I’. But that is not the correct meaning of 
self. It is not correct to identify ‘I’ with ‘self’, i.e., body. 
‘T’ refers to Aham (individualised soul). As long as one 
identifies ‘I’ with self, one cannot understand the real 
meaning of ‘I’. It is only when one sheds attachment to 
self and develops the feeling of equanimity, can one un- 
derstand the nature of atma. This Atma Tattwa is equally 
present in every being. This is the fundamental principle. 
It is only because of this fundamental principle that every 
living being acquires value. One has to recognise this 
fundamental principle. Only then does one deserve to be 
called a human being. In this world birds and beasts live 
along with human beings. Human beings can be differen- 
tiated from birds and beasts only when man realises that 
fundamental ‘I’ which is the Atma Tattwa. Since ancient 
times people in India have been striving to realise this 
fundamental ‘I’ which is present in all beings. 


The Fundamental ‘I’ Alone Is Eternal 


These days people are confronted with several dif- 


Eschew Body Attachment 183 


ficulties and worries in their life since their awareness is 
limited to bodily relationship. Such body consciousness 
is artificial. It does not reveal their true Self. One has 
to strive to realise the fundamental ‘I’. Human body is 
ephemeral and is bound to perish one day or the other. 
When we speak of ‘I’, it should not be limited to the 
ephemeral human body, but to the fundamental ‘I’. 


The body is made up of five elements and is bound 
to perish sooner or later but the indweller has 
neither birth nor death. The indweller has no at- 
tachment whatsoever and is the eternal witness. 


(Telugu poem) 


The deha (human body) with which we identify 
ourselves saying ‘I’, is subject to birth and death again 
and again. But, the dehi (indweller), is the eternal de- 
vadeva (Paramatma). While the vesture of deha (body) 
has birth and death, the dehi is beyond birth and death 
and is omnipresent. 


Consciousness has neither birth nor death. It has 
neither beginning nor end. It is present in all be- 
ings as the eternal witness. 


(Telugu poem) 


You might have observed a beggar standing infront 
of your house seeking alms with a request Bhavathi 
bhikshaamdehi (give me alms). He is reminding you 
of your true nature of divinity by addressing you so. 


184 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


The word ‘Dehi’ refers to divinity. He is seeking alms 
from God Himself. Hence, true education is realising 
the dehi. Education is not merely reading a number of 
books, which confers only bookish knowledge. Why 
do you run after these books? This bookish knowl- 
edge will enable you to merely eke out a livelihood. 
But, there is something beyond this bookish knowl- 
edge and livelihood, which all of you have to pursue. 


Can you call all those who know how to read and 
write educated? 

Can one be called educated merely by acquiring 
degrees? 

Can you call it education which does not confer 
virtues? 

If education is just for a living, dont we find birds 
and beasts carrying on their lives? 


(Telugu poem) 


One may acquire a lot of wealth and become a 
millionaire with the help of bookish knowledge and high 
academic degrees. But, ultimately people will give value 
to a realised soul and not to the one who has accumulated 
enormous wealth. As long as the body is present, people 
will refer to a person as “so and so; a very rich person; 
a king, etc.” 


At present, man is exposed to unrest and lack of 
peace. What could be the reason for this state of affairs? 


Eschew Body Attachment 185 


Not even one individual is living peacefully. The whole 
world is in a state of turmoil. It is true that secular 
education is necessary for one’s living in this world. But, 
one has to go beyond this level and explore into the realm 
of universal consciousness that leads and motivates every 
living being. That consciousness is present equally in 
every human being right from a pauper to a millionaire. 
The fundamental ‘I’ is present in you, him and every 
individual. Here is a small example. Supposing you 
question somebody, “Who is the doctor?” The doctor 
will immediately rise to answer, ‘I’ am the doctor. In 
this example, the doctor identifies himself with his 
profession and says ‘I’ am the doctor. But he forgets about 
the fundamental ‘I’ present in him. When a question is 
put, “Where is God?” The natural answer would be, 
“He is present in all.” The same truth is enshrined in 
the aphorisms, Easwarah sarva bhutanam (God is the 
indweller of all beings) and /savasyam idam sarvam (the 
entire universe is permeated by God). Different varieties 
of sweets like Mysore pak, Gulab Jamoon, Laddu, 
Khova, etc., are prepared. Names are different, but the 
fundamental ingredient (sugar) in all these sweets is the 
same. Similarly, one who realises the truth that the same 
Atma Tattwa is present in every human being and, in 
fact, in every living being, is the happiest person. Every 
person must attain such a level of consciousness. People 
in ancient times strove to attain that state and therefore 
they were aptly referred to as Yogis. They realised the 
truth that every human being was actually a three-in-one 


186 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


entity (1) the one he thinks he is, (2) the one others think 
he is, and (3) the one he really is. All the three aspects 
are present in one individual, with no separate entity for 
each aspect. This principle is changeless and eternal. 


Do Not Give Excessive Importance To Physical 
Relationships 


We often come across people who claim that their 
sons are employed in lucrative jobs in America. As a 
matter of fact, who is your son? You say that so and so 
is your son, keeping in view the bodily relationship with 
someone who has a name and form. Devoid of name 
and form, who is the son and who is the father? All 
these names and forms are acquired only after a person 
is born. 


When man emerges from the womb of his mother, one 
does not find any garland around his neck. There are 
no jewels made of pearls nor are there glittering gold 
ornaments. There are no chains studded with precious 
stones like emerald and diamonds. But there is one 
garland around his neck. Brahma strings together the 
consequences of his past deeds into a heavy garland 
and puts it around his neck at the time of his birth. 


(Telugu poem) 


As long as there is bodily relationship between 
you and him, you call him your son. If the body perishes, 
whom do you call your son? All these relationships are 


Eschew Body Attachment 187 


worldly and physical. As long as the physical relationship 
exists you consider someone as your relative, friend or 
foe. Hence, do not ever give excessive importance to 
these physical relationships. It is only when you rise 
above these physical relationships that you will realise 
the Antaryami (inner motivator). You may enquire 
from any of our boys, “Where is God?” They will 
spontaneously answer, “Everywhere. In fact, you are 
God.” Their relationship with God is beyond the physical 
level of the body. 


We are always leading a life based on physical 
relationships. But, these are not permanent. Such 
relationships exist today, but may cease to exist tomorrow. 
As long as there is life in the body, you say, “I am”. Once 
the body perishes how can you call yourself ‘I’? When 
you enquire into the matter deeply, everything in this 
objective world reduces itself to zero. All that we see in 
this world are zeros. Unfortunately, today we consider the 
zero as hero. However, there is one fundamental principle 
‘T’ which is eternal. That fundamental principle is hero. 
It is present in every individual, but it is not noticed. It 
is the inner motivator. We often refer to our human body 
consisting of flesh and blood as ‘I’. Our physical body 
is not eternal. It is like the passing clouds which come 
and go. Considering such transient body as the eternal 
‘Tl’, we often struggle to keep the body in comfort. This 
is not the correct approach. The body must be employed 
for the purpose for which it was given to us. Man is born 


188 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


to realise the eternal truth. Here is a small example. You 
performed the marriage of your son and brought a girl into 
your house, claiming her as your daughter-in-law. Before 
her marriage to your son, who was this daughter-in-law? 
The relationship ceases to exist once you leave this world. 
Such relationships are like passing clouds. Unfortunately, 
today we are passing our lives keeping such passing 
clouds as our true relationships. This is not the proper 
thing to do. Every individual should desist from leading 
a life based on dehabhimana (attachment to the body). 
Even educated people have attachment to the body, they 
constantly strive to maintain the physical body feeding 
it with comforts. It is only because of attachment to the 
body that they are exposed to sorrows and difficulties. 
Hence, shed body attachment and cultivate attachment to 
the Eternal Truth. People crave for the darshan of Rama, 
Krishna and other deities, which are the names given to 
the physical body donned by Divinity in different ages. 
As long as you are attached to the physical body, you 
cannot realise the Atma Tattwa. In fact, atma does not 
have any attachment. The atma is present in you, Me and 
every individual and every living being in keeping with 
the aphorism Ekatma sarva bhutantaratma (one Atma 
dwells in all beings). Realising the nature of such an all- 
pervading atma is considered to be true spirituality; not 
just performing some rituals like worship, religious vows 
and bhajans. When someone enquired of Sita, “Where 
is your Rama?” she replied, “Sri Rama is always with 
me only.” What people generally refer to is the physical 


Eschew Body Attachment 189 


body of Sri Rama, the son of King Dasaratha. In fact, 
the real Rama is not related to any individual neither the 
son of some king nor the son-in-law of another king. He 
is immanent in every living being. 


Instead Of Dehabhimana Cultivate Spiritual 
Relatioship 


Keeping in view the bodily relationship, people 
often make enquiries, “Where did your uncle come 
from?” Where did your aunt come from?”’, etc. Supposing 
you question the same person, “Where did you come 
from?” He cannot give a correct answer. The truth is all 
people come from the same source. When one realises 
this truth, there will no more be any worry or sorrow. 
Hence, one has to realise this universal truth. If you do 
not develop faith in unity, but follow diversity, your entire 
life will be chaotic. Do not develop attachment to the 
world. Instead, cultivate spiritual attachment. When you 
live in harmony with your fellow human beings, you will 
derive happiness. Then you will enjoy the unity between 
human beings. The real devotee is one who has realised 
such unity. Unity leads to purity, which in turn leads to 
Divinity. One who has not experienced such unity, purity 
and divinity confines himself to body attachment and 
will be trapped in the birth-death cycle. 


You are all aware of the havoc caused by tidal 
waves that shook the coastal villages on the east coast 
of India (Tsunami), a few months ago. More recently, 


190 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


in America a very devastating hurricane submerged 
several towns and villages. The entire region presented 
the picture of a vast sheet of water. No one knew who 
survived and who died. It is only after the water receded, 
an estimate of the extent of damage caused to life and 
property could be made. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Eschew body attachment and realise the unity in 
divinity present everywhere. That is real sadhana. Today, 
people undertake sadhana to achieve something, all the 
while thinking of something else. As a result, they are 
unable to achieve their goal. Such divided attention is 
the fault of the concerned individual, but not that of the 
objective world. Ensure that your sadhana is on the right 
track. Only then will you be able to realise the unity in 
diversity. Several people live long years of age, some 
even 100 years. But, they are unable to realise this unity. 
Instead, they visualise duality everywhere. This cannot 
be termed as real sadhana. One who has realised the 
non-dual (advaita) Brahman alone can be considered to 
be a real manava (human being). Hence, try to realise 
the unity in diversity by removing the feelings of duality 
and experience bliss. In fact, unity is divinity and that 
divinity is immanent in you. As long as you are under the 
influence of duality, you will not be able to realise that 
unity. Realise unity, experience unity and spread unity 
to the entire world. Unity alone brings purity and purity 
develops love. If only you develop such pure love, you 





Eschew Body Attachment 191 


will be able to understand everything in the spiritual 
realm. I will take some other opportunity to explain in 
greater detail the concept of pure love. If you entangle 
yourself in worldly attachments and still aspire for 
divinity, how is it possible? Hence, keep yourself away 
from all attachments and attain unity. 


International Sai Medical conference, 
3-9-2005, Prasanthi Nilayam 


Faith in God will instil faith in themselves and 
in others and the World will be happier thereby. 
The Americans might walk on the moon, or the 
Russians picnic on the planet Mars, but they have 
both to return to Earth, which is their common 
home. One can claim genuine victory only when 


one has reached not the dead satellite, but the liv- 
ing star, not the Chandra, but Ramachandra, the 
Lord who rules over the inner satellites, the inner 
planets, the inner motives and aspirations. 


Baba 


192 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


In order to escape being tossed about on the waves 
of joy and grief, one should cultivate unconcern 
(‘upeksha’), an attitude of welcoming either, as 
a sign of Grace. Sri Ramakrishna said that if you 
must avoid the sticky fluid in the jack-fruit from 
contacting your fingers when you peel it, you have 


to apply a few drops of oil on them. So, too, said 
he, “If you do not want the World and its reactions 
to stick to you, have a few drops of unconcern 
applied on your mind.” 


Baba 





The foundation for real peace is, according to the 
Vedas, the quality of Maithree. Maithree means 
amicability, friendship, compassion and, kind- 
ness. It can also be taken to mean, “My three” 
that is to say, my word, deed and thought shall be 
in accordance with words, thought and deed; that 


is to say, we shall speak, think and act together, 
without friction or fraction, in an atmosphere of 
love and understanding. That is what is wanted 
in the world today: My three. 


Baba 





17 


Cultivate Satwic Qualities Right From 


Childhood 


Childhood passes in trivial play with other 
children. 

Youth passes in amorous sport, 

Middle age absorbs time and effort in amassing 
wealth, 

Come dotage, time crawls in futile longing for 
worldly desires, yet there is no time for 
contemplation of God. 

Thus is wasted the precious heritage of human 
birth, deeply entangled in the net of 
karma. 


(Telugu poem) 


Why waste your time in idleness? 
Time wasted is life wasted; 

Arise, awake, it is not too late, 
Think of the future, at least now. 


(Telugu poem) 


194 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


Embodiments of Love! Dear Students! 


f you spend your time thus, if you fritter away 

your time and energy in vain pursuits thus, 
what for is your human birth? What will happen to you 
in future? Did you ever ponder over this? Time is the 
measure for human life. Time is the most precious as- 
pect in human life. Don’t waste time. Time wasted is life 
wasted. You have to seriously question yourself whether 
it is sensible to waste your time thus. If you waste your 
precious time in this young age, when will you be able 
to sanctify your life? 


Man has to perform karma in this karmabhoomi 
(field of activity) right from birth to death. In fact, the 
human birth has been given to us to perform karma. We 
are, therefore, engaged in performing various karmas 
continuously. But, very few make any effort to enquire 
from themselves whether the karmas performed are 
satkarmas (good deeds) or not. 


One has to strive to sanctify his time right from 
childhood. We are partaking of a variety of items as 
food to sustain the human body. But, none is making an 
enquiry whether the food one consumes is proper and 
healthy; whether it is beneficial for nourishing and nur- 
turing his physical, mental and spiritual health. 


Man is born out of karma, grows and departs from 
the world due to karma; 
Karma is verily the embodiment of divinity_It is only 


Cultivate Satwic Qualities Right From Chilhood 195 


due to Karma that 
Happiness and sorrow occur in the world. 


(Telugu poem) 


The Bhagavad Gita exhorts that man has a right 
only to perform his duty and not to the fruit thereof. 
Of course, there will be a result for every karma that is 
performed by a human being. There will be a good result 
for a good karma and a bad result for a bad karma. This 
is the eternal law. When you partake of a mango fruit, 
you will have only the belch of that fruit and not that of 
a lime fruit. In the same manner, your head (thoughts) 
will always be conditioned by the type of food you 
consume. 


Transform Yourselves Into Satwic Individuals 


“As is the food, so is the head (thoughts). As is the 
head, so is God” Thus, the food, the head, and God will 
be on the same wavelength. Hence, one has to cultivate 
good and noble thoughts always. If you eat satwic food 
and cultivate satwic nature right from childhood, your 
entire life will run smoothly. Hence, one has to be wary 
of his food and head (thoughts). If you wish to sanctify 
your human birth, you should not live like a bird, beast 
or an animal. Having taken birth as a human being, one 
has to perform the karmas worthy of a human being. 
One has to conduct oneself as a human being. What 
does the term “Human Values” imply? Sathya (Truth), 
Dharma (Righteous Conduct), Santhi (Peace), Prema 


196 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


(Love) and Ahimsa (Non-Violence). It is only when we 
cultivate and manifest these five human values in our 
daily lives that we will be entitled to be called as human 
beings. Human being is a repository of trigunas, namely, 
satwa (calm serenity), rajas (passionate activity), tamo- 
guna (sloth and slumber). Unfortunately, today, we find 
the rajo and tamo gunas more active in human beings. 
We do not find even a trace of satwic guna anywhere. 
Hence, it is of utmost importance today that people are 
taught and encouraged to cultivate satwaguna, perform 
satwic karmas and finally reach the abode of satwaguna. 
Embodiments of Love! 


You are now in the stage of childhood. This is the 
right age to cultivate satwic qualities. The quality of your 
life in the later stages will depend on the qualities you 
cultivate now. What is the use of trying to cultivate Sat- 
waguna at the very end of your life, when your physical 
body refuses to co-operate with you in your sadhana? 
Hence, you must cultivate and put into practice satwic 
qualities in the youthful age itself. If man wishes to 
experience manavatwa (humanness) and reach divatwa 
(divinity), satwaguna is very essential. It is only when 
you consciously cultivate satwaguna that you will be able 
to attain satwic nature. If you aim to attain satwic nature 
but indulge in rajasic and tamasic acts, it is not possible. 
All our ancient sages and seers did their sadhana when 
they were young and strong.Embodiments of Love! 


You have to partake of satwic food. By partaking of 


Cultivate Satwic Qualities Right From Chilhood 197 


satwic food, you will be able to cultivate satwic thoughts. 
And, by cultivating satwic thoughts, you will be able to 
undertake satwic karmas. It is absolutely necessary that 
one should have satwic friends in youth and constantly 
move about in their company. It is said, 


“Good company leads to detachment; 

Detachment makes one free from delusion; 

Freedom from delusion leads to steadiness 
of mind; 

Steadiness of mind confers Liberation.’ 


ua 


(Sanskrit verse) 


Hence, you have to consume satwic food keep- 
ing your goal of liberation in mind. You may at times 
have a doubt that you would not get such satwic food 
always. I do not at all agree with this view. Don’t you 
get vegetables and edible green leaves in plenty? In fact, 
the moment you are born out of your mother’s womb, 
you are surviving and thriving on your mother’s milk or 
cow’s milk. Is this not satwic food? Can you not live upon 
a vegetarian diet consisting of vegetables, green leaves 
and cow’s milk? Why should you cater to the dictates of 
your palate adding chillies, salt, tamarind and spices? It 
is only when you gradually reduce these ingredients for 
taste you will be able to cultivate satwaguna. Parents 
have a great responsibility in teaching the children about 
the efficacy of satwic food and getting them accustomed 
to it right from their childhood. On the other hand, if the 


198 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


parents themselves prepare and serve rajasic and tamasic 
food consisting of meat, fish, etc., in their homes, how 
can they expect the children to develop satwaguna? | 
am of the view that the children at least should abstain 
from such rajasic and tamasic food and demand from 
their parents only the satwic food. One has to con- 
sciously cultivate the habit of consuming of only satwic 
food. Only then will one be able to develop satwaguna. 
Embodiments of Love! 


All our senses are conditioned by the trigunas 
and the gunas, in turn, are conditioned by the food we 
consume. Hence, if we start eating satwic food, under- 
take satwic karmas and move about in the company of 
satwic friends, I am sure that we can transform ourselves 
into satwic individuals. It is the bad company that is 
responsible for evil qualities. If you want to cultivate 
good qualities, you have to eat sattwic food. In fact, it is 
the food that we consume is responsible for all the evil 
qualities. 


Shun Evil Qualities 
Dear students! 


If you develop bad qualities like anger, passion, 
envy, jealousy, etc., right form this early age, your entire 
life will be spoiled. You are poisoning your young minds 
with these evil qualities. My advice to the youngsters and 
students is eat satwic food; cultivate satwic behaviour 
and keep the company of satwic people right from this 


Cultivate Satwic Qualities Right From Chilhood 199 


early age. I often observe that youngsters today join bad 
company the moment they enter the school or college and 
continue to move about in the company of bad people. 
With the result, they cultivate bad qualities, resulting 
in bad behaviour. Often they are not even aware of the 
subtle changes taking place in their behaviour towards 
elders, parents, teachers and society. They think that they 
are on the right track, since they are pursuing education 
in a good educational institution. The education they are 
pursuing may be good, but the core of their heart is pol- 
luted due to bad company. Several bad thoughts emanate 
in their mind even at a young age. 


People think that it is a natural phenomenon due 
to young age. I do not at all subscribe to this view. It is 
not a natural phenomenon at all! It is most unnatural. 
Since you are partaking of bad food, you are having bad 
thoughts. Hence, first and foremost, give up bad food. 
People who are devoted to Swami, must join satsanga. 
But, you are joining bad company and, as a result, are 
developing bad thoughts. Once bad thoughts enter your 
mind, none can drive them away. Hence, you have to 
cultivate good thoughts, even before bad thoughts enter 
your mind. 


Dear children! 
There are several parents who are not concerned 


about the future of their children. Either they are too busy 
pursuing their vocations or they are helpless in supervis- 


200 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


ing your behaviour. But, if you tread the right path they 
will be most happy. On the other hand, if you are moving 
about in bad company cultivating bad habits, resulting in 
bad behaviour, they will be very sad and will be unable 
to share their distress or anguish with anybody. Hence, 
it is your foremost duty to keep your parents happy. If 
you want to keep your parents happy, you must tread the 
right path. So, tread the right path and keep your parents 
happy. Only then will you be able to cultivate good be- 
haviour. There are three aspects in human life which are 
interlinked the thoughts, behaviour and the end result. As 
are the thoughts, so will be the behaviour and as is the 
behaviour, so will be the result. Teachers expect good 
behaviour from their pupils. How is it possible when the 
students move about in bad company, eat wrong kind of 
food and entertain bad thoughts? The end result is always 
bad in such a situation. While taking bitter food, how 
can you experience sweetness? In short, the rajasic and 
tamasic food that you consume is the root cause for the 
bad thoughts that are entering your mind. 


Dear students! 


All of you must tread the right path. Even if your 
parents for any reason offer you rajasic and tamasic food 
prepared in the home, you must explain and convince 
them of the ill-effects of such food, saying, “Mother! If 
you serve rajasic and tamasic food to methus, I will only 
get bad thoughts. This is not conducive to good behaviour 
on my part.” You must also convince them of the need 


Cultivate Satwic Qualities Right From Chilhood 201 


to prepare and serve satwic food to all members of the 
family. Not only should you eat satwic food, you should 
also read good books. Your entire life is dependent on 
good food, good thoughts and good company. 


Dear students! 


You should not read all sorts of trash like cheap 
novels, stories, etc. Such trash will generate bad thoughts 
in you and pollute you mind. When you go to a library, 
you should read the biographies of great and noble 
people which will help to cultivate good qualities and 
good thoughts in you. One reason for the pollution of 
young minds and proliferation of bad thoughts in them 
is reading all sorts of cheap literature. In fact, it is only 
the mind that is responsible for good or bad thoughts. 
That is why it is said, “Manaeva manushyanam karanam 
bandha mokshayoh” (Mind alone is the root cause for 
either bondage or liberation). Unfortunately, in these 
days it is only cheap books that have become popular 
and acquired great attraction. Good books have become 
a rare commodity. A question may arise as to where 
one would get such good books. You go to good librar- 
ies of institutions committed to the moral and spiritual 
uplift of humanity. Frequently we come across people 
travelling in trains and buses purchasing worthless 
books available in the railway platforms and bus stands 
and reading them with absorbing interest. They may 
say that they are reading them for whiling away the 


202 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


time. They do not realise how harmful those books are 
in generating bad thoughts and polluting their minds. 
Hence, you must always select books that contribute 
to your intellectual, moral and spiritual development. 
Embodiments of Love! 


If you wish to cultivate good thoughts and good 
behaviour, you must read good books. Many students 
today consider it a fashion to read cheap literature that is 
available for a low price. With the result, cheap thoughts 
and cheap behaviour are generated in them. They look 
for cheap books and trash distributed free of cost. They 
woefully lack a sense of discrimination to judge whether 
such writings are conducive to their moral, spiritual and 
character development. They will, however, realise the 
consequences of their action after their minds are totally 
polluted. Then it will be too late for them to retrace their 
steps. It is only through good books that good thoughts 
and good behaviour can be cultivated. 


Dear students! 


There are several other important aspects to be 
taught to you in these three days which will enable you 
to cultivate noble thoughts and tread the right path. I will 
teach several aspects in due course that will help you to 
cultivate pure thoughts. 


Sai Children’s Festival, 22-10-05, Prasanthi Nilayam 


18 
Develop The Spirit Of Oneness 


Embodiments of Love! 


fi Bisse being Ladies day, many ladies have gath- 
ered here to share their happiness with one and 
all. We distinguish and differentiate between ladies and 
gents on the basis of upadhi (vesture) or physical form. 
However, the principle of Brahman present in ladies and 
gents is one and the same. Sarvam khalvidam Brahma 
(verily all this is Brahman). Everyone aspires to attain 
divinity. Many sages, seers and yogis did intense pen- 
ance to have the vision of God. Where is God? Daivam 
manusha rupena (God incarnates in the form of a human 
being). God assumes human form to protect humanity. 
This has been the mission of all avatars. 


Every One Is An Embodiment Of God 


Embodiments of Love! 


od transcends names, forms and attributes. 
He is infinite and not limited to a particular 


204 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


form. Once Sage Narada and a few other sages prayed to 
Lord Narayana to incarnate in human form and redeem 
mankind. Lord Narayana said, “Narada, Brahma Shakti 
(Divine power) is positive. It is not possible for Brahma 
Shakti to incarnate on earth unless it is coupled with 
negative power. It is only when the positive and nega- 
tive combine that Divinity manifests in human form.” 


In response to the prayers of sages and seers, God 
comes down in human form. He strives for the welfare 
of humanity and bestows joy on one and all. The Avatar 
is a manifestation of Brahmaswarupa and manavatwa 
(humanness). The same principle of Brahman is latent 
in all. One has to develop inward vision in order to 
experience Him. Easwara sarva bhutanam (God is the 
indweller of all beings). In this cosmic drama, God alone 
is the director and also the actor. He is donning all the 
roles such as mother, father, husband, wife, daughter, son, 
etc. Someone says, “I have been blessed with a grand- 
son today”. The grandson is a manifestation of Brahma. 
Brahma alone assumes various names and forms in this 
world. When God incarnates on earth, He has to assume 
the form of jiva. The principles of daivatwa (Divinity) 
and jivatwa (individual) are inseparable. You cannot find 
one to the exclusion of the other. Divinity has no specific 
form. Only the jiva has a name and a form but not deva. 
He is present in all. In fact, each one of you is an em- 
bodiment of God. Whatever you see around is also the 
manifestation of God. Even the small birds that you see 
here are endowed with the principle of divinity. There 


Develop The Spirit Of Oneness 205 


is no place which is not pervaded with divinity. There is 
no form which is not divine. However, God assumes a 
particular form based on the feelings of His devotees. 


God is extolled as Sabda Brahmamayi, Char- 
acharamayi, Jyotirmayi, Vangmayi, Nitvanandamayi, 
Paratparamayi, Mayamayi and Sreemayi (embodiment 
of sound, mobility and immobility, light, speech, eternal 
bliss, perfection, delusion and wealth). Hence, even the 
words that we utter manifest our innate divinity. It is God 
who speaks through each one of you. You should have 
this firm conviction. If someone accuses you, think that 
God in that form is accusing you. When you develop 
such spirit of oneness and tolerance, you will never be 
perturbed by censure and blame. Your mind will always 
remain in peace. Whatever may happen, accept it whole- 
heartedly as the Will of God. Have firm faith that it is 
God and God alone who is the doer. Do not consider 
your fellow human beings as mere individuals. When 
you talk to someone, think that you are talking to God. 
When you do not see God in others and treat them as 
your own, you will be giving room to evil qualities like 
anger, jealousy, hatred, etc. Develop the spirit of oneness. 
Only then will your life be redeemed. 


When you go to a noble soul and ask him for a mes- 
sage, he will merely say, “My dear son, know thyself”. 
Today People are interested in knowing about others. 
They keep on enquiring, “Who are you? Where do you 
come from’? But, they do not enquire into themselves 


206 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


“Who am I’? It is only when you conduct such a self 
enquiry, will you get the correct answer. God has given 
you the human body. It is He who makes you talk, walk, 
laugh and even cry. Everything happens according to His 
Will. Develop such firm faith. 


Selfless Desires Of Mother Easwaramma 


On this occasion, we should remember Mother 
Easwaramma and the ideals she exemplified. She was a 
paragon of virtues. She was always happy, cheerful and 
had a smiling countenance. Her heart was tender and 
sweet as it was filled with love and compassion. One 
day she approached Me with a request, “Swami, when 
the children of our village suffer from any ailment, their 
mothers have to carry them all the way to Bukkapatnam 
hospital. It is a heartrending sight to see the grief-stricken 
mothers carrying their children that far. There is no guar- 
antee that they get proper medical attention even after 
going there. Hence, kindly establish a small hospital in 
our village itself.” I pacified her saying that her wish will 
certainly be fulfilled at an appropriate time. It is only 
when the kala, karma, karana and kartavya (time, ac- 
tion, reason and duty) are favourable, can one attain the 
desired result. I constructed a hospital as per her wish. 
On some other day, she came to Me with another prayer, 
“Swami, I am unable to bear the sight of small children 
carrying heavy loads of books and walking all the way 
to Bukkapatnam school. Even You had to walk to Buk- 


Develop The Spirit Of Oneness 207 


kapatnam school in those days. Kindly construct a small 
school in our village and save them from the trouble of 
trudging all the way to Bukkapatnam for their studies. I 
assured her, “Don’t worry, I will surely construct a school 
in the village’. Accordingly, I fulfilled her wish. 


She came to Me with yet another request, “Swami, 
people in our village are suffering for want of drinking 
water facility. They have to go all the way to Chitravathi 
river to fetch water. Even in Chitravathi, we do not find 
water always. It is not a perennial river. We find water 
only when there are rains. I feel very sad to see small 
children carrying pots filled with water on their tender 
shoulders. Water is the sustainer of life. Hence, kindly 
get a well dug in our village and quench the thirst of 
people.” I told her, “Your desires are very simple. I will 
certainly fulfil them in a big way. You don’t worry about 
these things. I will make sure that the people of our vil- 
lage have proper education and medical facilities.” 


As per My promise to her, I got a small school 
constructed in the village. In the earlier days, she was 
concerned that not all the children of all the villages 
were attending school. Later on, I established a college. 
Easwaramma was very happy. Gradually, the college has 
developed into a university. 


To begin with, I got a small hospital constructed 
on the top of the hill. Dr. Seetharamaiah from East 
Godavari district came here to serve in the hospital at 


208 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


My behest. He was an ardent devotee. He served here 
till his last breath. The hospital was totally managed by 
one doctor and two nurses in those days. Now much 
more has been achieved than what Easwaramma had 
asked for by establishing a Super Speciality Hospi- 
tal. The simple desires of Easwaramma in those days 
paved the way for gigantic social welfare projects. 


Once when I went to the banks of the river Chi- 
travathi, I noticed some ladies from the village scoop- 
ing out sand to get their pots filled with water. Later, 
Easwaramma also told Me about the hardships of the 
housewives in the village for obtaining drinking water 
and requested Me to do something to relieve their dif- 
ficulties. Thereafter, I arranged for water to be supplied 
to the villages from a few hundred kilometres away. In 
fact, I fulfilled every little desire that she had expressed, 
the reason being, her desires were never for her own 
benefit but invariably in the larger interest of the villag- 
ers. Whenever anyone expresses a truly selfless desire, 
Swami will surely fulfil such wishes. What was once 
a small school has now been transformed into a multi- 
disciplinary university. What was once a small well has 
been transformed into a gigantic water supply system. 


Electricity was a rare privilege for the rural popula- 
tion those days. The politicians who came to power were 
not very enthusiastic and effective in supplying electric- 
ity for most villages. Therefore, I decided that without 
seeking their assistance or help, I must get these facilities 


Develop The Spirit Of Oneness 209 


provided by Myself. When Puttaparthi was electrified, 
there was jubilation and this even caused jealousy in 
nearby villages. Hence, I expanded the facility to other 
villages also. These were not casual acts of fancy, but 
were provided after ascertaining the needs of the vil- 
lagers. See this vast auditorium. For whom have I got 
it constructed? Is it not for the comfort of all of you? It 
is said, Paropakaraya punyaya, papaya parapeedanam 
(one attains merit by helping others and commits sin 
by hurting them). Help ever, Hurt never. Hence, always 
strive to help everybody. Selfishness is an evil. Fish is 
better than ‘selfish’. Unfortunately, today you see per- 
sons who are utterly selfish everywhere. It is difficult 
to trace the origin of the present-day politics steeped 
in utter selfishness, but its consequences are rampant 
corruption and evil tendencies. If this kind of politics is 
eliminated, there will be happiness all around. All and 
sundry have now entered politics. Even panwalas and 
beedi vendors have developed political aspirations. One 
has to understand the true purpose and significance of 
politics before one enters into it. Instead of being help- 
ful to society politicians actually engage themselves in 
harming those whom they are supposed to serve. Those in 
power expect that everyone should hanker after them for 
obtaining things as a matter of favour which in fact, are 
their right. | would therefore advice that you shun such 
politics. Instead, rely on your own innate strength. What 
sort of a practice is it to go from door to door begging 
for votes? If you lack the competence, your endeavours 


210 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


are bound to fail. Depend on God’s grace. If you depend 
on God, He will turn the minds of people in your favour. 
God is everything. Victory is secured only when you to- 
tally depend on God’s grace. Here again your prayers to 
God should not be for selfish reasons. If you are selfish, 
it practically renders you incapable of helping others. 
First of all, acquire good qualities. You must be helpful 
to a few people around you at least. Your efforts should 
reflect an element of sacrifice. Karmanyevadhikarasthe 
ma phaleshu kadachana (you have right only to work, but 
not to the fruit thereof). Be active in your life. Whatever 
work you take up, depend on your own innate strength. 
Do not depend on assistance, support or help from others. 
Be self-reliant. If you wish to have your family and chil- 
dren well educated and flourishing, you pray to God. 


Strive To Purify Your Heart 


Wherever you look, God is present. From stars to 
hillocks, from insects to elephants, everything is per- 
vaded by Brahman. Fill your heart with divine feelings. 
God is known as Hridayavasi (resident of heart). Here 
heart does not mean the physical heart. If there is enlarge- 
ment of physical heart, it results in a disease. What I refer 
in this context is the spiritual heart which is present in 
every individual. When there is an expansion of heart, it 
gives rise to broadmindedness. On the other hand, when 
there is contraction of heart, you will have only narrow 
feelings. Hence, never entertain mean qualities. The 
human birth is highly sacred. That is why God assumes 


Develop The Spirit Of Oneness 211 


the human form. Hence, develop purity of heart and lead 
your lives in a sacred manner. When I give a discourse 
or involve you in bhajan singing, it is only meant for the 
expansion of your heart. When you participate in Nagar 
Sankirtan in the early hours of the day, your heart will 
be brimming with bliss. It is not enough if you merely 
sing for your own satisfaction. You should participate in 
community singing wholeheartedly and share your joy 
with one and all. Sing His glory full-throated and make 
everyone drink the nectar of the divine name. Your aim 
should always be to attain expansion of heart in every 
endeavour. Only then will the title of “human being” 
befits you. Be broadminded and share your happiness 
with everybody. 


At present selfishness and self-interest are on the 
rise. People are not striving to purify their hearts. On the 
other hand, they are trying to cover up their mistakes 
and pose to be men of eminence. They are interested 
only in the welfare of their own family and friends. You 
should have concern for the feelings and well-being of 
others also. Love is God. Live in love. Love should not 
be tainted with narrow feelings of I and mine. All should 
live in amity with the spirit of oneness. It is possible 
only when you have firm faith that God is present in all. 
Without the presence of divinity within, one cannot live. 
With such awareness, live always in God consciousness. 
Consider the suffering of others as your own. Do not do 
unto others what you do not want others to do unto you. 


212 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


Consider love as your very life-breath. Grow in love. Be 
broadminded and share your love with everybody. Pray 
that others should not undergo the suffering you have 
undergone. Let everybody be happy and make progress 
in life. It is possible only when you develop love. 


Ladies Day, 19-11-2005, Prasanthi Nilayam 


There is no Vidya which our students are not pro- 
ficient in. They develop all the virtues and they 
saturate every act of theirs, including their skills 
and studies, with those high and pure qualities. 
To demonstrate that this process will yeild joy, 
peace and prosperity, I have these students as My 


instruments. They would themselves act as ideals. 
They are the source of My delight and they sustain 
My hopes. They are My Ananda and Ahaara. 


Baba 





19 


Truth And Righteousness Are The 
Foundation For True Education 


Dear Students! 


do not wish to speak much about the present day 

education. In fact, there is but one purpose and 
goal for education; that is truth. Whatever is learnt other 
than truth, cannot be construed as true education. That is 
only secular education. There are many ‘educated’ people 
in the world today. But, what is it that they are engaged 
in? I do not find educated people engaged in service to so- 
ciety today. Nevertheless, the educational institutions in 
the world are turning out more and more such ‘educated’ 
people. The education that these people acquire is only 
secular education and not spiritual education. In fact, 
spiritual education is the only true education, which will 
establish the existence of god. Secular education enables 
one to scure employment and eke out a living thereby. 
It is for the physical sustenance of the person concerned 


214 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


and his or her family. As the saying goes, “The end of 
education is character”. Devoid of character, all other 
possessions are useless. Unfortunately, today character 
building has been relegated to the background. It is the 
last priority. Of what use is it to pursue such education 
which does not confer character on a person? Modern 
education may help one to gain control over men and 
matter, but utterly fails in uplifting one’s own self. There 
must be unity between one’s inner feelings and outward 
actions. The harmony between thought, word and deed 
is of utmost importance. Education should enable one to 
cultivate good qualities, character and devotion. 


Character Is The Mark Of A Human Being 


When there is unity between thought, word and 
deed, one can acquire purity and realise divinity. Modern 
education is fully self-centred. Wherever you see, selfish- 
ness is rampant. Contrary to it, true education teaches 
selflessness. People pursuing such type of education, give 
up their selfish interests and work for the larger interest 
of society. It is said, Paropakaraya punyaya, papaya 
parapeedanam (one attains merit by serving others and 
commits sin by hurting them). Wherever you see, people 
today analyse whether a particular activity they wish 
to undertake will bring material benefit to them or not. 
Everywhere you will find only selfish interest coming to 
the fore. People tend to forget that the real self is one’s 
own Self (atma), which is the same Self (atma) present 
in every individual. And, that Self is chaitanya shakti 


Truth And Righteousness, The Foundation For True Education 215 


(the power of universal consciousness). This Chaitanya 
Shakti is present in every human being, nay every living 
being. That is why it is said, Easwarah sarva bhutanam 
(God is the indweller of all beings). Hence, one has to 
give up one’s self-interest and strive to realise the atma 
tattwa that is present in every living being. Modern edu- 
cation is steeped in utter selfishness. It is only when one 
transcends his self-interest can one acquire true education 
and purity of heart. One has to rise above self-interest and 
help others with a spirit of sacrifice. It is only then that 
one can become a true human being and can be called as 
such; not by mere education. Birds, beasts and animals 
cannot realise this sacred atma tattwa and manifest self- 
lessness. Only a human being can do so by sadhana. A 
human being can acquire value only by developing good 
character. Hence one has to strive to acquire and protect 
one’s character by pursuing true education. 


Education is not for earning a fat pay-packet. 
After all, what can money do? In what way can it help 
us? It may perhaps help us to acquire name and fame 
and build palatial buildings with modern comforts. But, 
devoid of character, of what use are all these comforts? 
Unfortunately, today the world respects such people 
only. In My view, a person without character is unfit to 
be called a human being. He is only an animal. Even an 
animal is better than such a human being, for, it has a 
season and a reason. But, a human being has no season 
and reason at all! Wherever you see, you will find only 
selfishness today. Only such people pass off as gentle- 


216 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


men in society in present times. Then again, character 
is the most important aspect of a human being. Truth 
and righteousness are the foundation for character. As 
the saying goes, Sathyannasti paro Dharma (There is 
no Dharma greater than adherence to truth). The man- 
sion of righteousness rests on the foundation of truth. If 
the very foundation of truth collapses, there can be no 
righteousness. Hence, truth and righteousness are the two 
most important limbs of a human being. When truth and 
righteousness go together, love manifests. 


Bereft of truth, righteousness, love and peace the 
value of all your education is zero; 
Bereft of truth, righteousness, love and peace the 
sanctity of all your acts of charity is zero; 
Bereft of truth, righteousness, love and peace the 
utility of the positions of power occupied is 
zero; 

Bereft of truth, righteousness, love and peace the 
result of all your good deeds is zero; 

These four qualities are the four pillars that support 
the mansion of Sanathana Dharma. 

What more can I explain, 

Oh! Men of noble qualities! 


(Telugu poem) 


There can be no peace without truth, righteousness 
and love. You often come across people complaining, “I 
have everything in life, but I have no peace of mind”. A 


Truth And Righteousness, The Foundation For True Education 217 


person without peace of mind is confronted with troubles 
from all sides. If only one has peace of mind, one can 
be happy in the world. He will have no troubles at all! 
Such a person is a great soul. 


Let us now analyse the true meaning of the 
word “Manava” (human being). It means one without 
attachment to the world. Only such a person can be called 
a real human being. To marry someone, beget children 
and develop a family these are all considered to be 
attachments. Man loses peace on account of developing 
attachments. A paradoxical situation has developed today 
where man has everything good food, comfortable life, 
etc., but, he has no peace of mind. Why? Because, he 
has developed an attachment to the objects of enjoyment. 
Peace is something which cannot be purchased in a 
market. It depends upon one’s attitude to life and living. 
Hence one has to develop ekatma bhava (feeling of 
oneness). If this ekatma bhava is developed, one can 
move about freely in the world with no attachment to 
any particular individual or object. When man loses his 
freedom he will become bound by the objective world. 
He will develop desires, lust, etc. Where there is lust, 
love cannot exist. The rose flower which is a symbol of 
love teaches many good things. It is a thing of beauty 
that speaks silently in the language of fragrance. It is 
surrounded by thorns. In this example, the rose flower 
is comparable to love and the thorns to lust. Man must 
be able to pluck the flower of love without being pricked 


218 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


by the thorns of lust. It is only when man develops pure 
love untainted by desire and lust that he can be called a 
true human being. 


Attachment Denies Peace 


Adi Sankara, the greatest exponent of the Advaita 
philosophy, once went on a tour to North India on a mis- 
sion of winning over scholars by argumentation. During 
the course of his tour, he came across a great scholar by 
name Mandana Mishra. He had a wife by name Ubhaya 
Bharati who was equally well-versed in scriptures. Be- 
sides, she was a realised soul. She was selected to be the 
arbitrator and judge to decide the winner in the argumen- 
tative sessions between Sankaracharya and Mandana 
Mishra. She was a truthful lady and was aptly suited to be 
a judge. The judges of modern times are not comparable 
to Ubhaya Bharati in the qualities of truth and objectiv- 
ity. She always believed in the aphorism “Truth is God” 
and therefore was eminently suited for the assignment. 
The arguments commenced in the presence of Ubhaya 
Bharati. She was following the arguments and counter 
arguments with rapt attention. Finally, Sankaracharya 
defeated Mandana Mishra and he was declared as win- 
ner by Ubhaya Bharati. As per the conditions, Mandana 
Mishra had to take to sanyas and he did accordingly. As 
a dutiful wife, Ubhaya Bharati followed suit and she also 
took to sanyas. A question may arise here as to what is 
sanyas, in the real sense. It is giving up of all desires. As 
long as one entertains desires, he will only be a samsari 


Truth And Righteousness, The Foundation For True Education 219 


(householder). He will develop worldly relationships. He 
will desire to have a son in the first instance. Thereafter, 
the whole retinue of daughter-in-law, grandsons, grand- 
daughters, etc., will follow. Ubhaya Bharati did not wish 
to entangle herself in the web of such worldly relation- 
ships. Hence, she took to sanyas (renunciation). 


One day, she was going along with her disciples 
to the river Ganga for taking a holy dip. On the way, she 
observed a sanyasi relaxing on the wayside, keeping a 
dried bottle gourd under his head. This, he was using for 
storing drinking water and hence he was preserving it 
safely. Ubhaya Bharati saw this sanyasi’s attachment to 
the bottle gourd and commented to her disciples, “Look! 
This man calls himself a sanyasi, but he is attached to a 
bottle gourd which he is keeping safely under his head 
as a pillow.” The sanyasi heard this comment, but did 
not utter anything then. While Ubhaya Bharati and her 
disciples were returning from the river, he threw away 
the bottle gourd in front of them in order to demonstrate 
that he was not attached to the article. Observing his ac- 
tion, Ubhaya Bharati aptly remarked, “I thought there 
was only one defect in him abhimana (attachment). 
Now I realise that he has another defect also ahamkara 
(ego). How can one with abhimana and ahamkara be- 
come a jnani and sanyasi?” Her comment was an eye- 
opener for the sanyasi. Immediately, he fell at the feet 
of Ubhaya Bharati and prayed to her to teach him true 
knowledge. 


220 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


People today put up a show as though they had 
renounced everything. In fact, it is they who crave for 
worldly possessions. Dear students! You are all engaged 
in pursuing education. Hence, you must have only one 
desire now. That is Brahmacharya (celibacy). When you 
come here to join the Sri Sathya Sai Institute of Higher 
Learning as students, you pray, “Swami! We don’t want 
anything. We have no desires like marriage, setting up 
a family and building of houses, etc. Please lead us on 
the path of liberation.” But, the moment you leave the 
portals of the Institute, umpteen number of desires swarm 
you like honey bees. 


Bad Company And Bad Place Influence Human 
Behaviour 


Man’s behaviour is influenced by Sthanabala 
(power of the place), Bhujabala (power of the physical 
body) and Dhanabala (power of wealth). For instance, 
in the Ramayana, when Sita, Rama and Lakshmana were 
taking a stroll in the forest, Lakshmana suddenly felt tired 
and told Rama that he was exhausted and would like 
to go back to Ayodhya as quickly as possible to have a 
more comfortable living. Rama smiled at him and said, 
“Let us proceed further, I shall explain everything later.” 
How did Lakshmana who previously had declared that 
Rama was everything to him and that he would not live 
without Rama even for a moment, suddenly develop this 
attitude? How did this concern for bodily comfort arise 


Truth And Righteousness, The Foundation For True Education 221 


in him suddenly? After they walked some distance, they 
sat under a tree. That moment Lakshmana felt the pangs 
of repentance for his impertinent behaviour. He realised 
his mistake, caught hold of Rama’s feet and implored, 
“Rama! Forgive me for what I had said. I cannot under- 
stand how these devilish qualities and bad thoughts en- 
tered me. What could be the reason?” Rama thought over 
the matter for some time and explained, “Lakshmana! 
The region through which we passed just now was the 
haunt of Surpanakha. She used to rest under that tree. 
Hence, the place is surcharged with all her devilish quali- 
ties. The vibrations of those evil qualities aroused bad 
thoughts in you. The moment you came out of the place, 
you are your normal self again. Your inherent good nature 
asserted itself.” Thus, one’s association with a particular 
place also has its effect on one’s behaviour. That is what 
is called sthanabala (power of the place). 


People often wish and pray for a son. But what 
type of son should they pray for? One who will emulate 
the noble qualities of the parents. Unfortunately, today 
you do not find noble qualities anywhere. Youngsters 
often move in bad company and cultivate bad qualities. 
This is not correct. They should always make friendship 
with good people and emulate their qualities. The great 
epic Ramayana is replete with several examples of how 
association with good people results in developing noble 
qualities. Adi Sankara in his famous Bhaja Govindam 
song very graphically described how satsanga would 


222 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


ultimately lead one to liberation: 


Satsangatwe nissangatwam, 
Nissangatwe nirmohatwam, 
Nirmohatwe nischalatatwam, 
Nischalatatwe jivanmukti. 
(Sanskrit verse) 


Today, people move about in bad company and 
ultimately spoil themselves. This is the effect of Kali 
Yuga, which is often referred to as kalaha yuga (the 
Age of Conflict). Man, by nature is divine, but turns 
bad on account of dussanga (bad company). That is the 
reason why sages and seers in ancient times constantly 
strove to cultivate noble qualities by satsanga. Today, 
trash literature is found everywhere. Wherever you see, 
you will find people, especially youngsters reading bad 
books that pollute their minds. You might have observed 
youngsters visiting the library invariably on Sundays and 
holidays. They search for bad books and read them with 
absorbing interest. Those bad books are very exciting to 
the young minds. Thus, youngsters spoil themselves on 
account of bad company. No force on earth can change 
such boys. Not even God. Unless one makes introspec- 
tion into one’s behaviour and strives for transformation, 
one will continue to move about in bad company. One’s 
character and conduct are of paramount importance. If 
they are taken care of, one is sure of treading the right 
path. There is no use acquiring high academic degrees 
with a view to earn high salary and position. How long 


Truth And Righteousness Are The Foundation For True Educa- 223 


will they last? On the other hand, it is possible that they 
may land one in trouble sometimes. 


In keeping with the saying, Yad bhavam tad bha- 
vati (as is the feeling, so is the result), one has to cultivate 
noble thoughts and feelings. One has to read good books 
that will bring about a transformation of heart and uplift 
the soul. You often find youngsters going to the library 
and remain engaged in deep study. What sort of books 
do they read? They read bad books camouflaged in a 
good cover. Once you remove the cover and look into 
the book, everything 1s trash with bad pictures. You will 
have to be very strict with such students. No one can be 
taken for granted. They speak sweet words outwardly as 
though they are very innocent. But, they stealthily engage 
themselves in bad activities. Unlike the students in the 
Gurukula system of the ancient times, the present day 
students indulge in bad behaviour. In spite of great efforts 
on the part of teachers to bring about a transformation 
in them, they continue to exhibit their bad qualities. It is 
not surprising to see students assaulting teachers in the 
educational institutions today. There are students who 
find fault with those who actually provide for their liv- 
ing. There are also students who do not hesitate to hurt 
the very hand that feeds them. Such are the qualities of 
the present day students. They do not appreciate the role 
played by the teachers in their uplift. 


Be An Ideal Student 


224 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


What are the qualities expected of a student? 


Students should pursue such education which 
confers on them the sacred qualities like good 
character, adherence to truth, devotion, discipline 
and duty. 

(Telugu poem) 


Only those students who cultivate such qualities 
are eligible to be called students in the real sense. Those 
who act against those principles are not students, but 
stupids. You should not associate with such people. Nei- 
ther you should call them stupids and earn their wrath. 
Be neutral in your relationship with them. You should 
keep up your own good qualities, which the world will 
appreciate. Love all. In fact, love is the most important 
aspect of education. One who teaches the method by 
which man can cultivate selfless love is the real Guru. 
There are, of course, several such teachers. I have estab- 
lished the Sathya Sai Educational Institutions only with 
a view to inculcate love and teach good qualities to the 
students. It is not an exaggeration to say that there is not 
a single bad book in our library. Our students are very 
good students. They do not at all move in bad company. 
Even when they go home for vacation, they do not like 
to stay there for long. Sometimes, their mothers may say, 
“My dear! You stayed for one full year in Brindavan or 
Puttaparthi. You never had an opportunity to eat tasty and 
spicy food. I shall now prepare such food that you will 
relish.” Our boys will then reply, “Mother! You should 


Truth And Righteousness, The Foundation For True Education 225 


also not eat such rajasic food. It is not good for health.” 
As is the food, so is the head (thoughts). Thus, when the 
food and head go together, people forget God. Hence, do 
not change your food habits. Continue to stick to a sat- 
twic diet. Take plenty of green leafy vegetables. It is only 
when you maintain spartan habits with regard to food and 
head, will you become a good-natured individual. You 
are aware that people outside have high expectations of 
the students studying in Sri Sathya Sai Educational Insti- 
tutions. Students, as long as they remain in our hostels, 
exhibit good behaviour and devotion. Once they go out 
of the portals of the institution, they turn bad. This should 
not happen. Wherever you are, whether in the hostel here 
or when you go out, you must continue to exhibit good 
behaviour. Of course, I have no doubt at all about the 
behaviour of our students. They are good boys. I hope 
that our students will continue to be good and become 
good citizens worthy of emulation by others. I conclude 
My Discourse with blessings to all. 


Benedictory Address XXIV Convocation Of SSSIAL, 
22-11-05, Prasanthi Nilayam 


226 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


This is the best time to tell you something about 
the authenticity of this Advent. I only wish to 
communicate the Truth. There are many who 
cannot bear or tolerate the Splendour that I am 
manifesting, the Divinity that is expressed in 
every act, the wonders and amazing happenings 
that are the result of Grace; these people label 
these as acts of mesmerism or miracles or feats 
of magic! They hope to bring these down in the 
estimation of people. Let me tell you this; mine is 
no mesmerism, miracle or magic. Mine is genuine 
DIVINE POWER. 


Baba 


Life sustained by food is short; life sustained by 
the Atma is eternal. Do not lay claim to long life; 
but to Divine life. Do not pine for more years 
on earth, but for more virtues in the heart. The 
Buddha knew and made known to the World the 
Truth. Everything is grief. Everything is empty. 
Everything is brief. Everything is polluted. So the 
wise man has to do the duties cast upon him with 
discrimination, deligence and detachment. Play 
the role but keep your identity unaffected. 


Baba 





20 


Realise Your Innate Divinity 
To Attain Peace 


Bereft of truth, righteousness, love and peace the 
value of all your education is zero; 
Bereft of truth, righteousness, love and peace the 
sanctity of all your acts of charity is zero; 
Bereft of truth, righteousness, love and peace 
the utility of the positions of power occupied 
is zero, 

Bereft of truth, righteousness, love and peace the 
result of all your good deeds is zero. 


(Telugu poem) 
Embodiments of Love! 
uman birth is meant to attain peace and not 
for occupying positions of authority. One 
may have all types of wealth and comforts but bereft of 


peace life itself has no meaning. There are many in this 
world who are well-to-do, highly educated and occupy- 


228 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


ing positions of authority. But, in what way is society 
benefited by them? They have no time or inclination to 
wipe off the tears of the suffering humanity. How can we 
help the poor and the downtrodden? This should be the 
concern of the people in power. But, nobody seems to 
think on these lines. In the name of social work, people 
are actually indulging in ‘show-work’! They drive away 
the beggars who come to their doorstep begging for alms. 
Man should engage himself in acts of charity in order to 
experience peace. 


The Goal Of Human Life 


You should understand the import of the term 
manava in the first instance. What is the goal of a human 
being? Is it to strive for the fulfilment of one’s desires? 
Is it to come up in life in the worldly sense? Is it to enjoy 
sensual pleasures? Human life is a mixture of happiness 
and sorrow. It is not possible to experience one to the 
exclusion of the other. How can you expect to attain 
happiness and peace if you are not prepared to help 
your fellow human being? Everyone has to experience 
ups and downs in life, but they are like passing clouds. 
Difficulties are a part of life. None can escape them. 
Hence, one has to treat happiness and sorrow with 
equanimity. There is pleasure in pain and vice-versa. One 
should not be elated by pleasure nor depressed by pain. 
We have to develop the spirit of equanimity in order to 
progress in life. Samatwa (equality) is very essential for 
samaja (society) to progress. Sukhadukhe samekruthwa 


Realise Your Innate Divinity To Attain Peace 229 


labhalabhau jayajayau (one should maintain equipoise 
in happiness and sorrow, gain and loss, victory and 
defeat). But, man, in spite of enjoying all comforts and 
pleasures, is unable to bear even a small difficulty. He is 
disturbed and distressed by the slightest trouble. If you 
ask a well-to-do person, whether he is happy, what will 
be his reply? He will say, “Sir, I have no dearth of money. 
My sons are well settled in life. My home is very well 
furnished with all types of comforts and conveniences. 
I have everything in life except peace of mind.” How 
can one attain peace of mind? It is possible only when 
one realises his innate divinity. Why are we not able 
to experience peace? Where does the mistake lie? We 
go on enquiring from others, “Who are you’? But, we 
do not make an effort to enquire into ourselves, “Who 
am I’? There lies the mistake. Once we realise who we 
really are, we will be free from sorrows and difficulties 
forever. Hence, first and foremost we should make efforts 
to realise our true identity. What is the use of knowing 
everything without being aware of the Self? 


Is it not a futile exercise to sow seeds when there 
are no rains? Even when there are rains, can you reap a 
harvest unless you have sown seeds? Both the positive 
and the negative are required for the electric current to 
flow. In the same manner, both self effort and divine 
grace are essential to achieve success in your endeavours. 
Easwarah Sarva Bhutanam (God is the indweller of all 
beings). Jsavasyam idam sarvam (the entire universe is 


230 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


permeated by God). We must realise that we are born to 
experience our innate divinity and not merely to enjoy 
worldly pleasures. We have to take to the path of spiri- 
tuality to experience our innate divinity. If we lack in 
spiritual outlook, we do not deserve to be called human 
beings. In fact, it amounts to betrayal of God. God does 
not expect you to worship Him. He expects you to lead 
an ideal and purposeful life. 


Once sage Narada enquired Lord Vishnu as to what 
was the royal path to immortality. Then Lord Vishnu 
replied, “One should realise that I am present in all be- 
ings”. The spark of divinity is present in all. Man is nota 
mere mortal. He is essentially divine. Jiva (individualised 
soul) and Deva (God) coexist. The former is negative 
and the latter positive. Lord Vishnu told Narada, “I have 
to assume the form of a human in order to move among 
men and protect the world. I am present in everyone in 
the form of atma. When man constantly contemplates on 
the principle of atma, I manifest Myself.” 


The same divine principle of atma is present in all. 
One who realises this truth experiences the all-pervasive 
divinity. God is in you, with you, around you, above you 
and below you. However, you cannot realise this truth 
unless you give up negative feelings. God is everywhere. 
You do not have to search for Him. Develop firm faith 
that He is in you. God has no specific form. He transcends 
all names and forms. 


Realise Your Innate Divinity To Attain Peace 231 


Having been born as a human being you should 
strive for the welfare of the society. You are a member 
of the society and your welfare depends on the welfare 
of the society. Hence, undertake activities which are 
beneficial to the society. 


The Atma Alone Is Eternal, The God In Man 
Embodiments of Love! 


Do not identify yourself with the body. You are 
the embodiments of the atma. 


The body is made up of five elements and is 
bound to perish sooner or later, but the indweller 
has neither birth nor death. The indweller has 
no attachment whatsoever and is the eternal 
witness. 


(Telugu poem) 


Can anyone say “My atma is dead”? The physical 
body perishes with the passage of time but the atma is 
eternal. One can see the reflection of the sun in a well, in 
a water tank, in the river and also in the ocean. Without 
water, there can be no reflection. Each human being can 
be compared to a flow in which the reflection of the same 
atma is seen. The sun is one, but appears as though there 
exists a separate sun for each country. When it is daytime 
in India, it is night-time in America and vice-versa. The 
sun may appear at different times in different countries, 
but it is one and the same. We cannot call it as Indian sun, 


232 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


American sun and so on and so forth. Similarly, God is 
one. Truth is one. Love is one. Live in love. When you 
adhere to the twin principles of truth and love, you will 
experience the manifestation of divinity in everything. 


Who is God? In fact, you yourself are God. Hence, 
everyone should develop the firm conviction, “I am God”. 
When you develop such firm conviction, there will be no 
room for ego and hatred. You are God and your fellow 
human being is also God. Develop such principle of one- 
ness and equality. When you harm others, you actually 
harm yourself. Victory and loss are a part of the game of 
life. One should not criticise or blame the other. When 
someone meets with failure in his endeavour, empathise 
with him. When you do not identify yourself with others, 
differences are bound to crop up. 


Who are you? You think you are the body. But, 
you are neither the body nor the mind. The human body 
is like a water bubble. How can you identify yourself 
with such an ephemeral body? You may say “I am the 
mind’. Mind is nothing but a bundle of desires. One day 
or the other you have to give up all desires. Hence, do not 
identify yourself with the mind. Today’s man has limit- 
less desires. His mind wavers from moment to moment 
and hence is called a monkey mind. Do not allow your 
mind to behave like a monkey. You belong to mankind 
and hence keep your mind always steady. Constantly 
remind yourself that you are a human being. Daivam 
manusha rupena (God is in the form of human). Give up 


Realise Your Innate Divinity To Attain Peace 233 


body consciousness and live in the constant awareness 
that you are God. 


We construct temples to consecrate idols and wor- 
ship them. Where does the idol come from? It is your 
own creation. You offer worship to the man-made idols 
but you are not prepared to worship the God in man. 
There is no point in merely worshipping idols if you do 
not realise your innate divinity. Everyone must respect 
and revere the principle of the atma within. Consider 
atmaviswasa (faith in the Self) as your very life-breath. 
Faith in the idols is temporary. When you go to Tirupathi, 
you worship God in the form of Lord Venkateswara. You 
extol Him saying, “Lord Venkateswara is our family 
deity”. When you make a pilgrimage to Brindavan, you 
worship God in the form of Krishna. In Ayodhya, you 
worship Him in the form of Lord Rama. Depending on 
the place and circumstances, different names and forms 
have been attributed to God. But, in reality Lord Ven- 
kateswara, Krishna, Rama, Sai Baba, all are one and the 
same. Call Him by any name, He will respond. He has no 
differences. You should not be deluded by differences in 
name and form. Develop firm faith in the oneness of the 
atma. “Religions are many but the goal is one”. 


Let Your Mind Be Purified Through Refinement 
Embodiments Of Love! 


Having come here after spending a lot money 


234 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


and putting up with inconveniences, you should make 
proper use of your stay here. Ask yourself, whether you 
have spent your time in a purposeful manner. What is 
the use of coming here if you do not practise Swami’s 
teachings? Develop unwavering faith in the oneness of 
divinity. Only then can you experience peace. So long 
as you do not contemplate on the oneness of God, your 
mind will continue to play its tricks. 


You may criticise someone as a bad person today 
and extol him as a good person tomorrow. Good and bad 
are your own thinking. Your mind is the cause for both. 
In reality, man is always good by nature. Human life is 
highly sacred. That is why it is said, Daivam manusha 
rupena. Do not belittle yourself thinking that you are a 
mere mortal. You are verily God Himself. The very fact 
that you portray God in a human form and worship Him 
proves that human being is essentially divine. Do not at- 
tach undue importance to names and forms. Understand 
the inherent principle of divinity. 


What is the use of taking birth as a human being if 
you conduct yourself like an animal? You need not give up 
everything and become a sanyasi. See God in man. God 1s 
all-pervasive. You cannot say that God is confined to a par- 
ticular place. There is no place where God does not exist. 

Sarvatah panipadam tat sarvathokshi siromukham, 
sarvatah sruthimalloke sarvamavruthya tishtati (with 
hands, feet, eyes, head, mouth and ears pervading 
everything, He permeates the entire universe). 


Realise Your Innate Divinity To Attain Peace 235 


We cultivate paddy. However, we do not consume 
it in its raw form. We remove the husk covering the 
grain and refine it into rice. So long as there is husk, it 
is obliged to have ‘rebirth’. Our desires are like the husk 
covering the rice grain. We will be free from the cycle 
of birth and death once we give up all desires. 


Paddy becomes suitable for consumption only after 
it undergoes the process of refinement and becomes rice. 
Rice is used for making various preparations such as 
Pulihora, Chitraannam, Chakkera Pongali, Paayasam, 
etc. Rice flour is used for preparing /dlis and Dosas. The 
names of these food items may vary, but the essential 
ingredient of rice is the same in all. Just as paddy is trans- 
formed into rice, our mind should also be purified through 
the process of refinement, termed as samskara. 


You are deluded because of your materialistic 
outlook. You have to change your vision. Do not expect 
God to change the creation. He has given you everything 
in its pristine form. But, you are polluting it because of 
your selfish desires. The mind is the root cause for all 
this. Hence, annihilate the mind and everything will be 
clear to you. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Your heart is pure and sacred but you are deluded 
by the clouds of desires. Just as the sun and the moon are 
not visible to us when they are covered by the clouds, 
we are unable to visualise our reality because of our 


236 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


desires. 


Childhood passes in trivial play with other children, 

Youth passes in amorous sport, 

Middle age absorbs time and effort in amassing 
wealth. 

Come dotage, time crawls in futile longing for worldly 
desires, yet there is no time for contemplation of 
God. 

Thus is wasted the precious human birth, deeply 
entangled in the net of Karma. 


(Telugu poem) 


Man feels proud of his youth and falls into the trap 
of maya (delusion). As the end approaches he regrets for 
not having attained peace of mind in spite of enjoying 
all comforts and pleasures. Man passes through various 
stages in life, such as, childhood, youth, middle age and 
old age. However, there is no transformation 1n him with 
the advancement of age. Instead of trying to change 
the srishti (creation), man should change his drishti 
(outlook). We can see the reality only when we change 
our drishti. There is nothing wrong with srishti. God’s 
creation is perfect and none can alter it. In this creation 
God can make anything happen by His divine Will. 


So long as one is endowed with physical strength 
and vigour, one may enjoy himself by participating in 
aatalu and paatalu (play and song). However, one should 
not indulge oneself in any activity beyond a certain limit. 


Realise Your Innate Divinity To Attain Peace 237 


As the age advances, the physical body undergoes cer- 
tain changes. All of you are aware what a great singer 
M.S. Subbulakshmi was. However, her voice refused to 
cooperate with her in the old age. When she mentioned 
this to Me, I told her that she had used her voice in excess 
and that was the reason for her predicament. 


Your voice and vision are bound to change with 
the passage of time. You suffer from unrest and anxiety 
because you rely on your physical body. Instead, rely on 
the changeless and eternal principle of the atma. 


Man is ruining his life because of his habits. He 
should lead a life of righteousness. Do not give undue 
importance to food and drink. Consider character as your 
very life-breath. If you lack character, you will have to 
face innumerable difficulties in life. 


Contemplate On One Name And One Form 


Divinity is referred to as ‘Sat’, which means the 
changeless and eternal principle. People of different 
religions call it by different names. The Muslims extol 
God saying, “Allah Ho Akbar”. They consider God as 
their sole refuge. Whether one is a Muslim or a Hindu, 
God is the only refuge for all. You should emphatically 
declare to yourself, “I want God”. You should get im- 
mersed in the divine, not in deep wine! Once you accept 
Rama as your God, you should spend your entire life 
in the contemplation of Rama. But, these days man has 
become fickle-minded. One day he keeps the picture of 


238 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


Lord Rama in his altar and starts worshipping Him by 
chanting His name, but, the very next day he replaces 
Rama’s picture with that of Krishna’s, if his wishes are 
not fulfilled. 


Once there lived a devotee of Lord Siva. He used 
to worship Siva every day and chant the sacred panchak- 
shari mantra “Om Namah Sivaya”. But, after some 
time he felt that Lord Siva had not done him any favour. 
Hence he put aside Siva’s picture in the almirah and kept 
Rama’s picture on the altar. Initially, he could experience 
some peace. However, his desires remained unfulfilled 
and he became restless. He kept Rama’s picture also 
in the same almirah and started worshipping Krishna, 
on the advice of his guru. He chanted the divine name 
“Gopala Krishna” incessantly. After some time, he felt 
that even Krishna had not done him any good. One day 
a lady devotee came to him and said, “What is the use 
of worshipping Rama and Krishna? Better you do Devi 
puja (worship).” As per her advice, he kept a picture of 
Devi on the altar and started worshipping it. As the puja 
was in progress, he noticed that the fragrance from the 
incense sticks was wafting towards the almirah where the 
pictures of other deities were kept. He therefore decided 
to remove those pictures from the almirah thinking that 
the incense sticks were meant for the goddess and that 
the other deities had no right to enjoy the fragrance. Im- 
mediately, the Divine Mother manifested Herself before 
him and said, “Oh simpleton! You worshipped Siva for a 


Realise Your Innate Divinity To Attain Peace 239 


few days, and then you switched over to Rama and later 
on to Krishna. What is the guarantee that you will not 
discard My picture also tomorrow? This is not true devo- 
tion. You should contemplate on one name and one form 
till your last breath. You should remain unperturbed by 
difficulties and lead a spiritual life. Fill your heart with 
sacred feelings. Only then will your life be redeemed.” 
If you want to progress in life never forget the name of 
God. Do not divert your mind from one name to another. 
Let your mind be focused on one name and one form. 


Manah eva manushyanam karanam bandhamo- 
kshayo (mind is the cause for bondage as well as libera- 
tion of man). The mind wavers because of the desires 
you entertain. Hence, you will attain peace only when 
you give up desires. Mere performance of acts of charity 
will not confer nobility on you. Offer yourself to God 
with single-minded devotion. Only then can you attain 
peace and happiness. Control your desires. Control 
your thoughts. Then everything will come under your 
control. 


Embodiments of Love! 


You are endowed with the eternal principles of 
truth and love. Sathyannasti paro Dharma (There is 
no Dharma greater than adherence to truth). Consider 
Sathya as the basis of your life. Follow the path of 
Dharma. Only then will the principle of Love manifest 
in you. When you have love, you will be successful in 


240 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


all your endeavours. 


I Am The Truth And The Love Present In All 
Embodiments of Atma! 


You are not the body which is bound to perish. 
You are the indweller which has neither birth nor death. 
It has no attachment whatsoever. You will attain im- 
mortality once you realise your true identity. You will 
be free from all worries and desires. You may ask, “Is 
there anyone without worries and desires?” I am Myself 
the living example in this regard. I have absolutely no 
desires whatsoever. Everything is in My hand. I can 
give you whatever you ask for. However, do not crave 
for materialistic things from Me. They are transient like 
passing clouds. Ask for that which is eternal. The entire 
world is sustained by the twin principles of truth and 
love. They are present in everyone. I am the truth that is 
present in all. I am the love that is present in all. Truth 
and love are all-pervasive. However, you are not making 
efforts to experience truth and love. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Today you may be occupying positions of power, 
but how long can you remain in power? It is only tem- 
porary. Only divinity is everlasting. You have chosen 
the path of truth. Never deviate from it. Never forget 
the principle of truth you have experienced. You may 
forget anything in life but not truth and love. Truth is 
bahirvahini (manifest flux) and love is antarvahini 


Realise Your Innate Divinity To Attain Peace 241 


(undercurrent). Both of them have to be protected and 
sustained. That is the duty of a human being. Bereft of 
truth and love one does not deserve to be called a human 
being at all! 


Embodiments of Love! 


Let your life be filled with love. Do not confine 
your love to your family and friends. Share it with one 
and all. Whomsoever you come across, consider ev- 
eryone as the embodiment of divinity. Share your love 
with your fellow human being and become the recipi- 
ent of his love. Follow the path of truth. I always teach 
the principles of truth and love. Congregations such as 
this are meant only to exhort you to adhere to the path 
of truth and love. All of you have gathered here out of 
your love for Me. Having come here and listened to My 
message, you should practise truth and love in your daily 
life. Only that will make Me very happy. Let your love 
be not tainted with worldly feelings. Let it flow inces- 
santly towards God. This was the ideal demonstrated by 
Radha. She was the kind of person who was always in 
the thought of Krishna and her name itself conveys her 
greatness and sacredness. If you start with ‘R’ you get 
‘Radha’; if you start with ‘A’ you get ‘Adhar’ (basis), 
if you start with ‘D’ you get ‘Dhaara’ (incessant flow), 
and if you start with ‘A’ you get ‘Aradh’ (worship). This 
means that the very basis of Radha’s life was incessant 
aradhana (worship) of Lord Krishna. Radha symbolised 
Dhara (Prakriti or Nature). Krishna was Paramatma 


242 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume -38 


(God). Radha knew only Krishna and none else. She was 
totally immersed in the love of Krishna. It is because of 
such one-pointed devotion that she could attain libera- 
tion. One who aspires to attain liberation should follow 
the path of love as demonstrated by Radha. 
Embodiments of Love! 


I do not want to cause inconvenience to you by 
speaking at length. Hence, I bring My discourse to a 
close. Consider whatever work you do as God’s work. 
See God everywhere. I will be happy when you develop 
such divine feelings. So many people have assembled 
here. I confer on you the sacred wealth of My love and 
bliss. May all of you lead a long, happy, healthy and 
peaceful life! 


80" Birthday, 23-11-2005, Prasanthi Nilayam 


