SATHYA SAI SPEAKS 
VOLUME 32 


Discourses of 
BHAGAWAN SRI SATHYA SAI BABA 
Delivered from Jan 1999 to June 1999 


PRASANTHI NILAYAM 


SRI SATHYA SAI BOOKS & PUBLICATIONS TRUST 
Prasanthi Nilayam - 515 134 
Anantapur District, Andhra Pradesh, India 
Grams: BOOK TRUST STD: 08555 ISD: 91-8555 
Phone: 87375. FAX 87236 


© Sri Sathya Sai Books & Publications Trust 
Prasanthi Nilayam (India) 


All Rights Reserved 


The copyright and the rights of translation in any language 
are reserved by the Publisher. No part, para, passage, text or 
photograph or art work of this book should be reproduced, 
transmitted or utilised, in original language or by translation, in 
any form, or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photo- 
copying, recording or by any information, storage or retrieval 
system, except with and prior permission, in writing from the 
Convener, Sri Sathya Sai Books & Publications Trust, Prasan- 
thi Nilayam, (Andhra Pradesh) India, except for brief passages 
quoted in book review. This book can be exported from India 
only by Sri Sathya Sai Books and Publications Trust, Prasanthi 
Nilayam (India). 


International Standard Book No _ 81 - 7208 - 286 — X 
81 - 7208 - 118 - 9 (set) 


First Edition: August 2001 
Published by 


The Convener, 


Sri Sathya Sai Books & Publications Trust 


Prasanthi Nilayam, India, Pin code 515 134 
Phone: 87375 Fax: 87236 
STD: 08555 ISD: 91 - 8555 


Contents 


— 


$08 GO" a ON Nae ae BD 


-= © 


SS Se eS 
Fuori Geko 


Divinity protects and safeguards man 
Cultivate love in your heart 
Manifesting Divinity in Lingodbhava 
Give up enmity, develop unity 

Glory of Bharatiya culture 

Put ceiling on your desires 

Start New Year with spirit of love 
Relevance of Ramayana to modern life 
Do sadhana with pure feelings 

Royal path to Divinity 

The ephemeral and the transcendental 
Dwell in God Consciousness 

Nature of Self 

Women symbolise sacrifice 

Control your senses 


I 
Divinity protects and 


safeguards man 


If you cannot achieve what you want, do not waver 
or get depressed. He is a realised one who is 
cheerful in the face of all adversities. 

[Telugu Poem] 


Embodiments of Love! Students—Boys and Girls! 


“Ekaamsena Sthitham Jagat (the whole universe is based 
on one aspect of divinity).” Just as the sun’s rays do not exist 
in the absence of the sun, so also the world cannot exist with- 
out divinity, the primordial basis. Here on this table you find a 
flower, a cup, a mike, and a handkerchief. The word ‘is’ is 
used to connote the existence of all these items. Here the em- 
phasis is on the word ‘is’. There is a picture, there is a pot and 
there is a person. The word is proves their existence. 

This ‘is’ explains the principle of divinity in full. The 
shakti (power), leelas (divine play), and the effulgence of God 
are limitless. The five elements are responsible for the protec- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 2 


tion and sustenance of the world. The first element, the earth, 
is the basis for mountains and hills, rivers and oceans, villages 
and cities, and forests. You can very well imagine the immense 
power of the earth, which supports all these. 


Power of the elements 


The earth is endowed with infinite power. Scientists have 
discovered that the earth rotates. True. Logically speaking, the 
rivers, Oceans, mountains, villages, and cities should also rotate 
when the earth, the basis, rotates. It is not so in reality. It is 
only the earth that rotates. The railway track is the basis for the 
train to move. If the track also starts moving, what would be 
the plight of the passengers? From this, it can be inferred that 
the track is the adhara (basis) and the train, the adheya (the 
object based on it). The table is the basis (adhara) for the mike 
—adheya-— to rest upon. Make an effort to understand the rela- 
tionship between the support (adhara) and the supported object 
(adheya). The earth, which is the repository of all powers 
(electrical, magnetic, etc.) forms the basis, sustains, and pro- 
tects all the objects on it. There is no power that is not present 
in the earth. The earth is able to support all the beings on it be- 
cause of its infinite power. 

Seen or unseen, water, the second element, is present all 
over the earth. It is water that sustains the life principle of hu- 
manity. It supports life on earth and is responsible for the evo- 
lution of life. 

The third element, agni (fire), is also all-pervasive. It is 
present in the form of jataragni in the human body. It is this 
jataragni that maintains the temperature of the human body at 
98.4 degrees Fahrenheit. There is fire even in the ocean. That 
is termed as badabagni. There is fire even in trees. When two 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 3 


branches rub against each other, fire is generated. Fire is im- 
manent even in a stone. Fire emerges when two stones are 
struck against each other. Investigations on these lines will re- 
veal that there is no place without fire. 

Similarly, the fourth and fifth elements vayu (wind) and the 
akasha (ether) are also all-pervasive. The akasha is the basis 
for all. It is the origin of sound. In fact, all the other elements 
originated from akasha. 

Therefore, we can conclude that the divine power, which is 
omnipresent and omnipotent, is present in all the five elements. 
When the five elements themselves are so powerful, how much 
greater the power of God should be! Though the five elements, 
which are essentially divine, are present in man, he is in quest 
of divine power, which he feels is present elsewhere. These 
powers are insignificant for God, who is aware of the past, pre- 
sent, and future. So, make an attempt to understand the omnis- 
cient, omnipotent, omnipresent nature of God. 


Swami has no body attachment 


The whole world is also a conglomeration of the five ele- 
ments. The world cannot exist in the absence of even one of 
the elements. Whether you see them or not, the five elements 
are present everywhere. Here is a small example. Though air is 
invisible and intangible, it is everywhere. Similarly, divinity is 
invisible and intangible, yet is omnipresent. Without realising 
the divinity within him, man becomes egotistic and feels that 
all his accomplishments are due to his education, intelligence, 
and physical prowess. But, in reality, it is the divinity that 
protects and safeguards man at every step from womb to tomb. 
No one has the power to protect one’s own self. It is only the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 4 


divine power and divine will that enables man to protect him- 
self. Only divinity has free will, none else. 

Whatever God says or does is for the welfare of humanity. 
God is selfless. There is no trace of selfishness in God. What is 
the benefit accruing to the sun by rising and setting? None at 
all. Sunrise and sunset are for the benefit of mankind. It en- 
ables man to discharge his duties during the day and rest dur- 
ing the night. Similarly, every act of God is for the benefit of 
mankind, not for His own. 

As Narasimhamurthi pointed out, Kasturi once urged Me 
not to neglect this body in the process of saving a devotee. I 
replied, “This body has come for the sake of devotees and shall 
be utilised for doing anything and everything for their wel- 
fare.” Body attachment is human and total detachment is di- 
vine. Attachment to the body is responsible for all suffering 
and misery. Since God does not have any body attachment He 
does not attach any importance to the suffering of His body. 
Once He assumes a body, many things are bound to happen to 
the body. Whatever happens is for the welfare of the whole 
world. 


Students’ Safety Pleases Swami 


Students, both boys and girls, are very good. Students par- 
ticipate in various activities, be it academic or sports, only with 
a desire to please and satisfy Swami. I am very well aware of 
this fact. No doubt, students strive to please Swami and make 
Him happy. But, they do not enquire what actually pleases and 
satisfies Him and makes Him happy. Will Swami be pleased if 
you display your valour by jumping through a ring of fire or 
for that matter from a lorry moving at a high speed? Will it 
satisfy Swami if you display your courage by doing dare-devil 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 5 


stunts on motor bikes like jumping over 10-20 people lying on 
the ground? I am pleased when you are safe and sound and the 
audience are pleased and happy with your performance. He is 
the blessed one who conducts himself in a manner in which 
neither he is hurt nor others. You should be safe and secure 
and at the same time desist from activities, which cause appre- 
hensions in others. This is what I want. I am pleased with ni- 
darsana and not with pradarsana (exhibitionism). Even a 
small action done with a heart full of love pleases Me. 


What happened on the Sports Meet day? 


While returning from Bangalore (in the month of Decem- 
ber), I instructed the Warden not to bring the boys for the 
Sports Meet. They attributed various reasons to this word of 
Mine. There may be many reasons (karana) but what I am in- 
terested in is the action (karya). After coming over here, I told 
the Vice Chancellor that I do not object to boys participating in 
various sports and games such as badminton, tennis, volley- 
ball, etc. At the same time, I cautioned him to ensure that no 
harm is caused either to the participants or to the audience 
during the course of the programme scheduled for 11 January. 

Students are tender hearted, full of noble feelings and love 
for Swami. They planned various programmes with a view to 
please Me. I was very well aware of the impending danger. 
But, students were not receptive to My words. I felt there was 
no point in advising them in such a situation. Only when they 
face the consequences of disobeying My command will they 
realise the value of My words. Till this moment nobody is 
aware of what exactly happened on the morning of January 11. 
They said that the Sports Meet was a grand success. I am also 
happy when you are successful. Students performed extremely 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 6 


well. Each contributed to the success of this event based on his 
capacities and capabilities 


How Swami protected the students 


That morning, as I entered the stadium, I spotted two lor- 
ries. Immediately, I could visualise the danger lurking in the 
corner. I saw the lorries with huge scaffolding placed over 
them. The boys planned to perform a few acrobatic feats on 
them. I knew that one of the rods was not fitted properly and 
was about to give in. If the were to happen, the boys would 
suffer a major head and spinal injury. I willed the boys should 
be saved and decided to take it upon Myself. 

Prior to this, one boy had suffered a spinal injury and had 
been admitted to the Manipal Hospital in Bangalore. Without 
any delay, I arranged for an ambulance to shift the boy to the 
hospital in Bangalore and gave 10,000 rupees to defray the 
immediate expenditure. I also ensured that our doctor accom- 
panied him. Parents shed tears of gratitude when they came to 
know of the love showered by Swami on their son. 

The doctor said that the boy would not be able to sit or lie 
down as his spinal column was badly damaged. I told him, 
“Don’ t entertain any misgivings. Do as I say.” Miraculously, 
by the time the boy reached the hospital, he could sit. He could 
sit on the bed in the hospital. He regained sensation in all his 
limbs, which were numb till then. No danger whatsoever. He 
was protected because of My infinite mercy and boundless 
grace. I willed that such an untoward incident should not recur. 
Once the spinal column is fractured, it is impossible to set it 
right. All students should be safe and secure. I have repeatedly 
declared that students are My property. I consider student wel- 
fare as My welfare and their happiness as My happiness. I 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 7 


never think of My happiness and My comfort. My one concern 
is that the students should not be disappointed or put to any 
inconvenience. 

A day before the Sports Meet, I had instructed four boys to 
surround the chariot and keep a vigil. They are also full of love 
and devotion for Swami. But I noticed that none of them was 
present at that spot. Nobody is to be blamed. No one does this 
deliberately. Swami is the very life-breath of the students. I 
asked for the chariot to be stopped. A senior devotee was 
driving the chariot with all sincerity, love and devotion. He 
stopped the vehicle in accordance with My command. Just 
when I was about to speak to the Vice-Chancellor, he acci- 
dentally lifted his foot from the clutch. That resulted in a jerk 
and I fell down in the chariot. As a result, I suffered injuries on 
my head, hand, and spinal column. What the boys had to face, 
I took it upon Myself. 


A Glimpse of Swami’s Divinity 


Many men and women were seated in the gallery, but I 
took care that none noticed My injuries. I pretended as though 
nothing had happened. The Vice Chancellor was worried, 
thinking that Swami was unable to get up. I knew that any 
further delay would cause anxiety in the minds of devotees. So, 
I immediately got up, forgetting the pain, and started blessing 
the devotees waving My hands. The pain was very severe, and 
the cut on My hand was so deep as though it was pierced with 
a knife. Actually the sleeve of the robe covering My hand 
should have been torn before I got the injury. But the cloth was 
not torn at all. This incident gives you a glimpse of the infinite 
power of Divinity. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 8 


I found Myself in an awkward situation. I had to walk up to 
the dais without My injuries being noticed. So I willed that no 
one should notice My injuries, lest they should become anx- 
ious. I walked up to the dais and took My seat. But in the 
meanwhile the dhoti below the robe was drenched in blood. 
Concerned that the devotees may get to know of this, I walked 
into the bathroom discreetly. The available towels were insuf- 
ficient to wipe the oozing blood. I did not want to leave the 
bloodstained towels in the bathroom, lest someone should no- 
tice them. Though there was excruciating pain, I washed the 
towels Myself with soap, squeezed them and put them up for 
drying. Under no circumstances do I reveal My suffering, pain, 
and fatigue. 

Some boys were curious to know why I went to the bath- 
room repeatedly. I replied, “Why are you concerned? It is My 
job.” Usually, I go to the bathroom only twice a day, morning 
and evening. Since it was bleeding profusely, I had to go to the 
bathroom five or six times in that short duration. 

In the meantime, two students came and prayed that the 
flag may be hoisted. When I got down from the chair, the sen- 
sation was such that it seemed as though I was subjected to 
electric shock. I smiled at My own Divine /eela. I could not 
stand firmly on the ground. I thought I should not be deluded 
by the attachment to the body and walked forward smilingly to 
hoist the flag. Then I lighted the lamp. I found Myself in an 
embarrassing situation. I could not sit in any posture comforta- 
bly. When I exhort all devotees to give up body attachment, I 
should set an example Myself in this regard. Saying this to 
Myself, I conducted Myself accordingly. 

The Primary School children performed extremely well 
and desired to have a photograph with Me. Acceding to their 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 9 


prayers I walked up to them to be photographed, as I did not 
want to disappoint them. Subsequently, I had to walk up to the 
playground five more times to be photographed with the re- 
maining students. In this manner, I detached Myself from the 
body. My body was numb. There was no sensation whatsoever. 
My head was reeling. I resolved to make them happy no matter 
what happened to the body. I decided to keep this to Myself. 
Concerned that the bloodstains may be visible while returning 
to the dais from the playground, I ascended the steps leading 
directly to My seat. Is it possible for a human being to conceal 
such a major injury from the public gaze for a long time being 
amidst such a huge gathering? No. I was seated on the chair for 
five long hours. 


Comprehend the nature of divinity 


I am relating all this so that students and devotees may 
comprehend the nature of divinity. Anyone in My predicament 
would not have been in a position to sit in the chair even for a 
second. It would have been impossible even to put a step for- 
ward. It was as though the electric shock was piercing My 
body. It is the electric current that gives shock, but when I am 
the current Myself, where is the question of Myself being sub- 
jected to shock? With that feeling, I sat through the whole pro- 
ceedings and returned to the mandir. 

The Central Trust members followed Me, but they were not 
aware of what had happened to Me. I asked them to have their 
food. The senior devotee who drove the chariot apologised for 
what had happened. I told him, “Why do you worry about the 
past? Past is past. 1am happy. Do not worry about Me.” All of 
them had their lunch. After the lunch, it started bleeding again. 
Students and band boys were waiting outside for photographs. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 10 


Again I went into the bathroom to wipe the blood. Noting this 
Indulal Shah cried out, “Swami, what is this?” I told him lov- 
ingly, “Indulal Shah, whatever had to happen to the body has 
happened.” Saying so, I showed him My injury. All of them 
cried out in agony. They noticed blood all over the body. I told 
them that I would not reveal anything in future if they ex- 
pressed their sorrow like this. No one knew about it until I 
reached the mandir. 


Whatever is bound to happen will happen 


Likewise, I take upon Myself the untold suffering of stu- 
dents and devotees at various points of time in order to protect 
them. No one is responsible for this mishap. You may find 
fault with one individual or the other, but no one is to be 
blamed for this. Whatever had to happen happened. That’s all. 


Whatever is bound to happen will happen 


You are bound to experience the pain and pleasure 
that you are destined to even if you hide yourself in 
a dense forest. When the time comes, your body is 
bound to perish, in spite of utmost precautions. 
[Telugu Proverb] 


Even mighty emperors and kings who had taken all pre- 
cautionary measures had to give up their body at the appointed 
hour. Whatever is bound to happen will happen. One should 
not resist this unduly. 

January is the first month of the New Year. If you experi- 
ence happiness in the beginning, you will be happy throughout. 
Start early, drive slowly and reach safely. The year Pramaadi 
(Telugu New Year) is fast approaching. There will be dangers 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 11 


in all fields. This is an indication of the forthcoming dangers. 
No one needs to worry about My welfare. I can do anything 
and everything. Here is a small example. 


How Krishna protected Arjuna in the war 


During the Mahabharata war, Krishna was the charioteer of 
Arjuna. Bhishma was shooting arrows at Arjuna. Krishna di- 
verted these and all other arrows aimed at Arjuna toward Him- 
self, protecting Arjuna in the process. As a result, every arrow 
wounded Krishna and He was bleeding profusely. Since 
Krishna was the charioteer, He had to receive instructions from 
Arjuna regarding the direction in which the chariot should 
move. In those days, there were no indicators like left and right 
as we have today. Therefore, Arjuna had to press the region 
beside the right eye of Krishna with his iron shoe to indicate 
that the chariot should move to the right. Similarly, he had to 
press the region beside the left eye to indicate to Krishna to 
turn the chariot to the left. Consequently, Krishna’s face was 
also bleeding. 

The whole body of Krishna was drenched in blood. No one 
observed this, since it was wartime and all were busy in dis- 
charging their duties and also due to the fact that Krishna was 
seated at a place much lower than that of Arjuna. Therefore, 
only Arjuna could be seen and not Krishna. 

Krishna protected Arjuna as promised by Him earlier. 
When Arjuna and Duryodhana approached Krishna for help 
before the war, Duryodhana opted for Krishna’s seven-lakh 
strong army, whereas Arjuna preferred Krishna to the army. 
Then Krishna assured him, “Arjuna, you don’t need to fear. 
The army is comparable to the compartment of a train, whereas 
I am the engine.” Compartments can move only when the en- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 12 


gine pulls them. So, do not worry, the engine is with you, Ar- 
juna.” Arjuna also responded saying “Krishna, it is enough if 
you are with me.” Therefore, all the dangers that were to befall 
Arjuna were taken by Krishna upon Himself. Many such inci- 
dents of God protecting His devotees have taken place in the 
past. 


Follow the divine command, be safe and secure 


So, whatever happened on that day was entirely due to My 
Will. Neither the students nor anyone else are responsible for 
this. Every day, the students used to enquire as to why I was 
walking so slowly. I told them, “Il don’ t have enough place to 
run, if only it was there I am ready even to run.” I was con- 
versing with them with a smile on My face. I am narrating this 
episode only to affirm the fact that I go to any extent to protect 
My devotees who obey My commands 

When I returned to the mandir, I called those four boys. 
They noticed My injuries and were crestfallen. I chided them 
for not obeying My command. I asked them, “Why were you 
not present there at that time as commanded by Me? If only 
you had obeyed My command, this incident would not have 
occurred.” I told them not to feel sorry about it. 

All those things that were destined to happen during the 
course of this year have already happened. So, follow the di- 
vine command, be safe and secure, and earn a good name for 
the institution and make your parents happy. 


Free food for seva dal 


Tomorrow marks the commencement of holy Uttarayana. 
It is for this auspicious moment that Bhishma waited for fifty- 
six long days lying on a bed of arrows to give up his mortal 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 13 


coil. Tomorrow, the sun begins its northward journey, which is 
most auspicious. In olden days, people used to sing songs de- 
scribing the arrival of Sankranti: 


The sun appeared cool and serene, 

The day started getting shorter, 

The cold wind blew fiercely, 

The fields were filled with golden harvest. 

The farmers rejoiced in singing at night 

With the moon shining bright. 

The buds of flowers blossomed 

Like garlands of pearls 

On the banks of rivers; 

Chillies were looking red, 

Farmers were bringing home 

The newly harvested grain, 

Hailing the advent of 

The joyous festival of Sankranti. 

Telugu Poem 
Whatever I will has to happen and none can come in My 

way. I would like to mention one more point. Last year, on the 
19th of November, all the ladies gathered to celebrate Ladies 
Day. They said, “Swami, we are wearing the saris gifted by 
You and experiencing the bliss of Your divine presence. What 
can we do in return to express our gratitude to You? Please 
give us a chance to serve You.” I replied, “You don’t need to 
do anything. Be always happy. That is enough.” But some of 
them pleaded that they be given a chance to provide food to the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 14 


seva dal, who are coming in large numbers from various parts 
of the country to render service in Prasanthi Nilayam. 

I assured them that I had already willed it and that it would 
materialise in a short time. I have willed that the seva dal 
should be provided good food entirely free of cost for all the 
365 days of the year. Every day we have about 3000 seva dals 
here. They will have very good food. I have already made ar- 
rangements for this. I have got the sheds put up. All the neces- 
sary items like gas cylinders, utensils, plates, spoons, rice, dals, 
etc., have already been procured. None is aware of this. Sathya 
Sai is a silent worker. From tomorrow onward food will be 
served to seva dal free of cost forever. 


Travel concessions for seva dal 


Then I summoned the members of the Central Trust and 
asked them what work they were doing. What is the use of oc- 
cupying high positions if you do not discharge your duties sin- 
cerely? People from all walks of life and from different strata 
of society are coming to serve as seva dal every year. I may 
give them food free of cost, but who will bear their travel ex- 
penses? The railway fare is increasing day by day. In olden 
days, just 20 rupees were enough to reach Madras from here, 
but these days even 200 rupees are insufficient. | commanded 
them to approach the railway authorities for travel concession 
for the seva dal. I talk sweetly but at the same time I am stern 
when it comes to the question of discharging one’ s duty. I told 
them either you do this work or resign. 

The Central Trust members have negotiated with the rail- 
way authorities and got the travel concessions sanctioned for 
seva dal. Due to the effect of Kali Age, people have become 
selfish. This selfishness makes them lazy. So, they plunge into 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 15 


action only when told strictly. The railway authorities were 
very happy. They thanked Me saying, “Swami, it is our good 
fortune that we got an opportunity to serve Your devotees.” 
Not only this. In order to ensure that the seva dal and 
devotees reach Prasanthi Nilayam without any inconvenience, 
the Central Government has sanctioned 50 crore rupees for the 
construction of a railway station near the petrol pump. We will 
have trains connecting Penukonda, Dharmavaram, and Putta- 
parthi. The other day, the officials of the railway department 
had a meeting in Delhi and arrived at this decision. Everybody 
should be able to reach Prasanthi Nilayam comfortably for 
Swami’s 75th birthday. One may board a train in Bombay, 
Madras, Delhi, Hyderabad, etc. to reach Prasanthi Nilayam. 


Unprecedented marvels! 


Once upon a time, this Puttaparthi was a small hamlet, with 
a population of barely 100 people. In such a small village as 
this, who would expect a university, an airport, a super spe- 
cialty hospital, and a railway station to come up in such a short 
period of time? All these things are happening during the life- 
time of the Avatar, which is unprecedented in the history of 
mankind. During the time of no other Avatar were such stu- 
pendous tasks achieved in such a short period of time. Many 
more wonderful things are going to happen. Today you are 
able to see Me from close quarters. But after some time, you 
may have to see Me from a distance of a few miles. 

So, make the best use of the divine proximity of Sai. Once 
you lose this precious chance to serve the Lotus Feet, you will 
never regain it. Sai confers devotion, power, and ultimately 
liberation on you. Never get misguided by the words of others. 
Keep this in mind and redeem yourself. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 16 


I had taken upon Myself this suffering only for your sake, 
and in response to your prayers I have decided to cure Myself 
now for your sake. Do not give room for any anxiety. Now 
Swami is 100% perfect, perfect, perfect. 

Follow Swami’s command, earn a good name, secure good 
marks, and set an ideal to the rest of the world. That is what I 
want. In addition to more facilities for the volunteers, we are 
making efforts to provide adequate accommodation for the 
devotees by constructing 100 more sheds. To provide accom- 
modation to the foreigners, a suitable piece of land of 150 
acres has been acquired on the hillock. On the 75th birthday, 
who knows where one would be placed? But, if you have 
Swami’ s grace, you belong to Swami, wherever you may be. 
Swami is always with you. Never entertain the feeling that 
Swami will be away from you. Have firm faith in Swami. 


Spirituality is the sole remedy 


Students! In future, you can conduct your programmes 
without hindrance. In the coming year, you can organise the 
Sports Meet in ways more grand than this. I will not put any 
brake on your activities. But in certain aspects, you must fol- 
low My commands. It is for your good and not Mine. Be safe 
and secure and lead an ideal spiritual life. 

Today we find restlessness, anxiety and worry prevalent 
everywhere. Spirituality is the only solution to all these ills of 
society. Due to lack of spirituality, man is a victim of depres- 
sion and disease. Diseases are the products of the mind, not the 
body. Lack of peace of mind results in depression, which in 
turn leads to disease. Develop physical strength, have faith in 
God, experience bliss and share it with your fellow beings. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 17 


Whatever may happen, never give up spirituality. It is only 
devotion to God that protects Bharath, nothing else. Distance 
yourself from animal qualities and develop human qualities 
and be one with the divine. How can you understand divinity 
when you are not able to understand the importance of human 
values? First practice human values, then divinity manifests 
itself. Take to the path of spirituality, and go to the four cor- 
ners of the country propagating spiritual ideals and strive for 
the welfare of the world at large. 


Be always happy ... from tomorrow. 


14 January 1999 
Sai Kulwant Hall, Prasanthi Nilayam 


Cultivate love in your heart 


One who cultivates the crop of love in the field of 
one’s heart is a true Christian, a true Sikh, a true 
Hindu and a true Muslim. In fact, he is a true hu- 
man being on earth who cultivates love in his 
heart. 

[Telugu Poem] 


Embodiments of Love! 


Love is the life breath of man. It is the consciousness in all 
the beings. It is the goal of human life. Human life is suffused 
with love. Unable to comprehend the eternal principle of love, 
man is weighed down by the physical, worldly worries and 
anxieties. 

There is the principle of Hiranyagarbha within every indi- 
vidual. Hiranya means gold. When gold is mixed with other 
metals such as copper, silver, brass, it loses its brilliance, 
value, and identity. Then it becomes impossible to ascertain 
whether it is gold or silver or brass or copper. Similarly, man’s 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 19 


heart, which is Hiranmaya, is losing its brilliance, value, and 
identity on account of its association with vishaya vasanas 
(sensual desires). Consequently, it is impossible to ascertain 
whether one is a human being or an animal or a devil or a de- 
mon. 


Life devoid of love is a devil’s life 


There is no love_at all in human beings today. Life devoid 
of love is a devil’s life. Can a man be called a human being if 
he has qualities of devils, demons, and beasts? Man is leading 
the life of a demon, unaware of the path of truth, righteousness, 
peace, and love. God has not created creatures such as devils 
and evil spirits. These are the creations of man. 

Here is a small example. During the exile of the Pandavas, 
Krishna visited them to enquire about their welfare. He spent a 
night with them. The Pandavas had to undergo untold suffering 
during the period of their exile. Since they had Draupadi also 
with them, the Pandavas would keep vigil in turns for one hour 
each every night. Krishna also volunteered to keep vigil for 
one hour. 

Dharmaraja wondered, “When You are the protector of the 
entire universe, what is the meaning in Your offering to do se- 
curity duty for an hour to protect us?” But at the same time he 
cautioned Krishna saying, “Krishna, beware of the devil in the 
vicinity. My brothers and I encounter it every night. On many 
occasions, it tried to attack us. Therefore, we pray to you to 
desist from this act. You have come to enquire about our wel- 
fare. It is not proper on our part to put you in danger. So kindly 
take rest.” 

Krishna replied, “Dharmaraja, is this what you have under- 
stood of My divinity? On the one hand, you extol Me as the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 20 


protector of the entire universe and on the other you are appre- 
hensive that I cannot protect Myself. You are worried that the 
demon will harm Me. Rest assured that no demon can touch 
Me. Therefore, permit Me also to join you all in doing the se- 
curity duty.” 

Having completed one hour’s duty, Krishna sat on a rock 
smiling to Himself. Thereafter it was Arjuna’s turn. He rushed 
to Krishna, a bit worried thinking that the demon might have 
attacked Him. Seeing Krishna smiling, Arjuna fell at His feet 
and enquired whether He had vanquished the demon. 

Krishna replied, “Arjuna, I have never created demons and 
evil spirits. Then, how can the non-existent demons appear in 
the forest? The demon you are referring to is not a demon at 
all. It is just a reflection of the evil qualities within you such as 
hatred, anger and jealousy, etc. The anger in you is manifesting 
in the form of a demon. Its power is increasing in proportion to 
the intensity of anger in you.” 


Good and bad are man’s own creations 


The evil qualities of man are the real demons troubling him 
today. Man is under the mistaken notion that demons exist and 
that they are responsible for his suffering. These are all nothing 
but creation of his imagination and psychological fears. In fact, 
it is only man who puts another man to suffering. There are no 
demons and evil spirits in this creation. 

Arjuna realised the truth of Krishna’s words and thereafter 
did not encounter any demon. Arjuna was beholden to Krishna 
for opening his eyes. He fell at His feet and expressed his 
gratitude. Good and bad are man’s own creations. 

After Buddha became a renunciant, he traveled far and 
wide. People were wonder-struck to see his brilliant and hand- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] ZI 


some form. Attracted by his effulgence, a lady named Am- 
bashali approached him and said, “O great one, you look like a 
prince in ochre robes. May I know the reason behind your 
donning ochre robes at this young age?” Buddha replied that 
he had taken to the path of renunciation in order to seek the 
solutions to three problems: “This body, which is young and 
handsome, is bound to become old at some point of time and 
will be subjected to sickness and will perish ultimately. I want 
to know the cause of old age, sickness and death.” 

Impressed by his quest for truth, she invited him for lunch. 
In no time, the entire village came to know of this. The villag- 
ers started coming to Buddha one by one and requested him 
not to accept her invitation, since she was a woman of bad 
character. Buddha listened to all their complaints patiently. 

Then he smiled and asked the village headman, “Do you 
also affirm that she is a woman of bad character?” The village 
headman replied, “Not once, but a thousand times I will vouch 
for the evil character of Ambashali. Please do not visit her 
house.” 

Holding the headman’s right hand, Buddha asked him to 
clap. The headman said that he could not do so as one of his 
hands was in Buddha’s hold and it was not possible for anyone 
to clap with a single hand. 

Buddha replied, “Likewise, Ambashali cannot be bad by 
herself unless there are men of bad character in this village. If 
all the men in this village were good, this woman would not 
have turned bad. Therefore, it is men and their money that are 
responsible for the bad character of Ambashali.” 

Saying so, he wanted to know if there was any individual 
in that gathering without any trace of evil in him, so that he 
could visit his house for lunch. No one came forward. Then 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 22 


Buddha said, “When there are so many bad men in the village, 
it is not proper to point an accusing finger at one woman. She 
turned bad due to bad company.” That is why it is said, “Tell 
me your company, I shall tell you what you are.” 

Realising their folly, the people fell at Buddha’s feet and 
sought his forgiveness. Since then they started treating Am- 
bashali as one amongst them. Inspired by the teachings of 
Buddha, Ambashali also took to the path of renunciation and 
led a pious life. 

No one else is responsible for the good and bad in an indi- 
vidual. Each one is responsible for their own good and bad. 
Who is good, who is bad? First eliminate all that is bad in you 
and then imbibe all that is good. It is a sin to accuse others 
when there is a mountain of evil within you. The same senti- 
ment was echoed by Jesus. 


He is true human being who sees only good in others 


Man today is not making an attempt to recognise the innu- 
merable faults in him; instead he is magnifying the minutest 
faults in others. In fact, he is searching for mistakes in others 
with a thousand eyes. This is the sad state of man today. Man 
is losing his true identity because he has allowed the evil 
qualities to enter his heart. People today are more interested in 
finding others’ faults rather than seeing their merits. He is a 
true human being who sees only good in others. 

He is a true Christian, a true Sikh, a true Hindu, a true 
Muslim, who cultivates love in the field of his heart. Unfortu- 
nately, today no one is sowing the seeds of love in his heart. 
Then how do you expect the harvest of love? How do you call 
a person a true Hindu if there is no love in him? When the 
members of the Viswa Hindu Parishad came to Me, I asked 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 23 


them the meaning of the word ‘Hindu’. Many answers came 
forth. One said, the word ‘Hindu’ refers to a person with com- 
passion and righteousness. I asked them for the spelling of the 
word Hindu in English. They replied H-I-N-D-U. Then I told 
them: H stands for Humanity, I for Individuality, N for Nation- 
ality, D for Divinity, and U for Unity. 

A true Hindu is one who embodies these qualities in him. 
Love is the underlying principle in all these five qualities. A 
true Hindu or a Muslim or a Christian should be the embodi- 
ment of love. Muslims pray “Allah Ho Akbar,” which means 
God is great. 

Islam means peace. So, a true Muslim is one who leads a 
peaceful life. Peace originates from a heart that is full of love. 
Without love one cannot be peaceful. So, for any caste, creed 
or religion, love is the basis. Love is sivam and mangalam, 
which means auspiciousness. Love does not hurt anyone. That 
which does not hurt is referred to as savam (corpse). The one 
with love is Sivaswarupa (embodiment of auspiciousness). 


Do not distort scriptural teachings 


Today we are celebrating Sivarathi. What does it mean? 
Ratri (night) is associated with darkness. The Vedas declare, 
“Chandrama Manaso Jatha, Chaksho Suryo Ajayatha (the 
moon was born out of the mind and the sun out of the eyes of 
the Purusha).” Moon is the presiding deity of the mind. So, 
mind should be pure and unsullied. There is an immense sig- 
nificance in every statement of Vedanta. Confusion prevails 
when these are misunderstood. 

There is a practice of sacrificing innocent and dumb ani- 
mals such as goats, sheep, etc., on this day in the name of ya- 
jna and yaga. One day, a noble soul noticed some animals be- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 24 


ing taken in a grand procession. On enquiry, he was informed 
that they were being taken to the sacrificial altar. He asked the 
owner of the animals what benefit was derived from sacrificing 
the animals. The reply was that the animals would attain lib- 
eration as a result of being offered to God. 

Then the noble soul said, “O man, your mother, your fa- 
ther, your wife and your son —all crave for liberation. Why 
don’t you sacrifice them and fulfill their desire in the process? 
Why don’t you grant liberation to the people who aspire for it 
instead of the innocent animals, which do not know what lib- 
eration means? If you firmly believe that sacrifice grants lib- 
eration, then why don’t you sacrifice your parents, your wife 
and your children?” 


Attachment leads to suffering 


Today, some people advocate the need for bhajans, charity, 
and service, saying that they confer moksha (liberation). If they 
really believe in what they are saying, why don’t they practice 
what they preach? It is easy to preach, but difficult to practice. 
Moha kshayam is moksham. (Total detachment is liberation). 
Attachment leads to suffering. So first and foremost, give up 
attachment. 

Prior to their marriage, even if the girl is down with a seri- 
ous ailment the boy is least affected. Subsequent to the mar- 
riage, if the girl develops a mild fever, the boy is extremely 
concerned. What is the reason for this? It is attachment. Before 
the marriage, there was no relationship between the two what- 
soever. But after the marriage, the boy feels that she is his 
wife. It is only this attachment that is the cause of all suffering. 
The closer we move towards attachment, the farther we drift 
from liberation. Attachment should be within certain limits. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 25 


One who is immersed neck deep in water may be able to 
speak, but not a person who is totally immersed. Likewise, a 
person who is immersed in divinity completely will have no 
words to describe the glory of God. Only those who have un- 
derstood God only partially will try to describe Him in various 
ways. You should immerse yourself completely in divine 
feelings and pure love. It is due to lack of love that there are 
today conflicts between individuals, villages, states, and coun- 
tries. 


Pravritti marga and nivritti marga 


Vedanta declares, “ Know thyself.” A person who follows 
pravritti marga (outward path) is interested in collecting in- 
formation about others and their whereabouts. He keeps asking 
others “Who are you?” “Where do you come from?” etc. A 
person who treads along nivritti marga (inward path) looks 
within and enquires, “Who am I?” “Where do I come from?” 
Nivritti marga 1s positive and pravritti marga is negative in 
nature. 

How can you expect positive results when your heart is full 
of negative feelings? External is the reflection of the internal. 
You will reap what you sow. Having eaten mango, how can 
you expect the belch of a cucumber? So, in order to get posi- 
tive results you should fill your heart with positive feelings. 
Love, peace, and compassion, which originate from the heart, 
are positive in nature. All the negative thoughts are the prod- 
ucts of the head. 

Science and technology are associated with the head. To- 
day technology has become ‘tricknology’, because you are 
traversing along the negative path. What is the use of having 
high intelligence in the absence of positive qualities? 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 26 


Man today has acquired all forms of knowledge, 
yet he does not know himself. 

In spite of having acquired various forms of 
knowledge, 

A mean-minded person cannot give up his evil 
qualities. 

All this worldly knowledge bolsters excessive ar- 
gumentation, 

But not total awareness. 

After all, one has to die in spite of acquiring all 
the worldly knowledge. 

So, study that which makes you immortal. 

[Telugu Poem] 


Today as the acquisition of worldly knowledge is on the 
rise, noble qualities in the heart are on the decline. What is the 
use of ten acres of barren land? A small piece of fertile land is 
better than ten acres of barren land. Develop at least one noble 
quality, which emerges from the heart instead of ten from the 
head. All the thoughts that emerge out of the head are useless. 
Most of the activities of the scientists are based on the head 
rather than on the heart. 

Students are well aware of the fact that it was Newton who 
discovered the existence of the gravitational force. As a result 
of excessive dependence on head, Newton had to spend five 
years in a mental hospital before his death. So, you should not 
overstrain your head. 

Today students spend most of their time in studies. While 
traveling in the car many a time, I have noticed small children 
carrying big load of books on their backs. You yourself can 
imagine the plight of the young children who have to stuff 
their heads with lots of information contained in the books. As 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 21 


result, their tender hearts are being polluted with unnecessary 
information. So, your studies also should be within certain 
limits. Only then you can retain your intelligence and memory 
power. 


Worst of sins is to search for mistakes in others 


The feelings that emerge out of the heart are immortal and 
nectarine. But are you making use of at least one of them? It is 
enough if you can develop peace. Everyday at the conclusion 
of the bhajan session, you chant santhi (peace) three times, but 
there is no trace of santhi in you. Even if there is the slightest 
disturbance caused by the person sitting beside you, you feel 
irritated and your tone of santhi becomes harsh, due to anger. 
Even while chanting santhi, there is no trace of santhi in you! 

How do you expect to experience peace if you do not culti- 
vate love in the field of your heart? Instead of cultivating love, 
you are cultivating the evil qualities of jealousy and hatred. If 
someone criticises you, do not take it to heart; consider that it 
is for your own good. It is the worst of sins to search for mis- 
takes in others. In the first instance, correct your mistakes ac- 
cept the good in others. 

If you do not grow the harvest of love in your heart, you 
are not a true Christian, true Sikh, true Hindu or true Muslim. 
You are a demon in human form. When you develop love in 
your heart, you are verily God. You become God or demon on 
the basis of your feelings. Do not find fault in others. Buddha 
was criticised by many when he accepted the invitation of 
Ambashali. She alone was not responsible for her character. 
There were many who encouraged her. 

For every act of sin, five persons are mainly responsible. 
One who commits the sin, one who is the cause, one who en- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 28 


courages the act of sin, one who shows the ways and means to 
commit the sin, and one who witnesses it. All five will have to 
face the consequences. 

When Draupadi was being humiliated by Duryodhana and 
Dussasana in the court, elders like Bhishma and Drona re- 
mained as spectators. They did not oppose Duryodhana’s hei- 
nous act. It is in this context that Vidura has pointed out that 
not only the sinner but the other four persons mentioned above 
will also go to hell. Since Bhishma, the one of wisdom, was a 
silent spectator to the humiliation of Draupadi, he had to lie on 
the bed of arrows for fifty-six days. Had he prevented the hu- 
miliation of Draupadi, he would not have suffered thus. 


Plunge yourself in sacred activities 


It is rather difficult to say how one gets merit or sin. In or- 
der to escape from sin, one should take to the path of spiritual- 
ity. Knowingly or unknowingly, you commit sin. Conse- 
quently, you suffer. You are unable to trace the root cause of 
your suffering. So, undertake meritorious deeds. Cultivate sa- 
cred feelings. Serve your fellow beings. Taking to this path 
amounts to devotion. 

Devotion does not mean performing worship and offering 
flowers to God. Worship amounts to good actions alone. One 
should have good thoughts within. One will not be redeemed if 
one undertakes good actions with bad intentions. 

For instance, if someone offers a donation of 10 lakh for a 
charitable cause, another person may come forward with a do- 
nation of 15 lakh only to attract public attention. In reality, he 
may not give even 10 rupees. Such people are heroes at plat- 
form and zeroes in practice. There should be unity in thought, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 29 


word, and deed. That is what is meant by “the proper study of 
mankind is man.” This is true humanness. 


One should shed only tears of joy, not tears of grief 


Embodiments of Love! In order to redeem yourselves, you 
should grow the harvest of love in the field of your heart; wa- 
ter the field of your heart with love. Water is the very life of 
man. How can you sanctify your life if you cannot provide at 
least drinking water to the people who are in need of it? Water 
is divine. Water in Sanskrit is called naaram. Eye is known as 
nayanam. So, the naaram, which comes out of nayanam, 
should be for the sake of Narayana (God) alone. One should 
shed only tears of joy, not tears of grief. When do you get tears 
of joy? Only when you are successful in your endeavours. 

You all know that here are many people from Mahaboob 
Nagar and Medak districts in this gathering. Swami has con- 
sented to provide drinking water to these two districts. Many 
people hailing from these two districts have never seen Swami 
before. Their joy knew no bounds when they came to know the 
love and grace showered on them by Swami. Men and women, 
young and old, were ecstatic. Every week many people from 
these two districts come to Swami to express their gratitude. 
You should all plunge into such sacred activities for the benefit 
of mankind at large. 

Sage Vyasa declared, “Paropakara punyaya papaya 
Parapeedanam (help ever, hurt never).” If possible try to help 
others. Never hurt anyone. Love even your enemies. Never use 
harsh words and hurt the feelings of others. If you hurt some- 
one today, you will have to suffer ten times more in future. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 30 


You will be observing Sivaratri in the true spirit of the 
term only when you give up bad qualities and cultivate divine 
love. 

Merely observing vigil on Sivaratri is not sufficient. You 
have to contemplate on God incessantly. Many people claim 
that they have observed jagarana (vigil) on Sivaratri night by 
playing cards. The fisherman goes on watching intently to trap 
the fish in the net. Can this be termed meditation? If one ab- 
stains from food on account of quarrel with one’s wife, can it 
be called fasting? No. Similarly, observance of sacred vigil on 
Sivaratri night is not achieved by playing cards the whole 
night. You should spend this night chanting the name of God, 
using the time in doing good deeds. 


Follow in My footsteps 


You should not waste your valuable time in vain gossip. 
Instead undertake service activities in villages and slum areas. 
Provide the basic necessities of life such as food and clothing 
to the poor and needy. It amounts to the greatest service. I am 
practising this right from My childhood. 

When someone appeared at the doorstep begging for alms, 
the people in the household would say ‘not now, not now,’ but 
I would surreptitiously dole out alms. If anyone needed 
clothes, I would provide them. The griham ammayi (mother of 
this body) used to recollect and narrate all these incidents. Be- 
lieve it or not, I had only one pair of school uniform to be used 
throughout the year. Everyday after returning from school, I 
used to don a towel and wash My only dress, put it up for dry- 
ing, and then press it by using a container with embers as an 
iron box. When I was provided with a new dress, I used to give 
My old dress to the poor and needy. The griham abbayi (father 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 31 


of this body) never reprimanded or punished Me. He would 
compliment Me by saying, “You are a mahathyagi (one of 
great sacrifice). It is impossible for us to be like You.” He 
would endearingly address Me as Vedanti (philosopher). 

The same was the case with griham ammayi. She looked 
after Me with great love and affection. People used to fall at 
her feet, pour out their tales of woe and plead with her to rec- 
ommend their case to Me. But, I used to put her off softly by 
saying, “Don’t worry about others’ problems.” 

In spite of this, she used to carry on, saying, “Swami, what 
is the use of My human birth if I don’t help people in distress? 
My sincere feeling is that they will be relieved of their suffer- 
ing if I convey their problems and feelings to You. So, I will 
not refrain from doing this even if you object or scold Me.” In 
this manner, the parents of this body led a very pious and sa- 
cred life. The whole clan has benefited from this. 


Never blame God for your difficulties 


Develop good qualities. Do not give scope for evil by 
joining bad company. In this train of life, youngsters are the 
long distance passengers. The elders may get down at the next 
station, but you have a long way to go before you reach your 
destination. First and foremost, you need to have self- 
confidence. Today people suffer because of lack of self- 
confidence. If you have total faith in God, you will be able to 
overcome all difficulties. There may be a few difficulties in 
your way, but do not be unduly perturbed. You should face all 
hardships with courage and conviction. Only then you will at- 
tain true happiness. Never blame God for your difficulties. 
You are bound to face the consequences, whether good or bad, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 32 


of your actions. But if you have God’s grace, even bad will be 
turned into good. So, develop faith in God more and more. 

You trust your friend whom you have met only a few years 
ago, but not God who is with you, in you, around you, 
throughout your life. You believe in the dhobi and part with 
your valuable clothes. You are prepared to bend your head in 
front of the barber. You are prepared to put your life in the 
hands of the driver. But you do not believe in the omnipresent, 
omnipotent, and omniscient divinity. Why can’t you bend your 
head in front of God? There are some evil-minded persons who 
criticise people for bending their heads before God. Such peo- 
ple will never have the good fortune of bending their heads 
before God. 


The real worth of the human head 


One day, King Bhoja was proceeding to a village in his 
chariot along with his minister. On the way, he found a Bud- 
dhist monk coming from the opposite direction. Immediately, 
he got down from the chariot and paid his respects to him by 
placing his head on the feet of the monk. The minister did not 
relish this act of King Bhoja. He said, “O king, how could you 
keep your most valuable head on the feet of an ordinary 
monk?” 

The king waited for an opportune moment to give his re- 
ply. One day the king, giving his minister the head of a sheep, 
a goat, and a human being, asked him to sell them in the mar- 
ket. The minister succeeded in selling the head of the sheep 
and the goat, but not that of a human being. He returned to the 
king and said, “O king, no one is willing to buy this human 
head.” 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 33 


Then the king said, “O minister, do you remember the day 
when you objected to my falling at the feet of a Buddhist monk 
saying mine was the most valuable head. At least now you 
would realise the value of the human head.” One should pros- 
trate at the feet of noble souls when one is alive, for even the 
vultures and dogs do not value human head after death. 

Self-confidence cannot be purchased or obtained through 
learning. It is based on deservedness. Develop the divine 
thoughts to attain deservedness. In fact, you are the most fortu- 
nate people. Otherwise, how could only a few thousand of you 
have come here when there are millions in this world? Make 
the best use of this golden opportunity. Follow the divine path. 
If you have faith in God, He will protect you in the face of all 
adversities. He is always with you, in you, above you, beside 
you, around you. 

Do not give scope for bad feelings and bad thoughts. Do 
not criticise anyone. You are well aware of the fact that every- 
day in the newspapers you find headlines describing the con- 
flicts between various parties. One party criticises and finds 
faults with the other. They are accumulating sins by doing so. 
That is why I do not read newspapers. Why should I go 
through all this? Many people waste so much money buying 
these newspapers. It is a form of madness. Read good books. 
Slander is the worst of the sins. 


Emergence of Atmalinga 


Embodiments of Love! 

As pointed out by the Vice Chancellor in his speech, I used 
to bring out Atmalingams from this body on the occasion of 
Sivaratri in the earlier years. Lingodbhava (emergence of 
Linga) used to take place on every Sivaratri. To witness this 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 34 


sacred event, lakhs would gather in a small hall. Consequently, 
there used to be stampede resulting in injuries to devotees. Due 
to this, I discontinued Lingodbhava in public. 

There is a specific time for this. It may take place at any 
moment between 8 and 10 in the night. It takes place at the 
right time irrespective of the place I am in. It is bound to take 
place. It is natural on Sivaratri night. Those who are fortunate 
to witness this sacred Lingodbhava are freed from all sins. One 
must see how it emerges. But, some people may not be able to 
see this even if they are sitting close by. Witnessing the emer- 
gence of the Lingam is of utmost importance. Once it emerges, 
everyone will be able to see it and it has its own benefits. 
There are many such important aspects attached to this auspi- 
cious occasion. 

You will be immensely benefited if you keep awake and 
sing the glory of God at least on this night. Moon is the pre- 
siding deity of the mind. Moon has 16 kalas (phases). On 
Shivaratri, 15 kalas merge in God and only one remains. By 
constant remembrance of God, the 16th phase also merges in 
God. Can you not spend a single night in the whole year sing- 
ing the glory of God? Sanctify this night by participating in 
bhajan. The bliss that you get from bhajan, the sweetness you 
experience in the divine name, the happiness you derive from 
visualising the divine form cannot be obtained elsewhere. Eve- 
rything is possible only through love. So, cultivate love and 
sanctify your life. 


14 February 1999 
Sai Kulwant Hall, Prasanthi Nilayam 


Manifesting Divinity 
in Lingodbhava 


He is a realised one who forgets the past, 
Doesn’t worry about the future, and 
Discharges his duties in the present. 
[Telugu Poem] 


Embodiments of Love! 


Past is past, future is uncertain, only the present is in our 
hands. It is the foremost duty of man to live in the present and 
share his joy with his fellow beings. Truly speaking, the human 
being is the most fortunate one among all the living beings. 
Compared to the entire cosmos, man is very small, like an 
atom; yet he is able to comprehend the magnitude and vastness 
of the creation, which is very startling indeed. He attains im- 
mortality by understanding the unity between the microcosm 
and macrocosm. As mentioned by Me yesterday, whosoever 
cultivates the harvest of love in the field of his heart is a true 
Christian, a true Sikh, a true Hindu and a true Muslim. In fact, 
he is the true human being on earth. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 36 


Love originates from Hiranyagarbha 


Man cannot exist without love. This Principle of Love is 
Hiranyagarbha. This Hiranyagarbha is situated on the right 
side of the human body, with the physical heart is on the left. 
The physical heart on the left side has to be left one day or the 
other, in some circumstance or the other. Hiranyagarbha, lo- 
cated on the right side of the human body is always right. It is 
immortal, divine, eternal, and all-encompassing. It is present 
not only in human beings but also in birds, beasts, and all other 
living beings. The Vedas declare: “Eswara Sarvabhoothanam 
(God is present in all living beings),” “Isavasyam Idam Jagat 
(God pervades the entire cosmos).” 

Love is the reflection of Hiranyagarbha and originates from 
it. The three principles of reaction, resound, and reflection 
have also originated from Hiranyagarbha. 

Unable to recognise his true identity, man is wasting his 
life in this pursuit of temporary, fleeting, transient, and ephem- 
eral pleasures. As I told you yesterday, gold loses its value, 
brilliance, and identity when it is mixed with different metals 
such as silver, brass, and copper. So also, the heart, which 
loses its value, brilliance and identity on account of its asso- 
ciation with the impurities of worldly desires. This is the pre- 
sent plight of mankind. Man is behaving like a demon, devil, 
and a beast because he has forgotten his divine nature. Divine 
love originates from Hiranyagarbha. This selfless divine love 
lives by giving and forgiving, whereas selfish love lives by 
getting and forgetting. Such divine love is essential for man. 

Here is a small example to illustrate this. After Ravana was 
killed in the battle, Hanuman went to Sita and conveyed to her 
the good news. Sita was overjoyed and started extolling Ha- 
numan thus: “O Hanuman, you are the Puravarashoura (the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 eT | 


valiant one), who entered Lanka in the face of all dangers; you 
are the Bhadraparakrama (the performer of acts of valour) 
who crossed the ocean in a single leap, and you are the Kapi- 
rajashikamani (the crown jewel of the monkey clan) who ful- 
filled the command of Rama.” But Hanuman did not relish any 
of these titles conferred on him by Sita. 

Sita then said, “O Hanuman, I have not seen a virtuous one 
like you. There is none equal to you in terms of physical 
strength in this world.” She also conferred the titles of Guna- 
vantha (full of virtues) and Balavantha (full of prowess) on 
Hanuman. None of these titles pleased Hanuman. 

In the end, Sita blessed Hanuman saying, “May Rama love 
you forever and install Himself in your heart.” Then Hanuman 
leapt in joy. He said, “O mother, there is nothing greater than 
God’s love in this world. I do not crave any title. I pray only 
for Rama’s love. In the absence of the love of Lord Rama, I 
would not be happy even if the whole world were to come un- 
der my control. My life will find fulfillment only when I am 
the recipient of His love.” 

Such a virtuous, valiant and ardent devotee like Hanuman 
craved only the love of Rama, nothing else. So, a sincere 
devotee should yearn for God’s love and love is everything. 
Human quality lies in kindling love within, speaking with love 
and acting with love. On this basis, it is said, “The proper 
study of mankind is man.” 


Controlling the senses is the highest sadhana 


Once, a pundit challenged Buddha to enter into a debate 
with him. The terms were that if he was the loser, he would 
follow Buddhism along with his 3000 disciples and serve Bud- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 38 


dha lifelong. But, if Buddha was the loser, it would be obliga- 
tory on his part to become a follower of the pundit. 

Buddha smilingly said, “Pundita samadarshina” (a true 
pundit is one who has equal-mindedness). A true Pundit makes 
no distinction between the dualities of life, such as pain and 
pleasure, joy and sorrow. A person with anger and ego is unfit 
to be called a pundit. In pilgrim centres such as Haridwar, 
Rishikesh, Badrinath, Kedarnath and Amarnath, you find pan- 
das who give mantras that would grant liberation to the de- 
parted souls. These pandas cannot be called pundits. In this 
world, there are many who have gone through sacred texts. 
Knowledge of the Self cannot be acquired by mere scholarship 
or by sitting at the feet of a guru. 


True meaning of ‘Kavi’ 


There are many who go through voluminous books, but is 
there a person who practices at least one teaching? When you 
spend all your life in reading, when are you going to practice 
it? Scholarship bereft of practice is futile. The Bhagavad Gita 
declares: Kavim Puranamanushasitharam (the Supreme Being 
is all-knowing, Indweller and Ruler of all). 

Who is a kavi (poet)? A kavi is one who knows the past, 
present, and future; not one who merely plays with words. This 
implies that God alone is kavi (poet). 

What is the inner meaning of Purana? Body is pura in 
which divinity pervades. The divine principle that pervades 
from top to toe in the body is referred to as Purana. So, God 
Himself is Purana. 

Next comes anushasithara (one who commands and con- 
trols). You may imprison a person who has committed a crime, 
but you cannot prevent his mind from going all over the world. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 39 


There is no judge in this world who can punish the mind. It is 
only God who has the power to command the mind of man. 
Therefore, God alone is Anushasithara. 

Explaining thus, Buddha silenced the pundit and advised 
him to shun the pride and ego of his scholarship. He told the 
pundit not to get carried away by the worldly knowledge. He 
exhorted him to acquire and practice divine knowledge and 
surrender to God. Buddha said, “I undertook spiritual practice 
for a long time and went through various sacred texts in quest 
of knowledge of the Self. Ultimately, I realised that mastering 
the senses is essential for acquiring knowledge of the Self. The 
five senses are the gift of God. Make proper use of them. Only 
then you can realise the Self. What is the use of going through 
sacred texts and undertaking spiritual practices without proper 
utilisation of the five senses? I have controlled the five senses 
and put them on the right path, as a result of which I am expe- 
riencing bliss.” 


Nirvana is nothing but merger in bliss 


Buddha attained Nirvana by controlling his five senses and 
making proper use of them. What is Nirvana? It is nothing but 
merger in bliss. Water bubble is born in water, is sustained in 
water and ultimately merges in it; likewise, human being is 
born in bliss, is sustained in bliss and ultimately merges in it. 
Bliss can be experienced by controlling the five senses. This is 
the true sadhana. Mere chanting of the Lord’s name will not 
suffice. First and foremost, the senses have to be controlled. 

At the time of attaining Nirvana, Buddha saw his cousin, 
Ananda, shedding tears. He called him near and said, “Ananda, 
true to your name, you should experience ananda (bliss). You 
should never shed tears of sorrow. You are the embodiment of 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 40 


ananda. All of us are embodiments of Brahma.” Saying so, 
Buddha put his hand on Ananda and attained Nirvana. 

Whoever understands this truth can experience bliss and 
attain divinity. When attaining liberation is so easy and simple, 
why do you struggle hard for it? It only means that you are not 
making any effort to understand the inner truth. You are mix- 
ing the metals of worldly desires with the gold of your heart. 
As a result, the heart has become polluted and has lost its true 
identity, i.e. bliss. Ancients have said that bliss lies in visual- 
ising and experiencing your true form, that is, the Principle of 
the Atma. Proper utilisation of the senses will lead to the 
knowledge of the Atma. 

Sage Patanjali said, Yoga Chitta Vritti Nirodha (control of 
senses is true yoga). No sadhana is greater than this. All spiri- 
tual practices such as japa (chanting the Lord’s name) and tapa 
(penance) will be of no avail if senses are not controlled. You 
may be under the impression that it is not possible for a human 
being to control the senses. Here control does not mean total 
cessation. Discharge your duties as a householder, student or 
businessman. But whatever you do, do it with a feeling that it 
is to please God (Sarva Karma Bhagavath Preethyartham). 
Once you develop this feeling, all your senses will naturally be 
controlled. 


Total faith makes surrender easy 


Embodiments of Love! You feel that arpitham (total sur- 
render) to God is rather difficult, but according to Me, nothing 
is easier than this. It may be difficult to make a garland out of 
flowers or to pluck the petals of a flower, but total surrender to 
God is easier and simpler than this. You find it difficult be- 
cause you do not have steady and firm faith in God. God is. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 4] 


There is no place without God. There is no being without di- 
vinity. Each and every being is the embodiment of God. 

If you have total faith in this truth, you will never have dif- 
ficulties. When your faith is defective, you find it difficult to 
achieve anything. Have faith in God and love Him. Love is 
God. You are bound to be successful in all your endeavours if 
you have faith in God. Any task, however difficult it may be, 
can be accomplished with God’s grace. 

That is what happened in the case of Hanuman. With 
Rama’s grace he leapt across the ocean, reached Lanka, and 
found Sita. He returned to Rama and described the untold suf- 
fering of Sita: 


“O Rama, please listen to what I say. 

I saw Mother Sita surrounded by demons, 

shivering like a fear-stricken parrot in a cage.” 
[Telugu Poem] 


On hearing this, Rama and Lakshmana immediately took 
their bows and arrows. Rama said, “I cannot bear the suffering 
of Sita. Let us not waste even a moment, let us go to Lanka” 
Rama reacted in this manner not because of attachment toward 
His consort. Sita symbolises prakritti (nature). God cannot 
bear the suffering of nature. In order to alleviate the suffering 
of nature, Rama decided to go to Lanka immediately. 


Objectives of human life 


Dharma (righteousness), artha (wealth), kama (desire), and 
moksha (liberation) are considered to be the four objectives 
(purusharthas) of human life. In fact, these correspond to the 
four stages of human life: brahmacharya (student), brihastha 
(householder), vanaprastha (hermit) and sanyasa (renunciate). 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 42 


They do not correspond to Purusharthas in the true sense of 
the term. Today, people are under the mistaken notion that the 
term purusha corresponds to man but not to woman. But actu- 
ally, Purusha means Atma or Chaithanya or Prana or Jivi. For 
Atma, there is no gender like masculine or feminine. So, Pu- 
rushartha means Atma Dharma or the dharma of the Aware- 
ness Principle or the dharma of the Life Principle. This is the 
true Purushartha, the prime objective of human life. 

Without understanding the true meaning of the term Pu- 
rushartha, people talk of one dharma for men and another for 
women. Sayujya (merger) is the true Atma Dharma, and that is 
true Purushartha. 

The second objective is artha. Artha does not mean money 
or gold. Earning money or gold is not the objective of life. 
Money comes and goes. Wisdom is the true wealth. Advaita 
Darshanam Jnanam (vision and experience of Divinity is true 
wisdom). One has to earn this wealth of wisdom. 

The third objective is kama (desire). This does not corre- 
spond to sensual desires. One should have desire for liberation 
(moksha kama). One should have the desire to understand the 
Atmic Principle and attain divinity. 


Liberation is complete merger with the Divine 


These are the main objectives of human life. Each word in 
Vedanta has many meanings associated with it. Different peo- 
ple interpret it in different ways. Today, what people under- 
stand of the four objectives of human life corresponds to the 
ashrama dharma such as brahmacharya, grihastha, va- 
naprastha, and sanyasa. They do not correspond to Adhyat- 
mika dharma (Spiritual dharma). Spiritual dharma is the true 
dharma. Only that can confer liberation. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 43 


What is liberation? It is not just reaching God, it means 
complete merger with the Divine. Rivers like Ganga, Go- 
davari, and Saraswathi have different names and forms, but 
once they merge in the ocean, they lose their name and become 
one with the ocean. Similarly, once you merge in God, there 
will be no difference whatsoever. Experiencing such non- 
dualism is the true objective of human life. 


Unity of Purusha and Prakriti 


Embodiments of Love! Today is the sacred day of Sivaratri. 
Legend has it that when Siva, in order to save the world, 
swallowed halahala (poison), He lost consciousness and fell 
down. The resultant heat affected the world. In order to cool 
down the world, Siva created the Himalayas. Then He placed 
the Himalayas on His stomach. As a result, the Himalayas ab- 
sorbed all the heat from His body and He got up. People cele- 
brate this event as Sivaratri. But, this is only a worldly inter- 
pretation. 

Truly speaking, the Himalayas are within you. In fact, the 
whole world is within you. The Divinity within you has neither 
birth nor death. The body may undergo change, but the Divine 
Principle remains the same. Love never undergoes any change. 
It remains love always. The quality of sugar is sweetness. It 
does not change whether it is added to coffee, tea, water or rice 
pudding. 

That which remains changeless is referred to as Sath (Be- 
ing). This Sath is within you. Love is its sweetness. We have to 
turn this love toward Visweswara (God), but not towards 
vishayas (sensual pleasures). Sath can be compared to sugar, 
Chith (Chaithanya) to water. When sugar is added to water, it 
becomes syrup. Likewise, when Sath and Chith come together, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 44 


what results is ananda (bliss). Sath is associated with the Atma 
and Chith with the body. The Atma is Purusha (Brahman) and 
the body is prakrti (feminine principle). The unity of Purusha 
and Prakriti is human life. 

So, every human being is ardhanareeshwara (androgyn- 
ous). The Principle of Siva (Sivathatwa) teaches the unity of 
Prakriti and Purusha. This is the true meaning of Sivaratri. 
Forgetting this principle, man considers this physical body to 
be made up of merely blood, flesh and fecal matter. No doubt, 
it has these constituents, but one should not forget the fact that 
divinity permeates this body. To set an ideal to this world, the 
body is very important. 


Attachment to the body leads to dualities 


Embodiments of Love! The body is Parvati, and the Atma is 
Eswara. There was a spiritual aspirant who used to repeat the 
mantra Sivoham, as commanded by his guru. One day, some- 
one asked him the meaning of the mantra. He said Sivoham 
meant, “I an Siva.” But when questioned what his relationship 
with Parvati was, he slapped his own cheeks and said with a 
tone of having committed a great sin, Aparadham (blas- 
phemy)! If he really had faith in the mantra he was chanting, 
he would have surely said, “Parvati is a part of my own being.” 
He could not say so because he was attached to his body. At- 
tachment to the body leads to dualities, because of which man 
is suffering. 

Eswara and Parvati are present in every individual. The 
combination of these two aspects constitutes Manavatwam 
(mankind). Manava refers to human being. Ma means ‘not’, 
nava means ‘new’. So, mankind is not new, it is ancient and 
eternal. But you are not able to understand this truth. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 45 


Here there are three letters: ma - na — va. Ma means maya 
(illusion), na means without, va means varthinchuta (to con- 
duct oneself). He is a true human being who conducts himself 
without being under illusion. But today, man is acting in a 
contradictory manner. At least from today try to understand the 
truth. Your deha (body) and desha (country) can be compared 
to object and reflection. Just as you safeguard your body, keep 
in mind the welfare of the country too. 


Significance of Lingodbhava 


Understand the true meaning and inner significance of 
Sivaratri. Hiranyagarbha Lingam is present in everybody’s 
hridaya (spiritual heart) and is on the right side of the body. 
The principle of Hiranyagarbha permeates My whole body. It 
assumes a form when I will it. Whoever has seen this Lingam 
at the time of its emergence will not have rebirth. One should 
see its form as it emerges. In order to sanctify your lives, such 
sacred manifestations have to be shown to you every now and 
then. Only then can you understand the divinity in humanity. 
This Lingam will not break even if it is dropped from a height 
with force. This is amruthatwam (symbol of immortality). It is 
changeless. You cannot see such a manifestation anywhere 
else in the world. It is possible only with Divinity. This is the 
manifestation of changeless Divinity. 

For the past twenty years, devotees did not get the oppor- 
tunity to witness Lingodbhava. The reason was that lakhs of 
devotees used to gather in the Poornachandra Hall to witness 
this grand spectacle. Since the Poornachandra Hall cannot ac- 
commodate large gatherings, there used to be stampedes. As a 
result, devotees were put to a lot of inconvenience. In order to 
avoid this, Lingodbhava was discontinued. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 46 


Not only this; three types of Lingams emerge. They are 
bhur, bhuvah, and suvaha. Bhur refers to materialisation 
(body), bhuvah to vibration (prana), and suvaha to radiation 
(Atma). I often say, you are not one, but three: The one you 
think you are (physical body), the one others think you are 
(mental body), the one you really are (Atma). On every 
Sivaratri, all the three Lingams used to emerge. Even now, the 
other Lingams had started to emerge, but I prevented them, be- 
cause there are many things to be told to you. In the future, you 
will be a witness to many more manifestations of Divinity. 
Understand that this bliss can be experienced only in the 
proximity of the Divine and nowhere else. 


There is no trace of selfishness in Me 


Don’t get deluded just because I talk, laugh, walk, and eat 
like you. Don’t get deluded by the body feeling. All My ac- 
tions are selfless, selfless, selfless. There is no trace of selfish- 
ness in Me. Have firm faith in this truth. If you have total faith, 
wherever you are, all your desires will be fulfilled without 
your asking. Only those who don’t have total faith suffer. De- 
velop self-confidence. That is the first sadhana you have to 
undertake. 

Truly you are all most fortunate. Today is Somavar (Mon- 
day), very endearing to Somasekhara (Eswara). That is why 
Siva is extolled as Someshwara and Somasekhara. This body 
was also born on Monday. In every Siva temple, special 
prayers are offered on Mondays. 

Hanuman is worshipped on Mangalavar (Tuesday). When 
Ravana was killed in the battlefield, Hanuman rushed to Sita to 
convey the good news. Sita was overjoyed and blessed Hanu- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 47 


man profusely saying, “Hanuman, I don’t know what day it is, 
but since you have conveyed the much awaited mangalakara 
vartha (auspicious news), this day shall be called Mangalavar 
(Tuesday), and may you be worshipped on this day!” 

In the Treta Yuga, names of the days such as Monday and 
Tuesday were not in existence; they are of recent origin. 
Therefore, in the culture of Bharat each term has an inner sig- 
nificance. But, the Bharatiyas themselves are not making any 
effort to understand them and are going along the wrong path. 
Culture is important, not caste. We have to uphold the culture. 

Embodiments of Love! Understand the truth that love is the 
Atma and the Atma is love. 


Sivaratri, 15 February 1999 
Sai Kulwant Hall, Prasanthi Nilayam 


Man has to pay attention to three basic duties in 
his quest for happiness: (1) He has to forget what 
he has to forget, namely, the world around him and 
its tantalizing pleasures; (2) He has to reach 
where he has to reach, namely, the goal of the Di- 
vine, the Presence of the Almighty; and (3) he has 
to give up what he has to give up, namely, material 
desires and pursuits. 

—Baba 


Give up enmity, develop unity 


In this sacred land of Bharat, forbearance is the 
real beauty. 

Of all forms of rituals, adherence to Truth is the 
greatest penance. 

Is there any ritual more sacred than the feeling of 
love toward the mother? 

What else is to be communicated to you more 
than this? 

O members of this noble and august assembly! 

[Telugu poem] 


Embodiments of Love! 


Bharat (India) is the birthplace of spirituality, charity and 
righteousness. It is the abode of peace and non-violence. Hav- 
ing been born in this sacred land of Bharat, it is the bounden 
duty of every Bharatiya (Indian) to foster the noble qualities of 
truth, peace, charity and non-violence. This sacred land is the 
birthplace of the Adi Kavi (first poet), Valmiki, and sage 
Vyasa, who classified the Vedas. This is the meritorious land 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 49 


that gave birth to Gautam Buddha, who declared Ahimsa pa- 
ramo dharma (nonviolence is the highest dharma). This is the 
noble land that was ruled by Lord Rama Himself. This is the 
divine land where Lord Krishna sang the song celestial, Bha- 
gavad Gita. It is most essential for the Bharatiyas to follow the 
ideals of these sages and Avatars. Having taken birth in this 
sacred land of Bharat, the Bharatiyas should make every effort 
to keep their hearts sacred. 


This Motherland of ours gave to the world noble 
souls renowned in all the continents. 

It is the land that ousted the foreign rulers and 
achieved freedom. 

This Bharat is reputed for its scholarship. 

It is the sacred land that stood forth as the exem- 
plar in the realms of music, literature and sa- 
cred lore and is noted for its fine arts and 
natural beauty. 

Born in the land of Bharat, oh devotees, it is your 
bounden duty to foster the glory and prosperity 
of the Motherland. 

[Telugu Poem] 


Bharatiyas should develop unity 


Embodiments of Love! The Bharatiyas achieved independ- 
ence, but not unity. The pristine glory of Bharat can be re- 
stored only when the Bharatiyas achieve equality, integrity, 
unity, and fraternity. These sacred values should be imprinted 
in the heart of every Bharatiya. There are many men of sacri- 
fice, highly educated and affluent people, eminent statesmen 
and politicians and very good administrators in this country. 
But what is the use? There is no unity and cooperation among 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 50 


them. That is the reason for the present plight of the country. 
They should give up individual differences and work for the 
welfare of the society. If all Bharatiyas stand united, none can 
ever attempt to attack us. Since the unity is on the decline, oth- 
ers are trying to take advantage of this situation. 


Bharat stands first in respect of adherence to truth 


Embodiments of Love! In the past, foreigners ruled over the 
country for hundreds of years treating the Bharatiyas like 
slaves. At least from now onward, take care that no foreign 
force enters our country. That is the vow all the Bharatiyas 
should resolve to take. The Bharatiyas have immense strength 
and power. But, they are facing hardships because of lack of 
unity. 

Spirituality is very essential for the welfare of the country. 
Since ancient times, Bharat has radiated peace and happiness 
to the rest of the world through the message of spirituality. It 
occupied the exalted position of teacher to the rest of the 
world. Bharat stands first in respect of adherence to truth. No 
other country in this world can ever match Bharat in respect of 
charity and sacrifice. 

Our ancestors took great pains and made great sacrifices in 
order to protect and safeguard this country. But, unfortunately 
that spirit of unity and sacrifice is lacking among the youth to- 
day. Moreover, it is not enough if we have unity unless we re- 
solve to work for the welfare of the society. Only when you 
realize the value of service to the society, can you achieve the 
noble qualities of unity, integrity, and fraternity. For this you 
have to take to spirituality. Eswara sarva bhoothanam, the 
same divinity dwells in all beings. The same was declared by 
Lord Krishna in the Bhagavad Gita: Mamaivamso jeevaloke 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 51 


jeevabhutha sanathana (the eternal Atma in all beings is a part 
of My Being). The culture of Bharat has propagated this prin- 
ciple of unity in diversity. 


Uphold the culture of Bharat 


Since ancient times, Bharat has advocated the ideal Loka 
samastha sukhino bhavantu (may the whole world be happy!). 
But, due to the effect of modern age, selfishness and self inter- 
est are on the rise. The need of the hour is to develop spiritual- 
ity, love, unity, and forbearance. All these can be achieved 
only through God's grace. In fact, you do not need to undertake 
any rigorous spiritual practices. Japa, meditation, and yogic 
practices confer only temporary satisfaction. It is enough if you 
develop love in your heart. There is no God other than love. 
Love is God, live in love. it is only love that can bring about 
unity. 

But, today everyone is struggling for their selfish ends. In- 
dividual differences are on the rise. There may be individual 
differences and party differences and differences in ideology, 
but when it comes to protecting the country, you should stand 
united, giving up all differences. Sacrifice all self-interests and 
develop love. Experience bliss and share it with others. This is 
what the culture of Bharat teaches. 

There is no culture greater than the culture of Bharat. This 
culture is eternal, universal, and acceptable to everyone. But, 
unfortunately today the Bharatiyas are imitating the Western 
culture ignoring their own culture. As a result, they are losing 
their identity. There is no greater misfortune than forgetting 
one's own culture. A true Bharatiya is one who upholds Bha- 
ratiya culture. The epithet Bharatiya does not mean a person 
born in the land of Bharat. Whoever follows the culture of 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 52 


Bharat is a Bharatiya. But the modern educated people are not 
fascinated by this culture because they have not understood it 
properly. The culture of Bharat is vaster than oceans and 
mightier than mountains. In order to understand this glorious 
culture, you need to develop broad feelings, become broad- 
minded and expand your love. Extend your support to those 
administrators who adhere to these sacred principles. Do not 
get carried away by those who give platform speeches but 
practice none. You should be prepared to sacrifice even your 
life in order to uphold the culture of Bharat. 


Unity rests on Truth and Love 


Hastasya bhushanam danam (charity is the true ornament 
of the hand); sathyam kanthasya bhushanam (truth is the true 
ornament of the throat); srothrasya bhushanam sastram (lis- 
tening to sacred texts is the true ornament of the ears). This is 
the teaching of the culture of Bharat. Sathyannasthi paro 
dharma (there is no greater dharma than Truth). It is truth that 
protects the world. It is love and nonviolence that sustain the 
world. Unity can be achieved only through truth, nonviolence 
and love. My advice is that all parties should unite. Only then 
Bharat will become a divine land. 

Very soon this is going to happen. The present-day admini- 
stration is noble and good. You should safeguard it because it 
supports spirituality and divinity. It was lack of unity among 
the Bharatiyas that was responsible for Bharat to be under 
British rule for hundreds of years. Past is past. At least in fu- 
ture take care that India will never be under foreign rule. Do 
not hate anybody. Love even the worst of your enemies. De- 
velop love. Only then the country will progress. Imagine what 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 53 


a formidable force India will be if all its 98 crore people stand 
united! Bharat will not have any problems. 

Very soon, peace and security will prevail in this land. To- 
day we do not find peace anywhere, only pieces! Peace is pre- 
sent in the hridaya (heart). You can experience peace only 
when you develop heart to heart relationship with your fellow 
beings. 


Money comes and goes, morality comes and grows 


The Vedas declare, “Anoraneeyan Mahatomaheeyan (God 
is subtler than the subtlest atom and vaster than the vastest ob- 
ject).” The Vedantins say the Atma pervades the entire world. 
The scientists say the whole world is made up of atoms. Names 
are different, but the power is the same. Einstein referred to 
matter and energy. But matter and energy are not separate from 
each other. Matter becomes energy and vice-versa. This energy 
is divinity. You should lead your lives taking divinity as the 
basis. You will ruin yourself if you take the world as the basis. 
All the worldly matters come and go like passing clouds. 
Money comes and goes, morality comes and grows. Morality 
fosters spirituality. Humanity will progress only when there is 
morality. So, today we have to foster morality. 

A good government should always be supported. One 
should not hate the government on the basis of individual dif- 
ferences. It has been fifty years since this country attained in- 
dependence. But what have we achieved? Murders, hijacks, 
and kidnappings! Is this what we dreamt of? Today, fear and 
restlessness are rampant all over the world. Man is haunted by 
fear wherever he is: at home, in a car, in a train or in a plane! 
Why? Because the human mind is polluted with desire, greed, 
anger, etc. If man wants to enjoy peace and security, he should 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 54 


get rid of these bad qualities and lead his life keeping in view 
the welfare of the society. He should give up selfishness and 
develop unity. Only then the pristine glory of Bharat can be 
revived. 

Our ancient sages coronated thyaga (sacrifice), welcomed 
Truth, and upheld righteousness. Today there is no trace of 
thyaga in man. He is always immersed in bhoga (worldly 
pleasures). As a result he is subjected to roga (disease). The 
culture of Bharat teaches that only sacrifice confers immortal- 
ity. But today, unfortunately, the Bharatiyas themselves do not 
have faith in the Bharatiya culture. 


Motherland is greater than heaven 


After the annihilation of Ravana, when Rama was re- 
quested to take over the reins of Lanka, He declared: Janani 
Janmabhoomischa Swargadapi Gareeyasi (mother and moth- 
erland are greater than heaven itself). One who does not have 
love and regard for one's own motherland, one's own mother 
tongue and one's own religion is a living corpse! But, one 
should not show disrespect towards other countries. Adveshta 
Sarva Bhoothanam (one should not hate anybody). One should 
not criticize anybody. But, today if one goes through the news- 
papers one finds one party criticizing and abusing the other. It 
is nothing but mean-mindedness. No one has any right to criti- 
cize others. Each party should see to it that it is free from all 
defects instead of pointing an accusing finger at others. 

All of you know what a nice person Vajpayee is. Even in 
olden days, whenever Vajpayee or Jayaprakash Narayan would 
visit Andhra Pradesh, people, especially the youth, used to 
gather in large numbers to listen to their speeches. Naturally, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 55 


the people are attracted to those who adhere to truth and right- 
eousness. Such a leader should be given all support. 


Pleasure it an interval between two pains 


You should strive hard to uphold dharma. In the process 
one may have to face hardships, but one should not get dis- 
heartened. Pleasure is an interval between two pains. One 
should be prepared to face all challenges and work for the up- 
lift of the society. Today, no one seems to be interested in the 
welfare of the society. Each one is concerned about his posi- 
tion and power. A true leader is one who works for the well- 
being of society. The government is safe only when the people 
are safe and secure and vice versa. So, the government and the 
people should stand united and work for the progress of the 
nation. 

Bharat (India) is the land of merit, the land of sacrifice. 
When Humayun, son of Babar, was ruling over this country, 
one day his father wrote a letter to him describing how fortu- 
nate he was to become the ruler of this sacred land. He wrote, 
"Humayun, it is your great good fortune that you have become 
the ruler of Bharat. See to it that Bharat does not suffer any 
hardships. Understand the cultural values of Bharat and put 
them into practice. Make the people of Bharat happy." So, you 
see, even the Muslim rulers had great regard for the culture of 
Bharat. Since ancient times, the Hindus, Muslims, Christians 
and Sikhs have been living in amity in this sacred land. Due to 
the effect of Kali age, hatred and enmity are on the rise among 
different religions. There will be no scope for hatred and en- 
mity if people realize that there is only one religion, the relig- 
ion of love, there is only one caste, the caste of humanity, and 
there is only one language, the language of the heart. Give up 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 56 


hatred and enmity from today. Develop unity. The country 
cannot progress unless and until hatred and enmity are up- 
rooted. 

When the safety of the country is at stake, all parties should 
stand united giving up individual differences. Dharmaraja 
stood as an ideal in this regard. Once, while speaking to Krish- 
na, he said, "Krishna, the Pandavas and the Kauravas belong to 
the same family. When there is any difference of opinion 
within the family, we are five on one side and they are hundred 
on the other. But if there is any external threat and the safety of 
the country is at stake, all 105 of us will join hands." Similarly, 
all political parties should come together to safeguard the in- 
terests of the nation. 


Develop friendship with other countries 


I have been observing Vajpayee for the last so many years. 
Now this body is seventy-four years old. Vajpayee always 
keeps the welfare of the society in mind in whatever he speaks 
or does. He is broadminded. There will certainly be peace and 
security in the country if these principles are followed. 

Vajpayee and Kulwant Rai have requested Me to visit 
Delhi at least once in a year. Today we have inaugurated the 
International Sai Center. We should cultivate broad and noble 
feelings. I will certainly come to Delhi every year provided 
you develop broad feelings, and put them into practice. In the 
Sai Organization, there should be no differences of opinion. 
All should live like brothers and sisters. More than a hundred 
years ago, when Vivekananda spoke in a religious congrega- 
tion in Chicago, addressing the audience as brothers and sis- 
ters, he was greeted with a thunderous applause. In olden days, 
brothers and sisters attained supreme state living in harmony 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 57 


with each other. But, today brothers and sisters go to Supreme 
Court due to lack of unity. 

Develop love. Devotion bereft of love is no devotion at all. 
You may undertake any number of spiritual practices, but love 
should be the underlying principle. Friendship is one of the 
nine paths of devotion propagated by the culture of Bharat. So, 
develop friendship with God. God is not separate from you. 
You are God. God is in you and around you. God is all perva- 
Sive just as an atom. Conduct yourselves with the firm convic- 
tion that God is everywhere. Only then will Bharat regain its 
pristine glory of being the leader of all nations. 

I want Vajpayee to develop friendship with countries like 
Russia, Japan, and Pakistan. How nice will it be if all these 
countries come together! Vajpayee is also making efforts in 
this direction. He has full control over his mind, but how can 
he be expected to have control over the minds of others? He 
has spiritual feelings in him. That will give him all the neces- 
sary strength and courage and ultimately confer success. Vyasa 
declared, “Paropakara punyaya papaya arapeedanam (helping 
others is meritorious, harming others is sinful).” So, Help ever, 
Hurt never. This is what I want you to do. Delhi is the stomach 
of Bharat. If the stomach is good, the whole body will be good. 
Likewise, if Delhi is good, the whole country will prosper. So, 
see to it that there is peace and harmony in De/hi. The people 
of Delhi should stand united. If you have unity, there is noth- 
ing that you cannot achieve in this world. I bless you all and 
bring My discourse to a close. 


12 March 1999 
Delhi 


5 


Glory of Bharatiya Culture 


Punar Vittham, Punar Mithram, Punar Bharya 
Punar Mahi Etath Sarvam Punar Labhyam Na 
Sareeram Punah Punah 

[Sanskrit Verse] 


Embodiments of Love! 


If money is lost, one need not be worried about it, for one 
can earn it again. If a friend is lost, one can have another. If 
wife is lost, one can marry again. If one loses one's piece of 
land, one can purchase another piece of land. All these can be 
regained; but if body is lost, one cannot get it back. 

Human body is highly sacred and invaluable. So, it has to 
be looked after with utmost care. Janthoonam narajanma 
durlabham, human birth is the rarest and noblest of all living 
beings. But man, unable to understand his true identity, is 
wasting his life. Since time immemorial, the culture of Bharat 
(India) has propagated three important values. Sathyam bru- 
yath (speak the truth). Never utter a lie to please someone. This 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 59 


is the moral value. Priyam bruyath (speak in a pleasing way). 
This is the social value. Na bruyath sathyamapriyam (do not 
speak unpleasant truth). This is the spiritual value. The Bha- 
gavad Gita says, “Anudvegakaram vakyam sathyam priya- 
hitham cha yat” (one should speak only truthful, pleasing, and 
well-intentioned words, which are beneficial to others). 


Cultivate selfless love 


Man today has forgotten his true Self and is getting carried 
away by illusion. What is the reason? A small example to il- 
lustrate this. Pure gold shines brilliantly and has a very high 
value. However, when it gets alloyed with metals like silver, 
copper, brass, etc., it loses not only its identity but also its 
value. Similarly, man, who can be compared to pure gold, has 
lost his true identity and also his value as his mind is polluted 
with worldly thoughts and unsacred feelings. Man today can- 
not be called a human being in the strict sense of the term. He 
has lost his humanness because of bad thoughts and bad com- 
pany. 

What man needs to cultivate today is the value of the ever 
brilliant and effulgent Self. Human values cannot be acquired 
from outside. They are innate and inborn. But, man has for- 
gotten these values, which are inherent in him right from his 
birth. Modern man is human only in form, but not in behavior. 

Right from ancient times, Bharat has been in the vanguard 
of human values, namely, sathya, dharma, santhi, prema, and 
ahimsa. Man is gifted with love, but he has highly adulterated 
it with selfishness and self-interest. He should cultivate selfless 
love. Only then will his life shine brilliantly. When the electric 
current enters the bulb through the wire, you get the light. 
Truth, righteousness, peace, and love can be compared to the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 60 


electric current, wire, bulb, and light respectively. So, in order 
to experience the light of love, you must cultivate truth, right- 
eousness, and peace. Love is God, God is love. So, live in love. 
Right from a pauper to a millionaire, none can survive without 
love. Man loves his wife, wealth, and children. But greatness 
lies in sharing your love with everyone, not merely with your 
kith and kin. 

Vedanta says, love everybody, but do not trust anybody. 
The reason is that the human body is temporary. 


It is made of flesh and bones and is full of dirt. 

It is afflicted with many diseases. 

It cannot cross the ocean of Samsara. 

Oh mind! Realize that this body is ephemera, 

and take refuge at the lotus feet of the Lord 
[Telugu Poem] 


This body is valued and considered to be Sivam (auspi- 
cious) as long as there is life in it. It becomes savam (dead 
body) and absolutely useless the moment life principle for- 
sakes it. So, understand the transient nature of the body and 
conduct yourself accordingly. Share your love with everybody. 
Your entire life is based on love. 


Man should realise his innate divinity 


Embodiments of Love! Since ancient times, the culture of 
Bharat has laid great emphasis on the need for good thoughts, 
good company, and good actions. “Sathyam vada, dharmam 
chara (speak the truth and practice righteousness).” Man can 
attain exalted heights by following this dictum. Only the 
Bharatiyas (Indians) understood this truth. But alas! Today the 
Bharatiyas themselves have forgotten it. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 61 


Today the Bharatiyas themselves are not making 
any effort to understand their own culture, which is 
suffused with noble and divine feelings. Human- 
ness has become extinct in man due to the lack of 
fear of sin and love for God. What greater mis- 
fortune can befall on humanity than this! 

[Telugu Poem] 


Man should realize his innate divinity. This is possible only 
when man makes proper use of the five elements and five 
senses gifted by God. 


Protect your senses from evil effects 


The primary duty of man lies not in protecting his wealth 
and valuables but in conserving the five elements and protect- 
ing the five senses from evil effects. The same message was 
propagated by Gautama Buddha. In the beginning, he studied 
many scriptures, approached many preceptors, and undertook 
various types of spiritual exercises. But his spiritual thirst was 
not quenched. Ultimately, he realized that proper utilization of 
the five senses would alone confer peace of mind. 

First and foremost, he stressed on the importance of sam- 
yak drishti (right vision). All that you see, be it good or bad, 
gets imprinted in your heart forever. So, see no evil; see what 
is good. Hear no evil; hear what is good. This is called samyak 
sravanam (right listening). Samyak drishti and samyak srava- 
nam will lead to samyak bhavam (right feelings). Your life will 
be sanctified once you cultivate samyak bhavam. Human life is 
based on feelings. Human life sans feelings cannot exist. To- 
day, man lacks peace of mind because he does not have sam- 
yak drishti, samyak sravanam, and samyak bhavam. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 62 


We blame others for our sufferings. Do not accuse others 
for your sufferings, because you are yourself the cause of your 
misery. Happiness or sorrow is of your own making. All that 
you experience is nothing but the reflection, reaction, and re- 
sound of what is in you. Buddha, having understood this truth, 
put his five senses to proper use through which he could attain 
Nirvana. He was in a state of supreme bliss at the time of at- 
taining Nirvana. That state could be described as ever blissful, 
granting happiness, embodiment of wisdom, beyond duality, 
infinite as the sky, primordial, final goal, one, eternal, pure, 
immutable, omnipresent witness, beyond emotions, devoid of 
the three gunas (qualities). 

When Buddha was at the verge of attaining Nirvana, his 
stepbrother Ananda, who was by his side, started shedding 
tears. Seeing this Buddha smiled and said, "My dear one, it is 
rather surprising that you should feel sad about my attaining 
the state of highest bliss. Instead you should also try to attain 
this state of supreme bliss by controlling your senses". 


Sacred values of Bharatiya culture 


Bharat is the motherland of many noble souls. It is there- 
fore essential for all the Bharatiyas to understand the sacred 
history of Bharat. But, today, no one seems to be interested in 
knowing the history and culture of Bharat. The culture of Bha- 
rat is based on dharma. The word dharma has been misinter- 
preted as religion. Dharma is like a vast ocean, whereas relig- 
ion is like a pond. The culture of Bharat is pure, unsullied, 
eternal, and immortal. In olden days, the children were taught 
the sacred values of Indian culture right from the age of five. 
Their education would begin with the sacred mantras like Aum 
Namah Sivaya and Aum Namo Narayana. But in the modern 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 63 


education system, the divine names such as Siva and Narayana 
have no place. The children are taught meaningless rhymes 
like “Ba. Ba. black sheep”. People are not making efforts to 
understand the efficacy of these mantras. 


In the Kali age, everyone is a doubting Thomas! 


No doubt, worldly education is required, but along with 
this secular knowledge, one has to make an effort to imbibe 
cultural values too. It is because of the growth of worldly 
knowledge without cultural values that man has become a re- 
pository of doubts. Even the parents and children, wife and 
husband lack faith in each other. During the times of Jesus, 
there was only one doubting Thomas, but in the Kali Age, eve- 
ryone is a doubting Thomas! 

Rama and Ravana were equally proficient in 36 forms of 
knowledge. But sage Valmiki, the composer of the Ramayana, 
portrayed Ravana as a fool and Rama as a noble one because 
Ravana misused his knowledge, whereas Rama put his knowl- 
edge to proper use. That is why Valmiki described Rama as 
virtuous and noble. Ravana became the root cause for the death 
of his sons and brothers, because he was unable to control his 
lust. His entire clan perished due to his wicked qualities and 
wicked actions. Rama led an ideal life. Today, many people 
aspire to occupy positions of authority in the political field, 
though they do not deserve. But Rama renounced the kingdom 
itself though, being the eldest son, He richly deserved to be the 
king. He sacrificed everything for the sake of truth. He had 
firm belief in the Vedic dictum, Sathyannasti paro dharma 
(there is no greater dharma than truth). He made such a great 
sacrifice and went to the forest to uphold his father's word. The 
Vedas also clearly state Na karmana na prajaya dhanena thya- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 64 


genaikena amruthatwamanusu (immortality can be attained 
only through sacrifice; neither wealth nor progeny nor good 
deeds can confer it). In fact, tyaga (sacrifice) is true yoga. If 
you do not exhale the air that you inhale, your lungs will be 
affected. If you do not excrete the food you eat, you will have 
stomach disorders. Likewise, you should give money that you 
earn in charity with a spirit of sacrifice. There lies the bliss. 
The culture of Bharat does not give scope for differences 
based on caste, creed, color, religion, and nationality. It says, 


Let us move together and let us grow together. 
Let us share the knowledge and improve upon it. 
Let us live in amity and peace without any differ- 
ences whatsoever. 
[Telugu Poem] 


It speaks of the principle of equanimity. It says, Loka 
samastha sukhino bhavantu (May the whole world be happy!). 
It treats everyone alike irrespective of caste, creed, color, re- 
ligion, and nationality. The same principle was stated by Jesus 
also. He said, “All are one, my dear son, be alike to everyone.” 
In fact, the underlying principle of all the religions is one and 
the same. But, people have forgotten this unity and have be- 
come narrow-minded. 


Search for Truth 


Embodiments of Love! Love is life. So, one has to chan- 
nelise this love in the proper direction. Do not let it go in the 
wrong direction. You can accomplish anything in life if you 
exercise control over it. The culture of Bharat speaks of Sath- 
yanveshana (search for truth). Why should one search for 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 65 


truth, which is all-pervasive? What is the inner meaning of the 
word Sathyanveshana? 

The culture of Bharat gives a beautiful analogy for this. 
The eyes that see your mother, your wife, your daughter, and 
your daughter-in-law are the same, but the feelings with which 
you see them vary. Here Sathyanveshana refers to the enquiry 
into the feelings that you should have when you look at each of 
them. The culture of Bharat lays great emphasis on self en- 


quiry. 
God is everywhere and in everything 


Some people say that since God has no form, He does not 
exist. But, God has form. In this world, there is nothing that 
exists without form. According to science, the entire world is 
made up of atoms. They too have form. The Vedas say, Ano- 
raneeyan Mahatomaheeyan (God is smaller than the smallest 
atom and bigger than the biggest object). 

The atom is God. Right from the water you drink and the 
food you eat, everything is pervaded by atom. It took thou- 
sands of years for the scientists to understand this truth. But the 
same truth was proclaimed by the tiny tot Prahlada ages ago. 
He said, “Do not have the feeling that God is here and He is 
not there. In fact, He is everywhere. You can find Him wher- 
ever you search for Him.” 

Bharat has been the birthplace of many noble souls like 
Prahlada who had experienced the omnipresent Divinity. Since 
ancient times, the Bharatiyas worshipped earth, trees, anthills, 
and mountains because they believed that God is everywhere 
and in everything. 


Sarvata pani padam tat, sarvatokshi siromukham, 
sarvata srutimalloke, sarvamavritya tishtati. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 66 


With hands, feet, eyes, heads, mouths and ears per- 
vading everything, He permeates the entire universe. 


God is everywhere. This is the teaching of our ancient 
culture. Since the human mind has become weak, man is losing 
faith in these ancient values. Just as the alloys mixed with gold 
make the gold lose its shine and value, so also the bad qualities 
and bad feelings have made man lose his value and brilliance. 


Only the Atma is true and eternal 


Embodiments of Love! Develop faith in God for your own 
happiness and bliss. If people develop faith in God, the whole 
country will be happy. You are subjected to misery because 
you lack faith in the Self. Self confidence is very essential. 

Do not get carried away by the worldly education. In fact, 
all that is related to the mind and senses is nothing but igno- 
rance. The annihilation of mind is true wisdom. Mind is a bun- 
dle of thoughts and impulses. So, all that is related to the mind 
is subject to change. Only the Atma is true and eternal. 

Many changes occur in man with age, but man remains the 
same. At the time of birth, you are a child. After ten years, 
people call you a boy. After thirty years, you become a man. 
After 75 years, you are called a grandfather. The child, boy, 
man, and grandfather are one and the same. But you are getting 
deluded seeing the physical changes. You should always have 
the changeless truth in your mind. That is the real human 
value. 

Worldly knowledge is also required, but that is not the be- 
all and end-all of human life. Worldly knowledge is for the 
happiness in this world and spiritual knowledge is for the hap- 
piness thereafter. It is only the spiritual knowledge that is in 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 67 


you, above you, below you, and around you and that protects 
you. 

Some people deny the existence of God because He is not 
seen by the naked eye. Can you, with the same analogy, deny 
the existence of air, which is also not visible to the naked eye? 
Though the human eye cannot see God, the hridaya (heart) can 
see Him, hear Him, and experience Him. This is the teaching 
of our ancient culture. This great culture has remained vibrant 
for thousands of years. Einstein said that energy can be neither 
created nor destroyed. It only changes its forms. The same 
thing can be said about our ancient culture also. 


Put into practice at least one sacred teaching 


Among the numbers one and nine, one is greater because 
you cannot have the latter without the former. It is only out of 
the number one that millions have emerged. Zero gains value if 
the number one precedes it. The value becomes more and more 
with the increase in the number of zeros. One is the hero, 
world is zero. That hero is God. You are all like zeros. So, try 
to have the hero by your side. 

Develop the faith that God is. Mere repetition of the names 
potato and chapati will not appease your hunger. Likewise, 
merely reading the spiritual texts or listening to the discourses 
of holy men will not grant you fulfillment. Instead put into 
practice at least one sacred teaching. Only then can you expe- 
rience happiness. 

Consider this example: Put two spoons of sugar in a tum- 
bler containing water. The sugar gets collected at the bottom of 
the tumbler. If you drink the water without mixing the sugar, 
the water will not have any taste. Take a spoon and stir it; then 
the whole glass of water will taste sweet. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 68 


The human heart is like a tumbler containing water. Divin- 
ity can be compared to sugar. Stir it with the spoon of buddhi 
(intellect). The process of stirring is enquiry. Once this is done, 
the sweetness of divinity will spread to all the limbs of the 
body. Then all that you see, hear, talk, and do will be suffused 
with divinity. Your life itself will be filled with love. 

You have to grow in faith in order to develop love. Many 
people consider faith as mere foolishness. But truly speaking, 
bookish knowledge sans practical knowledge can be termed 
foolishness. You should never be satisfied with mere bookish 
knowledge and superficial knowledge. You need to develop 
general knowledge and discrimination knowledge also. Only 
then you will attain practical knowledge, which is very essen- 
tial. But, today very few seem to be having practical knowl- 
edge. Most of the people are wasting their lives in acquiring 
superficial knowledge. 


Surrender all your thoughts and worries to God 


In the field of spirituality, you cannot attain anything if you 
do not have faith and determination. When you go to the mar- 
ket, you cannot get even a small handkerchief if you do not 
pay a certain amount of money. Likewise, you cannot attain 
divine grace unless you offer your love to God. 

God is also like a business man. What sort of business is 
He engaged in? Not worldly business, purely spiritual. He re- 
ceives your love and showers His grace on you. Surrender all 
your thoughts and worries to God and receive bliss in return. 

This is the business you are supposed to do with God. But 
in this Kali age, people are engaged in a different type of busi- 
ness with God. Students go to temple and pray, “O God, I will 
offer two coconuts if You make me pass the examination.” 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 69 


What will God do with your coconuts? It is because of such 
foolish vows that spirituality has become a matter of ridicule in 
the eyes of many. 

Many of you may be aware that in Andhra Pradesh, there is 
a very famous pilgrimage center named Tirupati, where Lord 
Venkateswara is the presiding deity. Some people go there and 
pray, 

‘Swami, I will offer my hair to You if I win the lottery.” 
They do not realize that God is not in need of their dirty hair. 

You have to offer all your wicked qualities and wicked 
thoughts to God and receive sacred qualities and sacred 
thoughts in return. Suppose you have a damaged currency 
note. None will accept it except the Reserve Bank, where you 
can get a brand new note in exchange of the damaged one. 
Likewise, your mind and heart, which are polluted with wicked 
thoughts, can be compared to damaged currency notes. Not 
even your wife and children would accept them. So, offer them 
to God who, like the Reserve Bank chairman, will give you 
good mind and good heart in return. Thereafter, you will lead a 
happy life. 


Take to the path of spirituality 


According to the Vedas, human life is highly sacred. Do 
not make it profane by wicked thoughts and wicked actions. 
Fill your life with love and take to the path of spirituality. 
Spirituality does not mean outward worship and rituals alone. 
You should have the feeling of worship within. You may also 
do it externally if you are interested. There is nothing wrong in 
it. But it will be a futile exercise if it is not done with the 
proper feelings. All these rituals should awaken the spiritual 
awareness in you. Otherwise, you will be leading the life of an 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 70 


animal, always aspiring for the worldly pleasures and com- 
forts. 


Ahara nidra bhaya methuneshu 
Samanyametat pasubir naranam 
Jnanam naranam sdhikam visesham 
Jnanena soonya pasubhissamana. 


Food, sleep, fear and progeny are common to 
mankind and animals. 

Only man is endowed with wisdom. 

Man bereft of wisdom is equivalent to an animal. 


Today, people are amassing wealth, but only a few of them 
are making proper use of it. Many are receiving high salaries. 
But, their work is not commensurate with the salary they re- 
ceive. “Sarvakarma Bhagavad preethyartham (whatever you 
do, do it to please God).” Only then your life will be redeemed. 


Proper utilisation of wealth 


Embodiments of Love! There are innumerable rich men, 
educationists, judges, scientists, and intellectuals in this coun- 
try. But not many are putting their wealth and resources to 
proper use. Very few are discharging their duties properly. 
This is the reason the country is facing hardships today. All 
those that amass wealth must realise that they cannot carry 
even a naya paisa with them when they leave this world. The 
money that you earn from the society should be used for the 
welfare of the society only. 

You all know that Kulwant Rai spent crores of rupees to 
build this magnificent building. There are many rich people in 
this country, but how many are engaging themselves in such 
acts of service and sacrifice? Sacrifice is the highest virtue. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 71 


Some people are building hospitals and educational institutions 
with business motive, spending crores of rupees. If they invest 
50 crores on a hospital, they expect a profit of 100 crores. 
Similarly, with the investment of 50 crores on an educational 
institution, they want to make 200 crores. This sort of business 
is an unhealthy practice. Whatever you do, do it for the benefit 
of others. 

When you stepped into this world, you did not bring any- 
thing with you, nor can you take anything with you when you 
leave. No benefit accrues to you from having palatial buildings 
and huge bank balances if you cannot use them for the service 
of the society. Spend your money for the welfare of society. 
Only then you can win divine grace. Serve the needy by pro- 
viding comforts and conveniences. 


Consider every good work as God’s work 


There are many poor people in Delhi who cannot afford 
medical care. There are many more who are unable to send 
their children to school owing to financial constraints. Estab- 
lish hospitals and schools, which will render free service to the 
poor. A third person need not tell you these noble ideas. You 
should take the initiative on your own. I never instructed Kul- 
want Rai to construct this building. It was his own idea that 
took this shape. Such noble ideas originate due to the merits 
done in past lives. There may be many people who feel jealous 
of him. It is his good luck to have built this building and it is 
their misfortune to feel jealous about it. Everyone must under- 
take work. Consider every good work as God's work. Truly 
speaking, Kulwant Rai has done a great service to the Organi- 
zation by getting this beautiful building constructed. He has 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 72 


done this not for his benefit, but for the service of others. 
Every rich man should develop the spirit of sacrifice. 

It is a mistake to think that Bharat is a poor country. It is 
the very abode of Lakshmi, the goddess of wealth. In the olden 
days, in Punjab, there were houses made of silver. The foreign 
invaders plundered those houses and took away all the silver 
on camels. They looted all the gold from Somnath temple. If 
Bharat were a poor country, it would not have suffered such 
foreign invasions in the past. There is no dearth of wealth in 
Bharat. It is unfortunate that some people call Bharat a poor 
country. Bharat is the land of plenty and prosperity. Bharatiyas 
are not poor; they are very rich. 

Who is the richest man in the world? He who has much 
satisfaction. Who is the poorest man in the world? The one 
who has too many. The one imbued with the spirit of sacrifice 
is the richest man. If you have, ten rupees in your pocket, give 
at least one rupee to the needy. However the beggars are not 
satisfied with one rupee because they cannot buy even a small 
piece of bread with it these days. 


Whatever I do is only for the welfare of other 


Our ancients used to attach more value to their word than 
to money. It is your good fortune that you are born in such a 
sacred land of Bharat. You should uphold and propagate dhar- 
ma to the rest of the world, befitting your nationality. It gives 
me great joy to find anyone practicing and propagating dhar- 
ma. Believe it or not, there is not an iota of selfishness in Me 
from top to toe. Whatever I do is only for the welfare of others. 
Be good, see good and do good. That is true human quality. 

God is the embodiment of Sath, Chit and Ananda. Sath 
means Being (that which is permanent). Chit means Aware- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 73 


ness. The combination of Sath and Chit results in Ananda. So, 
in order to experience bliss, one has to make friendship with 
God. God is the only true friend. All of you are aware how the 
worldly friends are. As long as there is water in the tank, you 
find thousands of frogs living there. But all the frogs desert the 
pond once it gets dried up. Likewise, all worldly friends swarm 
around you saying hello, hello as long as you are in position of 
authority and have wealth. Once you lose both, none will look 
at your face even to say goodbye. But friendship with God is 
true and eternal. God is always with you in times of both pain 
and pleasure. King Harischandra underwent many trials and 
tribulations to uphold truth. He always had the protection of 
God because he stuck to the path of truth. So, have faith in 
God and tread along the path of truth. Money comes and goes 
like passing clouds and makes many rounds, but morality 
comes and grows. This is the thing you have to note today. 

Delhi is the capital of Bharat. So, if Delhi is good, the 
whole country will be good. Anything can be achieved through 
unity. Give up individual and political differences. Have the 
national interest uppermost in your mind. Stand united and be 
prepared to sacrifice even your life for the welfare of the 
country. Uphold the prestige of the country and spread it far 
and wide. 


Truth has to be conveyed in a fearless manner 


Embodiments of Love! If you strive hard to put at least five 
of your fellowmen on the right path every day, you can bring 
about unity and transformation among the 98 crore Indian pop- 
ulation. Pray for the welfare of the nation. Develop the spirit of 
patriotism. Then the society and nation will prosper. I hope I 
am not causing inconvenience to you by speaking for a long 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 74 


time. But, such sacred teachings have to be imparted. Truth has 
to be conveyed in a fearless manner. There is no need to fear if 
you are following the truth. Human life is governed by four 
F's: 

Follow the master 

Face the devil 

Fight to the end 

Finish the game. 


Your conscience is your master, so follow your conscience. 
Life is a game, play it. Life is a dream, realize it. Life is love, 
enjoy it. If you understand this and put at least one teaching 
into practice, your life will be redeemed. Always contemplate 
on God. The secret of happiness lies in chanting God's name. 
You can chant any name of God and redeem your life. 


12 March 1999 
Delhi 


When you install God in your heart, there is no 
room in it for anything else. But today’s aspirants 
treat the heart as a musical chair. They go from 
one “swami” to another and shift from one kind of 
sadhana to another. Of what avail is this kind of 
merry-go-round? It is a waste of time and of life it- 
self. One heart, one thought, one God, one Goal. 
Whether you utter the name Allah, Jesus, Buddha, 
Zoroaster, or Guru Nanak —it is all the same. 

— Baba 


Put Ceiling On Your Desires 


Forbearance is the real beauty in this sacred 
land of Bharat. 

Of all the sacred virtues, adherence to truth is 
true penance. 

The nectarine feeling in this country is the 
feeling toward ones mother. 

Character is valued far more superior to the 
very life itself. 

People have forgotten the basic principles of 
the culture of Bharat 

And are following and adopting Western cul- 
ture today. 

Bharatiyas are not aware of the greatness of 
their own cultural heritage 

Just as the mighty elephant is not aware of its 
own Strength. 

[Telugu Poem] 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 76 


Embodiments of Love! 


Today man has taken to many paths to acquire wisdom. All 
the knowledge that he has acquired is not true knowledge in 
the strict sense of the term. Knowledge of the spirit, Atmic 
knowledge, is the true knowledge. That is Brahma Jnana. 
Atma, Brahman, and Jnana are synonyms. On this basis, the 
Vedas declare: Sathyam Jnanarn Anantham Brahma (Brahman 
is truth, wisdom and eternity). 


Work, worship, wisdom 


Since ancient times, the culture of Bharat has laid emphasis 
on these three aspects: work, worship, and wisdom. 

Work, worship, and wisdom all begin with service. No 
matter what service it is, if it is done with love and divine 
feelings, it becomes upasana (worship). 

What is wisdom? All that is related to our senses, the 
fleeting objects of the material world, and our actions, speak of 
our ignorance. Wisdom dawns the moment the mind is with- 
drawn. The thoughtless state between two consecutive 
thoughts is Brahma Jnana (Atmic, spiritual wisdom). Man is 
not able to experience this thoughtless state of Brahman and is 
carried away by fleeting, ephemeral, and momentary things. 
True wisdom dawns when all thoughts are decimated. Sai's 
philosophy speaks of the unity of work, worship, and wisdom. 

The culture of Bharat believes in unity in diversity, which 
is true wisdom. Many intellectuals observe multiplicity or plu- 
rality in unity, but there are very few men of wisdom who ob- 
serve unity in diversity. Since ancient days, the inhabitants of 
this holy land have been practicing these principles and have 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 ad 


been sharing them with the rest of the world. This country has 
always prayed for the advancement and welfare of the whole 
world. That is the meaning of the Vedic dictum, Loka samastha 
sukhino bhavantu (May the whole world be happy!) Our 
prayer is not limited to Bharat only. We pray for the welfare of 
the whole world. But the modern Bharatiyas (Indians) are not 
able to know the culture of Bharat, which is endowed with no- 
ble virtues of broadmindedness. 

Embodiments of Love! You have to understand the sanctity 
of the culture of Bharat. You may go through any number of 
books, you may visit noble souls, you may listen to sacred 
teachings, but the reality is one. People read hundreds of 
books, but very few translate them into action. It is enough if 
you put into practice at least one principle. 

Man is making every attempt today to be happy, blissful. 
Where do you get bliss? Is it in the material things, in the 
world, in individuals, in books? No, not at all. Bliss is within 
one's own Self. You have forgotten your true Self, the source 
of bliss. You are struggling hard for artificial happiness out- 
side. You are not aware of the reality that lies in the heart. In 
fact, all the bliss is there. The principle of love originates from 
the heart, not from the world. 

Everyone should develop love more and more. But, today, 
there is hatred and anger everywhere. Wherever you see, there 
is desire, enmity, and fear. How do you expect to be in peace? 
How do you expect to be blissful? Light the lamp of love 
within. Then fear and illusion can be removed and you can 
have the vision of the Self. Otherwise you are bound to suffer. 

You have to exercise a ceiling on your desires. There are 
rules for ceiling with regard to land and property. But you have 
no ceiling on your desires. Ceiling on desires means exercising 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 78 


control over them. You can be happy once the desires are con- 
trolled. 

Your life is a long journey. You should have less luggage 
(desires) in this long journey of life. Therefore, it is said: less 
luggage more comfort makes travel a pleasure. So, ceiling on 
desires is what you have to adopt today. You have to cut short 
your desires day by day. You are under the mistaken notion 
that happiness lies in the fulfillment of desires. But, in fact, 
happiness begins to dawn when desires are totally eradicated. 
When you reduce your desires, you advance towards the state 
of renunciation. 

You have many desires. What do you get out of them? You 
are bound to face the consequences when you claim something 
as yours. When you claim a piece of land as yours, then you 
will have to reap the harvest. This instinct of ego and attach- 
ment will put you to suffering. You will be blissful the moment 
you give up ego and attachment. 


Independence without unity is meaningless 


The Prime Minister, Ministers, Chief Justice of India, and 
other high officers assembled in the capital, Delhi. All of them 
mentioned that we underwent tremendous sufferings and hard- 
ships, and lost many lives to achieve independence. But we 
have not achieved unity in this country. 

What is the use of achieving independence without unity? 
We find that murders, kidnappings, hijacks have increased af- 
ter attaining independence. Is this the type of independence we 
wanted? No. Independence is meant to confer peace, and it 
should develop the culture of the nation. We should not be de- 
pendent on others. We should be independent in every way. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 79 


Bharat is a sacred land. Noble souls were born here. Bharat 
was ruled by Sri Rama Himself. This is the land of the song 
celestial, the Bhagavad Gita. This is the birthplace of the first 
composer, Valmiki. This is the birthplace of Veda Vyasa, who 
classified the Vedas. This is the land traversed by Lord Bud- 
dha. This is a land of merit and sacrifice. This is the birthplace 
of spiritual aspirants, seers and sages. 

But, the modern man does not have even an iota of sacri- 
fice. “Na karmana na prajaya dhanena thyagenaike arnritat- 
vamanusu (immortality can be attained only through sacrifice; 
neither wealth nor progeny nor good deeds can confer it).” So, 
cultivate the spirit of sacrifice. It is possible only when you 
develop love within. 


Develop love, practice sacrifice 


There are many rich people in this country. There are many 
intellectuals. We have also men of valor. All are here. But 
what is the use? There is hatred between person and person. 
There is hatred and enmity between people of the same profes- 
sion. It is a very bad quality. All are one; be alike to everyone. 
You have to love everybody. But, today, people are not 
broadminded. There should be expansion love. Today, there is 
only contraction love. 


The man who goes by the mind will ruin himself. 
He is worse than an animal. 
The one who goes by the intellect is the one of wis- 
dom. 
[Telugu Poem] 


So, you have to grow in intellect. As long as the mind per- 
sists, you are bound in illusion, you are bound to suffer. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 80 


It is the mind that causes misery. It is the mind that is full 
of desires. It is the mind that makes heaven or hell. Mano 
moolam idam jagat (this world is the creation of the mind). 
Since you are caught up with the whims and vagaries of the 
mind, you have forgotten the eternal path. 

Embodiments of Love! Love everybody, but do not trust 
anybody. You have to repose your trust only in God. What is 
the reason? Why should you not trust man? Man is not perma- 
nent. The Gita says the world is transitory, fleeting, and im- 
permanent. 


Human body is not permanent. 

It is full of dirt and diseases. 

It cannot cross this ocean of life. 

Oh man, never think that this life is eternal. 
[Telugu Poem] 


Love is within you 


People go by this body and forget the divinity within. Have 
strong faith in God. Do not have faith in this body, which is 
temporary. Body is like a water bubble, mind is like a mad 
monkey. Don’t follow the body, don’t follow the mind. Follow 
the conscience. That is the principle of the Atma. You will ex- 
perience divinity only when you follow your conscience. 

You may worship God in any name and form. God does 
not take into consideration your caste or community. He ex- 
pects only love. You don't need to do penance or undertake any 
rigorous spiritual practice. You can cultivate love easily. Love 
is within you. Develop love, which already exists. You have to 
share this love with everybody. Love even the one who hates 
you. To harm a person who harmed you is nothing great. Real 
greatness lies in loving the person who harmed you. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 81 


Know your true identity 


Embodiments of Love! Human life is full of love. What is 
the purpose of life? It is love and love alone. Love is God. Live 
in love. Divinity manifests only when you develop love. There 
is no need to search for Him anywhere. The Bible said so. To- 
day, man is in search of God. Why should you search for God 
when He is everywhere? You are God. All sadhana (spiritual 
practice) will go in vain if you do not know your true identity. 
Instead of asking others, “who are you, who are you,” better 
ask yourself, “who am I, who am I.” This is my book. This is 
my tumbler. Then who am I? This feeling of “my”, is maya 
(illusion). First know who you are. 

All this is matter. All this is negative. You are the master of 
this material world. Master the mind and be a mastermind. You 
should make an effort to know your true identity. To know 
this, you should first give up body attachment. 

This is my handkerchief. When I say this is “my handker- 
chief,” I am separate from the handkerchief. Similarly, when I 
say this is “my body,” I am separate from the body. “My 
mind” means I am separate from my mind. Then who am I? 
Constant enquiry on these lines would lead you to self realiza- 
tion. 

People are heroes in doing experiments in the laboratory, 
but zeros in experience. You should be heroes in the practical 
field. It is useless to be a hero in reading books or in giving 
lectures. There is only one hero, and He is God. Ekam sath 
vipra bahudha vadanti is the teaching of the Vedas. God is the 
only truth. All the rest is falsehood. Everything becomes truth 
in the company of God. 

Zero preceded by one becomes ten. As the number of zeros 
increases, the value also increases. If the number one is erased, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 82 


nothing remains. Therefore, hero becomes zero if he forgets 
God. You may be an intellectual with great erudition and ex- 
alted position. But, you cannot call yourself intelligent if you 
forget God. 


Easy way to know God 


Science has progressed to a great extent in Bharat. Man has 
undertaken space travel also. But what is the use? Man wants 
to know what is there in space. He wants to know what is there 
at the moon. He wants to reach even the sun. First recognize 
the divinity within yourself. Open the doors of your heart. De- 
velop love more and more. Understand the truth. Experience 
God. There lies the bliss. It is very easy to know God, but man 
does not understand this. 

You have to make every effort to understand the immanent 
divinity. The divinity within is covered by ego and anger. 
Therefore, it is said, “Moham hithva punar vidya (real knowl- 
edge dawns when attachment is destroyed).” Where does this 
attachment come from? Excessive desires lead to attachment. 

Embodiments of Love! All are embodiments of God. “Sa- 
hasra seersha Purusha sahasraksha sahasrapad (God has 
thousands of heads, eyes and feet).” You will experience it 
once you enquire deep within. 

You may attain peace by undertaking Japa (repetition of 
the name), dhyana (meditation), and yoga. But this peace is not 
permanent; it is temporary. To attain permanent peace, develop 
love within. Love can turn earth into sky and sky into earth. 
This sacred love is within you. But, you direct it in the wrong 
direction and thereby it gets perverted. You are responsible for 
the loss and suffering. You are responsible for the wicked ac- 
tions and agitations outside. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 83 


The previous speaker spoke about diseases and their cure. 
Why do diseases arise? The number of doctors is increasing 
day by day. Today, we have a doctor for every family. Each 
house has at least two patients. Most of the diseases are psy- 
chological. You are bound to be sick if you go on feeling you 
are sick. Never think you are sick. Always have the feeling that 
you are happy and healthy. Develop sacred love and experi- 
ence your innate divinity. This is the culture of Bharat. Bharata 
— Bha means effulgence. Effulgence is God, Rata means “to 
love”. One who has love for God is a true Bharatiya (Indian). 

Intelligence is gifted to mankind to know God, not to 
amass wealth. Why do you study? You have to study to get rid 
of ignorance. True education lies in giving up ignorance and 
recognizing divinity. 


Man faces problems in life because he lacks unity 


Embodiments of Love! Repeated teachings do not help you 
to understand Divinity. You are not able to understand Divinity 
due to the consequences of your actions in many past lives. 
Today, human values are on the decline. Man originated lakhs 
of years ago. But, till this day, he has not understood human 
values. It is said, “Proper study of mankind is man.” What is 
this proper study of mankind? It is the unity of thought, word, 
and deed. Man faces problems in life because he lacks unity. 

Let there be perfect harmony in thought, word, and deed 
right from this day. You should say what you think and do 
what you say. You do not need to search for God. You are 
God. God is in you, with you, above you, below you. and 
around you. Understand this truth and turn your vision inward. 
Only then you can attain bliss. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 84 


I have been coming to Mumbai for many years. What have 
you achieved during this period? What spiritual practices have 
you undertaken? What truths have you known? Today, people 
crave bookish knowledge, superficial knowledge, and general 
knowledge, but they do not have practical knowledge. The one 
who has practical knowledge will have understanding of the 
divinity. But, today, people are heroes at platform and zeros in 
practice. You should be heroes in practice. Put into practice at 
least one sacred principle. At least speak the truth or develop 
love. That is enough. There is no greater sadhana (spiritual 
discipline) than this. Sathyannasti paro dharma (there is no 
greater dharma than adhering to Truth). What is dharma? True 
dharma lies in developing love. It is love that unifies all. This 
love will help you to experience unity in diversity. 


Bhajan singing makes the heart sacred 


Embodiments of Divine Atma! Whatever spiritual path you 
tread, it should help you to uproot ignorance. What is igno- 
rance? It is the belief in all that is outside, the external sce- 
nario. You have to discriminate whether it is right or wrong, 
good or bad. You should have samyak drishti (right vision). 
Then you will attain deservedness. 

I am always ready to tell you the easy path to Divinity. I 
will be happy only when you are happy. Make every effort to 
put into practice what you hear. 

Bhajans are highly sacred. Bhajan singing makes the heart 
sacred. What is important is that it should come out from the 
heart. Bhajan is not just rhythm, tune and beat. You should 
sing God's name with love. You will see the manifestation of 
Divinity with your physical eyes when you sing His glory with 
all love. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 85 


Many noble souls merged in God through love. Don't you 
know Mira, who attained liberation by chanting Krishna's 
name? Prahlada was bitten by serpents, trampled upon by ele- 
phants, and given poison. Yet, chanted God's name and at- 
tained liberation. He considered everything divine. Yad dha- 
vam tad bhavati (as is the feeling, so is the experience). So, 
you should think of God with love. 


14 March 1999. 
Mumbai 


This Sai has come in order to achieve the supreme 
task of uniting the entire mankind as one family 
through the bond of brotherhood; of affirming and 
illumining the inner reality of each being in order 
to reveal the divine, which is the basis on which 
the entire cosmos rests; and of instructing all to 
recognise the comming divine heritage that binds 
man to man, so that man can rid himself of the 
animal and rise to the divine, which is his goal! 

— Baba 


Start New Year with spirit of love 


If the feelings and intentions 
Behind your actions are good, 
The results will also be good. 
If your intentions are bad, 
You will certainly meet with failure. 
[Telugu Poem] 


Embodiments of Love! Thoughts are the permanent asset of 
man. Thoughts are based on feelings and feelings on the mind. 
As the thoughts, so the mind. If thoughts are good, humanity 
will blossom into Divinity. Today man’s behaviour is not good 
because his thoughts are polluted. Because the thoughts and 
actions of man have become perverted, the country is passing 
through troubles and turmoil. Man has filled his mind with 
thoughts about mundane, ephemeral, and transient things. This 
is totally negative in nature. Only thoughts based on Truth are 
positive. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 87 


Spiritual wealth of Bharat 


In ancient times, the Bharatiyas (Indians), before partaking 
of food, used to chant the prayer. “Annam Brahma, Raso 
Vishnu, Bhokta Devo Maheswara (food is Brahma, the essence 
is Vishnu, and the one who partakes of it is Maheswara)”. The 
essence of food permeates the whole body and gives physical 
strength and satisfaction. It is the food that sustains the physi- 
cal body. The subtle part of the food becomes the mind, and 
the subtler part of the food becomes speech. Human quality is 
expressed through thoughts, words, and deeds. The gross part 
of food is Brahma, the subtle part is Vishnu, and the subtlest 
part is Siva. So, the Divine Trinity is present in the food that 
we eat. Sacred thoughts, good words, and noble deeds are the 
true human values. But modern man lacks in human values. 

Today, man is bereft of gratitude, which is one of the most 
essential qualities. He forgets the help rendered to him by oth- 
ers. As long as man is alive, he should be grateful for the help 
he received from others. There are two things you have to for- 
get: the help you have rendered to others and the harm others 
have done to you. If you remember the help you have ren- 
dered, you will always expect something in return. Remem- 
brance of the harm done to you by others generates in you a 
sense of revenge. You should remember only the help you re- 
ceived from others. The one with these sacred qualities is an 
ideal man. 

In this ephemeral and transient world, man always aspires 
for peace and security. But money, education, position of 
authority and physical comforts cannot confer peace and secu- 
rity. Peace originates from the heart. Man can experience 
peace and security only when his heart is filled with love. Love 
is God, love is Nature, love is life and love is the true human 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 88 


value. Bereft of love, man is equivalent to a corpse. You 
should lead a life filled with love. Love even the worst of your 
enemies. It is on the basis of the principle of love that the cul- 
ture of Bharath has declared: Loka samastha sukhino bhavantu 
(May the whole world be happy!). 


The land of Bharat is suffused with love 


Since ancient times, this sacred land of Bharath has shared 
its spiritual wealth with the rest of the world to foster peace 
and security. It is because of its immense spiritual wealth that 
Bharat continues to be a land of peace and security in spite of 
many foreign invasions in the past. Without Bharat, there 
would be no trace of spirituality in this world. There is truth in 
the air of Bharat. There is dharma in the dust of Bharat. The 
land of Bharat is suffused with love. The water of Bharat over- 
flows with compassion. 

Having taken birth in this sacred land of Bharat, you must 
uphold and sustain the principles of truth, love, righteousness, 
and compassion. For whose sake should you uphold these 
principles? Is it for the sake of society or for the country? No. 
You should uphold these principles for your own sake. Only 
when everyone fosters these principles will the country pros- 
per. 

Today man is engulfed in selfishness and self-interest and 
is leading an unsacred life. Our ancient seers used to partake of 
food with the feeling that food is Brahma, the essence is 
Vishnu, and the one who partakes of it is Siva. Such a feeling 
would foster pure and sacred thoughts in us. Today, man has 
strayed away from the path of truth and righteousness. People 
criticise those who follow truth and righteousness. It is very 
easy to criticise, but very difficult to understand. The Vedas 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 89 


say: Sathyam vada, dharmam chara (speak the truth and fol- 
low righteousness). Since ancient times, the Bharatiyas have 
considered these two as their two eyes. 


True spirit of celebrating Ugadi 


You would have celebrated many Ugadi (New Year day) 
festivals in your life. Certain traditional practices go with every 
festival, such as having a sacred bath, wearing new clothes, 
cleaning the house and decorating it with buntings of green 
leaves. Greatness lies in purifying our thoughts, not merely the 
transient human body. The significance of a festival does not 
lie in wearing new clothes but in cultivating new and noble 
thoughts. The house should be decorated not merely with the 
buntings of green leaves, but with buntings of love. Share your 
love with everyone who visits your house. Only then would we 
be celebrating the festival in its true spirit. 

Today, we are celebrating Ugadi, which means the com- 
mencement of a new era. It denotes the beginning of Kali 
Yuga, not Krita Yuga or Treta Yuga. This is the beginning of 
Nuthana Samvathsara (New Year). Vathsara is another name 
of God. That is why God is extolled as Vathsaraswarupaya 
Namah (salutations to the one who is the embodiment of Vath- 
sara). Time is God. Vathsara is its cosmic form. So, time and 
Vathsara connote the same Divinity. 

The New Year has to be sanctified by sacred thoughts and 
broad feelings. Today, humanity is stricken with fear and rest- 
lessness. Courage and strength are on the decline, because you 
have unsacred thoughts and wicked feelings. Your enemies are 
not outside. Your bad thoughts are your worst enemies and 
thoughts based on Truth are your best friends. But today, peo- 
ple do not befriend the thoughts based on Truth, which are es- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 90 


sentially divine. You have to make friendship with sath, the 
eternal truth. Sath means Being, the ever-existent God. The 
worldly friends and enemies change with the passage of time, 
but sath is the true and eternal friend. This friend is always 
with you, in you, around you, above you, below you and pro- 
tects you just as the eyelid protects the eye. 


Exemplary devotion of Delhi seva dal 


Embodiments of Love! There is nothing great in going 
round the world and getting accolades. Lakhs and lakhs of 
people in Delhi and Mumbai enjoyed the divine bliss during 
Swami’s visit last week. It was not a temporary joy; it was the 
everlasting love etched in their hearts. That is why, while I was 
leaving Delhi, they expressed their feelings by putting up a 
huge banner with the words, “Thanks for the visit. Please come 
back soon!|” 

The aerodrome is situated miles away from the city. During 
Swami’s drive, thousands of youth of the age group of 25 to 30 
flanked both sides of the road with devotion, discipline, and 
enthusiasm. Usually, one does not find such well-behaved 
youth in cities like Mumbai and Delhi. It was a clear indication 
of the transformation brought about in them. 

What wonderful service they have rendered! I have been 
observing the service activities of various seva dal groups for 
the past fifty years, but the service rendered by the Delhi Seva 
Dal (the Sai volunteer service organisation) was of very high 
standard. They discharged their duties, forgoing even food and 
drink. They said, “Since Swami says duty is God and work is 
worship, we are ready to sacrifice even our lives in following 
Swami’s commands. Only then we shall have pleased Swami.” 
Such was their devotion! 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 oF 


No one exactly knew Swami’s schedule. Therefore, one 
could find a seva dal every nook and corner of Delhi carrying a 
cellular phone to exchange minute to minute information re- 
garding Swami’s movements. There was no complaint whatso- 
ever from any quarter. You are all aware of the fact that neither 
the police nor the media take note of our seva dal activities. 
But this time in Delhi, the police personnel as well as the 
newspapers extolled our seva dal sky high. They said such 
selfless and dedicated youth are found only in Sri Sathya Sai 
Organisation. 

The seva dal youth were ten thousand in number. Whom- 
soever I asked, “What do you want, boy?” the reply was one 
and the same, “Swami, I want You, I want Your love.” They 
were very humble in their approach and spoke softly and 
sweetly. I often say, “You cannot always oblige, but you can 
speak always obligingly.” That obliging nature was very much 
evident in Delhi Seva Dal. They brought a good name to the 
Sri Sathya Sai Organisation by their exemplary behaviour. In 
other states also, seva dal are doing good work. The whole 
world has recognised the truth that if there is any organisation 
where love, unity, friendship, co-operation, and selfless service 
are practised, it is only the Sri Sathya Sai Organisations. There 
are many organisations in this world, but nowhere would you 
find the idealism that is found in Sri Sathya Sai Seva Organi- 
sation. 


Revival of ancient culture of Bharat 


While I was in Mumbai, the Health Minister of Maharash- 
tra came to Me and said, “Swami, we have many doctors here 
and we would like to work in collaboration with the Super 
Specialty Hospital in Prasanthi Nilayam. Every little activity 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 92 


that Sri Sathya Sai Organisation undertakes is an ideal to the 
rest of the world. We have seen many organisations, but the 
spirit of sacrifice that is found in Sri Sathya Sai Organisation is 
not found anywhere else. We have spoken to many members 
of Sai Seva Dal. They are all highly devoted, dedicated and 
disciplined. Such an ideal organisation should spread all over 
the world.” 


Be “bigger”, not beggar 


Swami does not ask anything for Himself. Today there are 
many Swamis and Ammas who are making money in the name 
of spirituality. The Sri Sathya Sai Organisation has no con- 
nection whatsoever with them. You should not have anything 
to do with them. The Sri Sathya Sai Seva Organisation should 
progress with the spirit of sacrifice. Only then will the pristine 
culture of Bharat be firmly re-established. It will not be long 
before you will be a witness to this. Very soon, we are going to 
revive the ancient culture of Bharat. All the members of Sri 
Sathya Sai Organisation should develop sacred thoughts and 
noble feelings. We should perform all our actions based on 
Truth. Then victory will certainly be ours. 

Keep this in mind: never ask anything from anybody. If 
you want anything, come to Me, I will give. Only beggars 
stretch their hands in front of others, not devotees. You should 
be “bigger”, not beggar. Help the poor and the needy, serve 
society, and lead an ideal life. Only then you will be called a 
true devotee. I have explained to you many times the qualities 
of a true devotee. They are: virtues, good intellect, truth, devo- 
tion, discipline, duty. Participate in service activities. 

This morning I am going to Kadugodi to inaugurate a 
vriddhashram (home for the aged). There are many old people 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 93 


in society who are leading a miserable life, since they have 
been deserted by their children. Anybody is welcome in this 
home for the aged. This is started to see that the old people 
may lead a peaceful life till their last breath. One should be in 
bliss at the time of death, and not be shedding tears of sorrow. 
One’s last moments are the foundation for one’s next birth. 


Life bereft of sacrifice in inhuman 


All members of Sri Sathya Sai Organisation should culti- 
vate the spirit of sacrifice and service to help others. There are 
many affluent people in the society, but few have this spirit of 
sacrifice. 

Life bereft of sacrifice is inhuman. The Vedas said: “Na 
karmana na prajaya dhanena thyagenaike amruthatwamanasu 
(one can attain immortality neither by rituals nor by progeny 
nor wealth; only sacrifice confers immortality).” 

We do not need any publicity or advertisement. Work si- 
lently. Before leaving for Delhi, I instructed Kulwant Rai not 
to give any prior publicity about My impending visit. Why 
worry about newspapers? There should be heart to heart and 
love to love connection. Love expands automatically all over 
the world. We are able to listen to the programmes broadcast 
from the Delhi radio station through radio waves. Similarly, 
good thoughts are like radio waves. These waves should spread 
through love, not through publicity. Prachar (publicity) is not 
the achar (practice) of Sai Organisation. We should work for 
the progress of the Organisation through practice and spread 
the message of love throughout the world. The entire humanity 
should unite and live like one family. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 94 


Ushering in an era of Peace 


The name of the New Year is Pramadi, which implies dan- 
gerous prospects. But no danger would befall this world. The 
name may imply danger, but in reality the world will attain 
prosperity. We shall escape from all dangers. Be prepared to 
face anything with love and broadmindedness. There are no 
dangers either for the world or for the nation or for the society 
or for the family. A person bearing the name Dharmaraja may 
not follow dharma at all. Similarly, this year, although named 
Pramadi, will not bring any calamities. 

Embodiments of Love! Do not get elated by listening to 
what happened in Delhi and Mumbai. They have done it for 
their satisfaction. I have nothing to do with that. Praise or cen- 
sure does not affect Me. Your devotion also should be steady. 
Some people shower praise on Me only when their desires are 
fulfilled. Happiness is obtained not when desires are fulfilled, 
but when desires are destroyed. Whether your desires are ful- 
filled or not, always be happy. Strive to attain this state of 
bliss. Develop friendship with God. Worldly friends have their 
dwellings outside, but God, your true friend, resides in your 
heart. So, you need not search for Him outside. Turn your vi- 
sion inward and there you will find God. 

Love is the most essential of all the qualities we should 
possess. So, cultivate selfless love. Love is God, God is love. 
Today is the New Year day. In this New Year, drive away all 
bad thoughts, breed good feelings, and spend time in contem- 
plation of God. When you tread this path, you can achieve 
anything. You will not have any problems. Many of you are 
apprehensive of what lies in store for you this year. Nothing 
will happen. What we encounter depends on our thoughts. So, 
entertain good thoughts, and you are bound to be successful. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 95 


Keep in mind the welfare of nation and society 


Embodiments of Love! I bless you with a long, happy and 
healthy life. Set an ideal to the rest of the country. Very soon, 
all countries will come together and will attain peace and secu- 
rity. I told Vajpayee, “Vajpayee, you are a good person, mak- 
ing efforts in the right direction. But develop friendship with 
Pakistan and China. If India, Pakistan, and China become 
united, they will make a formidable force.” I told this on 11th 
evening. Vajpayee again came on the 13th and informed that 
he was happy that both Pakistan and China had responded 
positively to his invitation. He said, “It is Swami’s Divine Will 
that has made it possible.” 

But, in fact, there is no unity amongst Bharatiyas (Indians) 
themselves. Today, one finds several groups in a single party. 
Parties may vary, ideologies may differ, but all should stand 
united. Never attach undue importance to parties and ideolo- 
gies. Keep in mind the welfare of the nation. The welfare of 
the world depends on the welfare of the nation. The welfare of 
the nation depends on the welfare of the society. So, whatever 
you do, bear in mind the welfare of the society and the nation. 
There may be differences of opinion, but they should not stand 
in the way of unity. This is what the ancient culture of Bharat 
taught in the beginning. 


Let us move together, let us grow together 
In intelligence and share the knowledge 
That we have acquired. 
Let us live in peace and harmony 
without any conflicts. 
[Telugu Poem] 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 96 


Only then Bharat will prosper. Bharat is the leader and an 
ideal to the rest of the world in the field of spirituality. So, all 
Bharatiyas should foster broad feelings. Today the country is 
facing problems because people have become narrow-minded. 


The worst enemies of man 


Every human being has the evil tendencies of kama (lust), 
krodha (anger), lobha (greed), etc. in him. The great epics, Ra- 
mayana, Bhagavata, and Mahabharata, teach good lessons to 
control lust, greed and anger, which are the enemies of man. 

Ravana, who had mastered all sixty-four branches of 
knowledge and was a great scholar and a mighty warrior, lost 
his life and caused the ruination of his entire clan because of 
lust. It is not enough if you merely read the Ramayana; you 
should grasp its real significance. 

Hiranyakasipu was a great scientist. Today, scientists have 
traveled only up to the moon, but Hiranyakasipu could travel 
even to the sun. He had control over all five elements, but he 
became a victim of his anger. His anger was directed at God 
Himself. Ultimately, what happened? He ruined himself. He 
subjected his son to all sorts of trials and tribulations and 
sought to kill him by many means, like throwing him from the 
hilltop, casting him into the sea, putting him in a pit of poison- 
ous snakes and making elephants trample upon him. Because 
Prahlada was chanting the name of Narayana (God) cease- 
lessly, all the obstacles became Narayana for him and he came 
out unscathed. That is why it is said, Yath bhavam, that bha- 
vathi (as is the feeling, so is the experience). God manifests on 
the basis of the feelings of the devotee. If you pray to God with 
purity of heart and love, you will experience God. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 97 


In the Mahabharata, Duryodhana personified greed. He re- 
fused to share the kingdom with the Pandavas and denied them 
their rightful share. Due to this greed, he perished along with 
his entire clan. 

These three illustrations echo the need for the eradication 
of the feelings of lust, anger and greed. The Pandavas emerged 
victorious because they practiced all the human values of 
sathya, dharma, santhi, prema, and ahimsa. If you follow these 
values, success will follow automatically. 

Today, New Year has begun. With sacred feelings and di- 
vine thoughts, cultivate the spirit of love in you. God is not 
found separately in a temple or in an Ashram, etc. Truth is 
God. Love is God. Dharma is God. When you worship God by 
following these principles, He will manifest Himself then and 
there. There is no doubt about this. Love God wholeheartedly. 
Pray to God and make friends with Him. You can achieve 
anything if you have God as your friend. 

Learn today to fill your heart with love and adorn your 
hand with the ornament of sacrifice. Sacrifice is the jewel for 
the hands. Truth is the necklace one should wear. You must 
develop the habit of adorning these jewels in the New Year. In 
this New Year, develop divine love and foster peace in the 
country. Pray with a broad feeling: Loka samastha sukhino 
bhavantu (May the whole world be happy)! Start the New Year 
with this prayer. Then, you will lead a blissful and peaceful life 
full of enthusiasm. To lead such a life, cultivate noble 
thoughts. Love God and make friendship with Him, and you 
are bound to be successful in all your endeavours. 


18 March 1999 
Sai Ramesh Hall, Brindavan 


Relevance of Ramayana 
to modern life 


The whole universe is under the control of God. 
God is governed by Truth. 
Noble souls are the guardians of Truth. 
Such noble souls are verily 
The embodiments of Divinity. 
[Sanskrit sloka] 


Embodiments of Love! All are essentially the embodiments 
of Divinity. Eswara sarva bhoothanam (God dwells in all be- 
ings). Isavasyam idam jagat (God permeates the entire uni- 
verse). Where is the need to search for such an all-pervasive 
Divinity? 

Sarvata Pani Padam Tath Sarvathokshi Shiromu- 
kham, Sarvata Sruthimalloke Sarvamavruthya Thi- 
sthati. 

[Sanskrit sloka] 


How can you search for Him who is moving about with 
thousands of feet, thousands of eyes, and thousands of ears? It 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 99 


is utterly foolish to search for God. God is within you. Since 
you have forgotten your true Self and are carried away by the 
temporary and transient physical body, you are unable to un- 
derstand the Divine. When you get rid of body attachment and 
develop attachment towards the Self, only then you can under- 
stand the divine Atmic Principle. 


Values contained in Rama's story 


Embodiments of Love! Life is like a game of chess; not 
merely that, it is like a battlefield. The story of Rama teaches 
us the threefold Dharma (code of conduct) pertaining to the 
individual, the family and the society. You have to make every 
effort to understand the duties of the individual, the family and 
the society. Rama is the ocean of compassion. He is love per- 
sonified. It is possible to understand His divinity only through 
the path of love. Love is the undercurrent of human life. Man 
will be able to manifest his innate divinity only when he de- 
velops love within. 

Modern society needs to follow the dharma that is con- 
tained in the epic Ramayana. Why? Today, the son is not pay- 
ing heed to his father's advice, and the parents are not con- 
cerned about the future of the son. Devotion to the guru should 
be the aim of the students. But students are not having regard 
for their teachers and the teachers are not imparting anything 
good to them. In such a situation, everyone needs to follow the 
ideals of the Ramayana. The Ramayana speaks of the true 
identity of the individual, the real significance of the family, 
and the sanctity of the society. The Ramayana teaches the im- 
portance of human values. Today, corruption is rampant in all 
fields such as business, education, and politics. Under these 
circumstances, the principles of the Ramayana are very im- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 100 


portant. It explains in detail the relationship that should exist 
between brothers, the father and the son, the preceptor and the 
disciple. 


The moral, social, and spiritual values om Ramayana 


All of us live on the same earth. The same sky is above all 
of us. We breathe the same air and drink the same water. Ig- 
noring this underlying principle of unity man visualizes multi- 
plicity, which is a big mistake. The Ramayana centers on the 
principle of unity in diversity. Today, since man has lost the 
ability to see unity in diversity, he is immersed in restlessness. 
What we need today is to see unity in diversity and the divinity 
behind this unity. 

The culture of Bharat says: Sathyam bruyath, priyam bru- 
yath, na bruyath sathyam apriyam (speak the truth, speak 
sweetly and softly, and never utter truth in an unpalatable 
way). Sathyam bruyath is the moral value. Priyam bruyath is 
the social value. Na bruyath sathyam apriyam is the spiritual 
value. So, the moral, social, and spiritual values are all con- 
tained in the above statement. 

The Ramayana teaches these values in the simplest way. 
But man has forgotten the message of the Ramayana and is 
leading the life of a Ravana. Ravana did not understand this 
principle of divinity. There was no transformation in him, 
though he had acquired all forms of knowledge and had done 
severe penance. He ruined himself on account of excessive de- 
sires. Before his death, he gave a message to the people: “O 
people, with all my skills and expertise in different forms of 
knowledge I became a victim of desires. I lost my sons, ruined 
my clan, and burnt my kingdom to ashes, since I could not 
control my desires. Do not become a victim of desires like me. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 101 


Follow the path of truth and righteousness and be like Rama. 
Experience divinity.” 


Put Ramayana's teaching into practice 


The relationship that existed between the brothers of Rama 
is an ideal to the rest of the humanity. They lived in unity in 
spite of troubles and turmoil. Mother Kaikeyi wanted her son 
Bharata to ascend the throne of Ayodhya, but Bharata never 
had any such desire. He went to Chitrakoota mountain, fell at 
the feet of Rama, and prayed, He, being the eldest, should take 
over the kingdom of Ayodhya. But Rama did not yield to his 
request. Quoting the Vedic dictum Mathru Devo Bhava, Pithru 
Devo Bhava. He exhorted Bharata to obey the command of the 
father and fulfill the desire of his mother by becoming king of 
Ayodhya. Rama promised him that He would render all help 
and support. That is why even today, people extol Rama as 
Sathyavakparipalaka (one who adheres to truthful speech). 

Today, many people read the holy Ramayana, but few un- 
derstand its essence. They spend their time in acquiring book- 
ish knowledge and superficial knowledge but fail to have 
practical knowledge. There are many people who can explain 
the teachings of Ramayana in a beautiful way, but how many 
of them obey the command of their fathers in their daily life? 
Not many! What is the use of reading various texts if we do 
not put into practice the message contained in them? Can any- 
one enjoy the taste of various delicious items such as mysore 
pak, gulab jamoon, and jilebi by merely repeating their names? 
No. One can enjoy the taste only when one eats them. Mere 
textual information is of no use. But, today, man is interested 
only in information and not transformation. Intellect will blos- 
som only when there is transformation. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 102 


If your ambitions are not fulfilled, 
do not waver or get depressed. 
He is a realized one who is cheerful 
in the face of all adversities. 
[Telugu Poem] 


One has to face many obstacles in life, but one should 
never get depressed. Life is a challenge, meet it. Life is a 
dream, realize it. Life is a game, play it. Life is love, enjoy it. 
Be cheerful and courageous in the face of adversities; never 
give scope to any weakness whatsoever. The Vedanta declared, 
Na Ayamatma balaheenena labhya (a weak-minded person 
cannot realize the Atma). A weak-minded person cannot ac- 
complish anything. So, be strong-minded. Develop faith in that 
which is good. 


Since there is no fear of sin and love for God, 

Humanness is on the decline in human beings. 

This is the cause for lack of peace in the world. 
[Telugu Poem] 


Therefore, man should cultivate Daiva preeti, papa bheeti, 
and sangha neeti (love for God, fear of sin and morality in so- 
ciety). Though Rama and Ravana were equally well versed in 
all forms of knowledge, sage Valmiki extolled Rama as Divine 
and condemned Ravana as a foolish one. What is the reason? 
Ravana did not translate into action the knowledge he had ac- 
quired; on the contrary he used it for wicked purposes. On the 
other hand, Rama translated all his knowledge into action and 
gave joy to one and all. Sarvaloka hithe ratah (Rama was en- 
gaged in the welfare of all). Sarvajnanopasampannah (He was 
the master of all forms of knowledge). Sarvasamudhita guna- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 103 


ihi (He was the embodiment of all good qualities). These are 
the three aspects that manifested Rama's divinity. 

Whoever has these three aspects is essentially divine. In 
fact, everyone is divine. But because of attachment to the 
body, man is not able to understand his divine nature. Man can 
experience and enjoy divinity only by treading along the path 
of love. Love is God; God is love. So, live in love. 


Start the day with love 
Spend the day with love 
Fill the day with love 
End the day with love 
This is the way to God. 


The best sadhana: love everybody 


The cause for man's suffering is that he has constricted his 
love to himself and his family. He should develop the broad 
feeling that all are his brothers and sisters. Expansion of love is 
life; contraction of love is death. All are the children of God. 
All are sparks of the Divine. Lord Krishna declared in the 
Bhagavad Gita: Mamaivamso jeevaloke jeevabhutha sanatha- 
na (eternal Atma in all bodies is a part of My Being). So, man 
should have the broad feeling to identify himself with every- 
one. Humanity can never progress without broad feelings. 


See no evil, see what is good 
Hear no evil, hear what is good 
Talk no evil, talk what is good 
Think no evil, think what is good 
Do no evil, do what is good 
This is the way to God. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 104 


When there is such an easy path to divinity, why do you 
trouble yourself by undertaking rigorous spiritual practices 
such as japa, thapa, and yoga? Divinity cannot be attained by 
all these austerities. How easy it is to love everybody! 

Love all and think of divinity. Moses used to think of Jesus 
all the time. As a result, his face shone with divine effulgence. 
He resembled Jesus so much that people used to mistake him 
for Jesus. Ratnakara, a robber, on being advised by Narada 
started chanting the name of Rama incessantly, as a result of 
which the radiance of Rama was seen on his countenance and 
he became sage Valmiki. Rama is Lokadatha (the giver of the 
world) and Valmiki became Slokadatha (composer of the holy 
hymns). There is no difference between the giver and the com- 
poser. The Vedas declare, Brahmavid Brahmaiva Bhavathi (the 
knower of Brahman becomes Brahman himself). So, you 
should always think good, do good, talk good, and hear good. 
Only then you can become good. A true human being is one 
who is good. A wicked person can never be called a human 
being. 


The divine nature in man 


There are four qualities in man: the divine, demonic, ani- 
mal and human. What is the divine quality in man? Sarvaloka 
hithe ratah. (engaged in the welfare of everybody). That is the 
divine nature. What is the human quality? Always undertake 
meritorious deeds (punya). Never indulge in sin (papa). Paro- 
pakara punyaya papaya parapeedanam (rendering help to oth- 
ers is merit, harming others is sin). Help ever, Hurt never. 
What constitutes the animal quality in man? Jnanena sunya 
pasubhir samana (devoid of wisdom man is equivalent to an 
animal). The purpose of human life does not lie in merely eat- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 105 


ing, drinking, sleeping, and indulging in materialistic comforts. 
Even animals indulge in such activities. But unlike man, ani- 
mals do not possess the evil qualities of amassing, robbing, and 
stealing. Today man is human only in form, but not in behav- 
ior. 


Less luggage, more comfort 


Janthoonam narajanma durlabham (human life is the most 
difficult to attain of all living beings). The good that you expe- 
rience in this life is the result of meritorious deeds done in sev- 
eral past lives. This human life is not new. This message is 
contained in the word manava. Ma means 'not'; nava means 
'new', which means human life is not new. 

Today man has degenerated to the level of an animal due to 
excessive desires. Less luggage more comfort makes travel a 
pleasure. But, the desires (luggage) in man are multiplying day 
by day. Human life is a long journey. One should lead a divine 
life (divya jeevanam), not a mean life (deena jeevanam). Al- 
ways be happy. Difficulties do come in life. That is the law of 
nature. Never get disheartened by them. Difficulties are like 
passing clouds. Difficulties come and go, but morality comes 
and grows. Unfortunately, there is decline in moral values in 
the society today. 

Rama stood as a shining example of upholding the moral 
values in the society. Even when he was asked to leave for the 
forest at a time when he was supposed to be coronated, he was 
not perturbed in the least. Sukhadukhe samekruthva labhalab- 
hau jayajayau (he is an equal minded one who treats the duali- 
ties of life —pain and pleasure, victory and defeat, gain and 
loss— alike). Rama displayed this virtue of equanimity. To- 
day, man aspires for positions of authority though he does not 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 106 


deserve them. But Rama relinquished the position even though 
He deserved it. Rama was courageous in the face of adversi- 
ties. He never gave any scope for weakness. He led the life of a 
dheera (courageous one), not a deena (weak-minded). 

The same is the case of one who is in His company. Hanu- 
man, by contemplating on Rama incessantly, became a dheera. 
He displayed this quality of courageousness in the court of Ra- 
vana. But the same Hanuman stood like a deena (humble one) 
in Rama’s presence. This drives home the point that one 
should be a deena (humble one) in front of divinity and dheera 
(courageous one) in the face of evil. 


Control your desire to the extent possible 


Annihilate the evil qualities of kama (desire), krodha (an- 
ger), and lobha (greed). Ravana ruined not only himself, but 
also his dynasty because of kama. Therefore, to the extent pos- 
sible control your desires. Today the Government has imposed 
ceiling on land and property through legislation, but what is 
essential is ceiling on desires. Not only did Hiranyakasipu re- 
frain from chanting the name of Lord Hari, he also insisted that 
his son Prahlada follow suit. He developed hatred toward his 
own son for singing the praise of Lord Had against his wishes. 
This evil quality of anger led to his doom. 

Duryodhana was greed personified. He was not prepared to 
part with even a small piece of land. He subjected the Pan- 
davas to enormous hardships. What happened to him ulti- 
mately? He became a victim of his own greed. 

Desire, anger and greed are the greatest impediments in the 
path of spirituality. Render help to others, if possible. Never 
hate anybody under any circumstances. The essence of eight- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 107 


een Puranas is contained in these two maxims: Help ever, Hurt 
never. 


Spirituality promotes spirit of unity 


The story of the Ramayana reveals the ideal relationship 
that should exist between brothers. Lakshmana and Satrughna 
served Rama and Bharata respectively, with utmost devotion 
and sincerity. When Lakshmana fainted in the battlefield, 
Rama lamented, “In this world, I might find another mother 
like Kausalya, a wife like Sita, but definitely not a brother like 
Lakshmana.” A brother should be like this —one who respects 
elders and brings name and fame to the whole family. It is the 
unity amongst the brothers that brought reputation to the whole 
family. 

The same was the case with the Pandavas also. The five 
Pandavas could defeat hundred Kauravas because they stood 
united. Even though Vali and Sugriva were just two, they fell 
apart because of lack of unity. Rama restored the kingdom to 
Sugriva, since he completely surrendered to Him. Similar was 
the case with Ravana, Vibhishana, and Kumbhakarna. Any big 
task can be accomplished if the five fingers are united. Other- 
wise even a small task becomes extremely difficult. So, every- 
one should strive for unity. 


Spirituality destroys narrow mindedness and con- 
fers unity, cooperation and universal peace. 
[Telugu Poem] 


Unity is very essential. Through unity, you can understand 
spirituality. Do not hate anybody. Do not develop ill feelings 
towards others. Then you can become a true human being. 
Spiritual practices are just a waste of time if you cannot over- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 108 


come your selfishness. Do not engage in spiritual activities as- 
piring for your own liberation, because it would amount to 
selfishness. Work for the redemption of one and all. Let every- 
body attain divinity and experience divine bliss. You should 
have such broad feelings. Your welfare lies in the welfare of 
the society. 


Spend your life in selfless service 


Embodiments of Love! You do not need to undertake any 
spiritual practices. Experience the innate divinity in everyone 
by following the path of love. Love is God. Spend your life in 
selfless service. This is the teaching of Rama. 

In order to demonstrate to the world the ideal character of 
Lakshmana, Rama subjected him to a test. When Sita, Rama 
and Lakshmana were residing on Chitrakoota mountain, one 
day Lakshmana went into the forest to fetch some food. Taking 
this opportunity, Rama decided to test Lakshmana. He asked 
Sita to play her role in this divine drama. As Lakshmana was 
returning with food, Sita pretended to be asleep under a tree, 
keeping her head on the lap of Rama. Rama asked Lakshmana 
to keep Sita's head on his lap without disturbing her sleep as 
He had some other important work to attend to. 

Rama wanted to observe the feelings of Lakshmana. So, 
He assumed the form of a parrot and perched on the same tree. 
Considering Sita as his mother, Lakshmana closed his eyes and 
went into deep contemplation of Lord Rama. Rama in the form 
of a parrot started singing: 


It is easy to wake up someone who is fast asleep, 
but is it possible for anyone to wake up a person 
who is pretending to be asleep? 

[Telugu Poem] 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 109 


Sita pretended to be fast asleep and even started snoring! In 
all respects, Sita and Rama were a perfect match for each 
other. After some time, Rama returned as if from somewhere 
and 'woke up' Sita. Sita opened her eyes as if from deep sleep 
and expressed her satisfaction to Rama that she had a sound 
and undisturbed sleep. The /eelas (pranks) of God are mysteri- 
ous, wonderful, and sacred. God tests a devotee in order to 
shower His grace on him and protect him. Lakshmana fell at 
Rama's feet and said, “I am Your servant. It is my duty to serve 
You in the way You want me to.” 


Lakshaman’s sincerity and devotion 


When Sita was being taken away forcibly by Ravana, she 
bundled all her jewels and dropped them from above. The va- 
naras (monkeys) found the jewels and took them to Sugriva. 
When Rama and Lakshmana met Sugriva, he showed them the 
jewels and asked if they belonged to Sita. Since Rama did not 
know, He asked Lakshmana to see. Lakshmana replied, 
“Brother, I don't know whom these earrings and bracelets be- 
long to. But I am sure that these anklets belong to Mother 
Sita.” 

On being questioned as to how he could recognize Sita’s 
anklets, Lakshmana said, “It was my practice to prostrate at her 
lotus feet every morning. While doing so I had noticed Mother 
Sita's anklets.” 

Rama was pleased with Lakshmana’s sincerity and devo- 
tion and showered praises on him and said that he could not 
find a brother like Lakshmana anywhere in the world. Later 
Rama said that it was because of Lakshmana's strength and 
support that He could defeat Ravana and bring Sita back to 
Ayodhya. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 110 


The Ramayana demonstrates that anything can be achieved 
through sincerity and devotion. The story of the Ramayana is 
so enchanting and captivating that one feels like listening to it 
again and again. Bharatiyas (Indians) have been singing the 
story of Rama since ancient times. Everyone should try to un- 
derstand the essence of the Ramayana. The Ramayana teaches 
that one should have a good character, one should obey the 
command of the father and respect the parents, and there 
should be unity among brothers. If you follow these teachings 
in letter and spirit, your life itself will become a living Rama- 
yana. 


Heart is the real temple 


Students should understand that God is their best friend. 
All the worldly friends are lured by your position, power, and 
pelf. Once your position and power are gone, gone are your 
friends too. God is the only friend, in the real sense of the term. 
The whole world is a book, and your conscience is your real 
guru. Why trouble yourself going after various worldly gurus? 
Follow your conscience and experience divinity. The Principle 
of the Atma, which reveals the secrets of your mind, is your 
true guru. Guru is one who is formless and beyond all attrib- 
utes. 


Gurur-Brahma Gurur — Vishnu 
Gurur - Devo Maheswara, 
Guru Sakshath Param Brahma 
Thasmai Sri Gurave Namah. 


Consider God as your mother, father, friend, and every- 
thing. Take God as your guru, follow Him and merge in Him. 
If you have God as your guru, you can achieve everything in 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 111 


life. Develop love for God and be recipients of His love and 
grace. Develop friendship with God and the whole world will 
be under your control. Troubles and turmoil are part and parcel 
of one's life. Overcome them by chanting the divine name. Be 
fearless. 

Do not restrict God to temples and pilgrimage centers. He 
is Hridayavasi (indweller of the heart). He is in you, with you, 
above, you, around you. You do not need to visit various pil- 
grimage centers. Your heart is the real pilgrimage center. 

Mira also echoed the same feelings. When her husband 
asked her to leave the temple premises, she said to Krishna, 
“None can separate You from me. My heart is Your temple.” 
In the Gita, Lord Krishna declared, Kshetrajnam Chapi Maam 
Viddhi (recognise Me as the indweller of all beings). The body 
is the field, and the Atmic Principle is the indweller of all 
fields. So, the kshetra (field) and the kshetrajna (knower of the 
field) are within you. Bliss is not present in a foreign land; it is 
present within you. In order to experience bliss, develop love 
in your heart. 

You should pray to God to grant you that which He pos- 
sesses and you do not. What do you lack? Peace and bliss. Ask 
and it shall be granted. Do not ask God for the fulfillment of 
mean desires. All the worldly things are fleeting and momen- 
tary. Only God is immutable, pure, eternal, and immortal. So, 
spend your time in singing the glory of God. By sincere prayer, 
you can discover your latent divinity. 

At the time of his departure to the forest along with Rama 
and Sita, Sumitra counseled Lakshmana thus: “Never be under 
the impression that you are going to the forest. Wherever 
Rama and Sita are present, that itself is Ayodhya. This Ayod- 
hya without Sita and Rama is a veritable forest. Consider Sita 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 112 


and Rama as your mother and father and serve them to the best 
of your ability with all love, sincerity, faith and devotion.” You 
cannot find a woman greater than Sumitra in this world. She 
blessed her son to serve God wholeheartedly. The term Sumi- 
tra means good friend (Su - good, Mitra - friend). Such noble 
mothers like Sumitra and sons like Lakshmana with total de- 
votion to God are needed today. 

Unity is the need of the hour today. It is unity that protects 
the world. The prosperity and welfare of the society depends 
upon the individual. Our thoughts are our greatest asset. If the 
thoughts are sacred, you will have sacred results. Pleasure and 
pain are the consequences of your thoughts. So, sanctify your 
thoughts. When thoughts are good and powerful, you can 
achieve anything. 


25 March 1999 
Sai Ramesh Hall, Brindavan 


Do Sadhana with pure Feelings 


Truth is your true mother and Wisdom 
the true father, 
Dharma is the true brother and Compassion 
the true friend; 
The true wife is Peace and the true so 
Forgiveness, 
These six are in fact the true relations of man. 
[Sanskrit sloka] 


Embodiments of Love! Life is like an ocean with waves of 
joy and sorrow. Spirituality is the lighthouse to the people who 
are traveling in the ocean of Samsara. Spirituality does not 
mean rituals and worship alone. Spirituality is that which dem- 
onstrates unity in multiplicity. God is love personified and is 
installed in the heart of every man. That is why since time im- 
memorial, the Bharatiyas have prayed for the welfare of all 
people in the world. Spirituality has a certain discipline. Na 
sreyo niyamam vina (Nothing noble and great can be achieved 
without discipline). 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 114 


Spirituality and welfare of humanity 


In Tamil, there is a sacred book named Thirukural, which 
is equivalent to the Vedas. It was written by Thiruvalluvar. He 
took to the path of spirituality, worked for the welfare of hu- 
manity, and led a disciplined and peaceful life. He used to ask 
his wife to keep a cup of water and a needle by his side while 
he ate his food. As per the command of her husband, his wife 
did accordingly day after day, but not even once did she find 
him putting them to use while having food. When his wife 
asked him for the reason, he replied, “I don't want to waste 
even a single grain of rice. The purpose of this needle is to pick 
up the grain of rice if it were to fall outside my plate and to 
wash it clean with water before putting it back in the plate. So 
far I have not used this needle, since I have been very careful 
not to spill rice grains.” 

Annam Brahma, raso Vishnu, bhokta devo Maheswara 
(food is Brahma, the essence is Vishnu, and the one who par- 
takes of it is Maheswara). Food is called Brahma since its es- 
sence pervades the whole body and gives it strength. The 
prayer to Vishnu is to purify the mind, so that the body may be 
utilised in a proper way. The Eswara Principle demonstrates 
how to make use of the strong body and pure mind in a proper 
way. God resides in the heart of everyone in the form of love. 
But no one is making any effort to realise the Principal of Love 
in the heart. There is no life without love. Love is God. God is 
love. 

Today, man is leaving no stone unturned in order to expe- 
rience happiness. But his desires are increasing day by day, 
just as the ants that come out of an anthill. Increase in desires 
will only lead to restlessness but not happiness. Man aspires to 
be happy through the fulfillment of his desires; on the contrary, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 115 


he is becoming more and more restless. The lesser the desires 
are the greater the happiness will be. The Vedas teach that all 
the education that man acquires should be utilised for the wel- 
fare of society. The Vedas say, Sarvaloka hithe ratah (man 
should involve himself in the service of society). Sarvajnanopa 
sampannah (man should be a treasure of wisdom), Sarv 
asamudhita gunaihi (man should cultivate all good qualities). 
But today’s education does not confer these noble virtues. 
Modern education bestows mere bookish knowledge, which in 
turn becomes superficial knowledge. Today, there is no trace 
of practical knowledge in man. 

After his education, man should work for the welfare of 
society and the world at large. He should not have the narrow 
feeling that he and his family alone should be happy. Without 
the world, where is the family? Man and his family are de- 
pendent on society and the world at large. So, man and his 
family can be happy only when the world is safe and secure. 
Today in all fields of life, be it political or social, no one seems 
to be concerned about the welfare of the world. Selfishness and 
self-interest are widespread in all the fields. As long as there is 
selfishness and self-interest in the people of a country, it can- 
not prosper. 


Brahma and Bhrama 


Today man aspires to have the vision of Brahma, but is 
getting immersed in bhrama (illusion). Unity in multiplicity is 
Brahma and viewing multiplicity in unity is bhrama. Man has 
lost the vision of unity in diversity. He has become highly “in- 
telligent”, so as to divide unity into multiplicity. Fie upon such 
intelligence! Man should make an effort to see the unity in di- 
versity. That is the real sadhana (spiritual exercise). 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 116 


Practice the teachings of the Vedas to experience bliss 


Reading the sacred texts such as the Vedas, the Upani- 
shads, and the Puranas does not confer the vision of Brahma. 
Narada had studied the four Vedas and six Sastras. He was a 
great exponent of the Brahma Sutras and the Upanishads. In 
spite of all this, he could neither attain peace nor get rid of his 
delusion. So he approached the sages Sanaka, Sanandana, and 
Sanat Kumara and requested them to grant him peace and wis- 
dom. Sanat Kumara asked Narada what made him feel that he 
deserved to attain peace and wisdom. 

Narada replied that he had studied the four Vedas, the six 
Sastras, the Upanishads, and the Brahma Sutras. 

Then Sanat Kumara said, “Narada! No doubt, you have 
studied the Vedas and Upanishads, but have you put them into 
practice? It is a mistake to think that mere study of the Vedas 
and Sastras can confer peace and wisdom. One has to practice 
the teachings of the Vedas and Sastras in order to experience 
bliss.” 


Will the darkness in the world be dispelled by the 
message of light? 

Can the disease be cured by merely listening to the 
efficacy of medicine? 

Can the poor get rid of poverty by listening to the 
principles of Economics? 

Can hunger be satiated by mere repetition of the 
names of various delicious dishes? 

No. Similarly, you can attain bliss only when you 
put your knowledge into practice. 

[Telugu Poem] 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 117 


Sanat Kumara went on to say, “Narada, you say you have 
gone through the Upanishads. But have you understood the 
first declaration of the first Upanishad: Isavasyam Idam Sar- 
vam (God permeates the entire cosmos)? Have you recognised 
the Truth that God exists in everybody. You are chanting the 
slokas (verses), but you are not trying to experience them.” 


Dharma leads to divinity 


Today spiritual aspirants are wasting their time in such fu- 
tile exercises. Time is God. Time wasted is life wasted. Instead 
the aspirants should try to enter a path that will endow them 
with wisdom. There are nine paths of devotion. They are: sra- 
vanam (listening to the stories of the Lord), kirtanam (singing 
the glory of the Lord) Vishnusmaranam (contemplating on the 
form of the Lord), Padasevanam (serving the Lotus Feet), 
vandanam (salutation), archanam (worship), dasyam (servi- 
tude), sneham (friendship of the Lord), and Atmanivedanam 
(self-surrender). Are you putting any of these into practice in 
your daily life? No. You are merely mouthing words, but not 
practising. 

The proper study of mankind is man. What is the proper 
study? Your thoughts, words, and deeds must be in harmony 
with each other. Manasyanyath vachasyanyath karmanyanyath 
duratmanam (he is a wicked one whose thoughts, words, and 
deeds are not in harmony). In the modern world, you find such 
wicked people everywhere. But there are good people also. If 
there are no good people in the world, how can the sun rise? 
Good people are there in the world, no doubt. But, the pre- 
sent-day scenario is such that only the wicked seem to be pros- 
pering. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 118 


Sathyam matha, pitha jnanam (truth is your mother and 
wisdom is your father). A true father is one who imparts the 
knowledge of non-dualism to his son. But the present-day par- 
ents are not concerned about truth; whatever untruths their son 
utters to cover up his mistakes, they take that as truth! It is only 
because of such parents that the children are going in the 
wrong direction. Parents are to be blamed if the children take 
to the wrong path. As the parents, so are the children. If the 
parents themselves are found arguing with each other, the chil- 
dren will go a step ahead and engage themselves in fighting 
with each other! The condition of the country depends upon 
fathers and mothers. But today, the situation of the family is 
very unfortunate. 


Humility bestows deservedness 


Since ancient times, Bharat has radiated peace and happi- 
ness to the rest of the world with its power of spirituality. All 
the aspects of the culture of Bharat are suffused with divinity. 
The eyes, the ears, the nose and the hand are the different 
limbs of the body. Body is a limb of the society. Society is a 
limb of mankind. Mankind is a limb of nature. Nature is a limb 
of God. 

It is because of the impact of modern education that man is 
misusing his limbs. He has forgotten the truth that humility is 
the hallmark of true education. Education confers humility. 
Humility bestows deservedness. Deservedness will lead to 
dharma. It is through dharma that one can attain Divinity. 
Modern education has become job-oriented. Without yoga, 
what is the use of udyoga (job)? One has to attain yoga, which 
means control of the senses. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 119 


Buddha did penance (thapas) for many years in order to 
attain yoga. Ultimately, Buddha attained Nirvana (liberation). 
But, today, people are ruining themselves because they are 
immersed in thamas (dullness). Buddha laid emphasis on sam- 
yak drishti, samyak vak, samyak sravanam, samyak chintha- 
nam, and samyak karma. This can be interpreted as: 


See no evil, see what is good. 
Talk no evil, talk what is good. 
Hear no evil, hear what is good. 
Think no evil, think what is good. 
Do no evil, do what is good. 


Buddha made proper use of the five senses, experienced 
bliss and shared it with others. But, today all five senses are 
being misused. Actions are based on thoughts. So, man has to 
cultivate noble thoughts. Hridaya (heart) is the temple of God. 
Thoughts, words, and deeds will be pure, steady and selfless 
only when man has a pure hridaya and noble feelings. Purity, 
patience, and perseverance are very essential for mankind. 
Without firm faith, man cannot achieve anything in life. 


Happiness and sorrow co-exist 


Ages have passed, years have rolled by, but there is no 
transformation in man. When you have a bitter thing in your 
mouth, even the sweet tastes bitter. Sweet will taste sweet only 
when you spit out the bitter thing and rinse your mouth. What 
is that you have to do in order to pour milk into a glass, which 
is already full of water? You have to pour out the water and 
then pour in the milk. Likewise, man has to get rid of evil 
thoughts in order to cultivate sacred feelings. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 120 


Man's life is like an ocean full of opposite waves of union 
and separation. These waves co-exist; in fact one cannot exist 
without the other. So, one has to be equal-minded. 


Happiness and sorrow co-exist. 

It is impossible to separate them. 

One cannot have comforts alone. 

Comforts accrue from troubles and sufferings. 
[Telugu Poem] 


Man should purify his mind with pure thoughts 


Today we find pollution everywhere. The air that we 
breathe, the water that we drink, the sound that we hear, the 
food that we partake of, all are polluted. The root cause for all 
this is that the mind itself is polluted. It is because of evil feel- 
ings in the mind that everything appears evil. Mano moolam 
idam jagat (the whole world is based on the mind). Even if 
man dies, mind will not die. So, man should purify his mind 
with pure thoughts. Pure thoughts can be cultivated only by 
chanting the divine name. 

Some people may talk derisively about the efficacy of the 
divine name. But, the joy and bliss that you derive by chanting 
it is supreme. Today people think of only worldly matters, but 
not God. What is the benefit that accrues from thinking of 
mundane matters? Nothing at all. In fact, it makes you more 
and more restless. 

People find the reflection of their own defects in others. 
Those that find mistakes in others do not know their own mis- 
takes. How can you get the belch of a mango if you have not 
eaten it? The belch you get depends on the food you take. The 
good and bad that you see and experience are the results of 
your own thoughts. First recognise the defects in yourself and 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] jE | 


get rid of them. It is a great sin to criticise others. God is in 
everyone. So, criticising others amounts to criticising God 
Himself. Do not criticise or ridicule anyone. Respect everyone; 
only then will you be respected. It is foolishness to expect oth- 
ers to respect you without yourself respecting them. 

If your feelings are good, you will see only good in every- 
one. Mind is the root cause for everything. Man cannot exist 
without the mind. A torch cannot function without cells. Body 
is like a torch, eyes like bulbs, and intellect like a switch. But, 
without the mind, which can be compared to a cell, the body 
cannot function. So, the mind has to be kept in good condition. 


Cultivate noble qualities in New Year 


Embodiments of Love! You have been celebrating the New 
Year Day year after year. But are you cultivating new and sa- 
cred qualities? No. You are unable to give up bad qualities. 
With each New Year, new and noble qualities should be culti- 
vated. Desires have to be controlled. The lesser the desires, the 
lesser your sorrows. Excessive desires lead to the ruination of 
will power (ichcha sakthi). Decline in will power leads to loss 
of power of action (kriya sakthi). Develop unity of ichcha 
sakthi, kriya sakthi, and jnana sakthi (power of wisdom). Will 
power will increase only when desires are reduced. Happiness 
is eluding man due to limitless desires. Excessive desires spoil 
health and cause depression in the mind. Reducing desires 
amounts to reducing the burden on the mind. Less luggage, 
more comfort makes travel a pleasure. Life is a long journey. 
How can you enjoy the journey if you are carrying heavy lug- 
gage? Go on reducing your luggage. The same message is con- 
veyed in the Vedas too. Na karmana na prajaya dhanena 
thyagenaike amrutathwamanasu (immortality can be attained 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 122 


only through sacrifice; neither wealth nor progeny nor good 
deeds can confer it). 

Have fear of sin and love for God. Only then there will be 
morality in society. If you do not have fear of sin and love for 
God, you will not be respected even by your own mother, wife, 
and children. If you have fear of sin and love for God, the 
whole world will love you. Sage Vyasa has given the essence 
of the 18 Puranas in the dictum, Paropakara punyaya papaya 
parapeedanam (to help others is merit; harming others is sin). 
Help ever, Hurt never. If you cannot render help, at least re- 
strain yourself from hurting others. That itself is a great help. 


Master the mind and be a mastermind 


The sacred land of Tamil Nadu is the birthplace of many 
great saints and sages, who undertook many spiritual practices 
with great determination and led noble lives of peace and hap- 
piness. They gave up body attachment and developed love for 
the Atma. But, today, man is developing attachment to the 
body more and more, forgetting the Principle of the Atma. 


This body is a heap of rubbish 
and is full of diseases. 
O mind, do not be under the illusion 
that body is permanent. 
Take refuge at the feet of the Lord. 
[Telugu Poem] 


The body and the mind are negative; only the Atma is 
positive. You say, my body, my mind, my intellect, my senses, 
and so forth. When you say, my handkerchief, the handker- 
chief is separate from you. Similarly, when you say, my body, 
my mind, etc., you are separate from them. Then who are you? 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 123 


Put a question to yourself. All this is matter and you are the 
Master. Master the mind and be a mastermind. 

On the spiritual path, japa and dhyana are not that impor- 
tant. Purity of mind is most important. You do not need to un- 
dertake spiritual practice. Love everyone. Do not limit your 
love to you and your family alone. Do not spend your life in 
narrow-mindedness. All belong to the same universal family. 
All are one; be alike to everyone. Divine love is pure, selfless, 
attributeless, and eternal. He is a sinner who tries to find faults 
with divine love. Worldly love is negative and full of selfish- 
ness. Man can attain Divinity only when he gives up selfish- 
ness. 

Develop morality. Money comes and goes, but morality 
comes and grows. Today man entertains only negative 
thoughts. Man cannot expect to have positive rewards when his 
heart is filled with negative thoughts. When the heart is full of 
worldly desires, how can you have love for God? It is impossi- 
ble. Cultivate positive feelings; only then you will have posi- 
tive results. 


Only God is your true friend 


If you have selfless love, you need not be afraid of any- 
thing. Even if the sky were to fall on your head, be fearless. 
Never be afraid of following the truth. Truth is God, love is 
God. Live in love. Get immersed in the divine love. The 
wicked and evil-minded people cannot understand the divine 
love. Do not enter into friendship with such people. Only God 
is your true friend, who has no trace of selfishness and who 
helps you always under all circumstances. Have the firm con- 
viction that God always helps and never hurts anyone. Whether 
you are in the forest or in the sky or in a city or in a village or 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 124 


on the top of a hill or in the middle of a river, God is always 
with you, in you and around you. 

Worldly friends are such that they say hello to you only 
when you have money and power. Hello becomes hollow once 
you lose both. As long as there is water in the pond, thousands 
of frogs gather there. Once the pond gets dried up, not even a 
single frog will be seen around. Same is the case with worldly 
friends. But God’s friendship is not like that. He is with you at 
all stages and in all situations. Love him from the depth of 
your heart. Take refuge in Him. He will definitely protect you. 
Did He not come to the rescue of Prahlada, who surrendered to 
Him completely? Yad bhavam, tad bhavathi (as is the feeling, 
so is the result). God will come to your rescue if you have total 
faith. 

Some actions will yield instant results, whereas others may 
take a few hours, a few days, a few years or a few births. For 
example, when your finger is cut, bleeding starts immediately. 
It takes a few hours for the food to get digested. It takes a few 
years for a seed to grow into a tree and yield fruit. Be it good 
or bad, you have to face the consequences of your actions. So, 
do not indulge in bad actions. Always do good, be good, and 
see good. This is the way to God. Do not say “I will try;” you 
must do it. 


God is love, so He always gives only love 


Some people, when faced with difficulties, think that God 
is punishing them. It is a mistake to think so. God never pun- 
ishes anybody. It is only the king who gives punishment, not 
God. God is love, so He always gives only love. The punish- 
ment you suffer is the result of your own actions. God neither 
punishes you nor protects you. You are punished by your own 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 125 


sins and protected by your own good deeds. You may utilise 
light for writing wrong account or for reading the holy Rama- 
yana. But, the light is not affected by what you do. Similarly, 
God is the eternal witness. He is like the light, not affected by 
what you do, be it good or bad. 


Spiritual practices and purity of mind 


Embodiments of Love! Many New Years have come and 
gone, but what is that you have achieved? You may have par- 
ticipated in bhajans any number of times. But, you still con- 
tinue to be immersed in negativity. Put a question to yourself 
what have you gained by participating in bhajans. Bhajans 
should develop positive feelings in you. Any sadhana (spir- 
itual practive) done with noble feelings will yield good results. 
You may be doing a lot a spiritual practices for many years 
without any result. But, never give up any spiritual practice. 
Continue your sadhana. One day or the other, you will get the 
reward. 

You think that you have attained swatantrata (independ- 
ence). Swa means Atma. So, the true independence lies in fol- 
lowing Atma Dharma. Body is like a water bubble. Mind is 
like a mad monkey. So, do not follow the body; do not follow 
the mind. Follow the conscience. Your conscience always 
gives you the right prompting. It is a sin if you do not follow 
the dictates of your conscience. Conscience is your master. 


Follow the master 
Face the devil 
Fight to the end 
Finish the game. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 126 


Some people say that they have not got any benefit in spite 
of chanting the divine name for twenty to thirty years. No 
benefit accrues from chanting the divine name if the mind is 
filled with impurities. First purify your mind and fill it with 
positive feelings. Only then you can experience the benefit of 
chanting the divine name. Bad thoughts and bad feelings will 
not help you in any way. Even if you happen to come across 
anything bad, do not let it enter your mind. 

God's work will never fail. So, all the work that is done 
with divine feelings will never meet with failure. If you fail in 
your endeavour, it means you do not have divine feelings. You 
will always be successful if your feelings are pure and divine. 
At least from today onward, cultivate noble feelings. Talk 
sweetly and softly. You cannot always oblige, but you can 
speak always obligingly. 

Embodiments of Love! On New Year day, it is a practice to 
mix sweet, sour and bitter things and eat them. It is to indicate 
that joy and sorrow have to be treated with equanimity. It is the 
tongue that tastes the delicacy and it is the heart that tastes 
love. The taste of love is peerless. It is sweeter than even nec- 
tar. Love alone can match love. God is love, love is God. Live 
in love. Whatever bhajans you sing, sing with love. God is 
Bhavapriya. He sees your feelings, not the rhythm or tune. If 
your feelings are pure, God will take care of everything. 


Tamil New Year, 14 April 1999 
Sai Ramesh Hall, Brindavan 


10 


Royal Path to Divinity 


Run away from bad company; 
Join good company. 
Perform meritorious deeds day and night. 


Embodiments of Love! Since times immemorial, Bharat 
(India) has been the treasure house of spirituality and has been 
radiating peace and serenity to all the other countries. But, to- 
day, people do not understand even the sacredness, signifi- 
cance, and uniqueness of the human body. Many people are 
under the false impression that the body is meant to eat drink, 
sleep, and make merry. You can understand the purpose be- 
hind God gifting you this body only when you understand the 
sacredness and mystery of human birth. The primary goal of 
man is to recognise the Truth in daily life. 

Every man has a body. It not only acts as an instrument but 
also sets ideals in every respect. What are the ideals? It inhales 
the life-sustaining oxygen and exhales the poisonous carbon 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 128 


dioxide. It partakes of delicious items and excretes foul smell- 
ing faecal matter. What is the inner significance of this activ- 
ity? Man has to accept those things that are beneficial to the 
society and the country and discard those which are maleficent 
to the interests of the society and the nation at large. Thus, the 
body demonstrates that man has to take in noble and sacred 
feelings and leave out the unsacred and worldly thoughts. 


Life is a combination of body, mind, and Atma 


Unfortunately, today, man takes in unholy and unsacred 
thoughts discarding pure and sacred feelings. What is truth and 
what is untruth? What is permanent and what is temporary? 
What is good and what is bad? Man does not undertake such 
an enquiry today. He is using his power of discrimination for 
wrong purposes. He is accepting bad and giving up good. Do 
you prefer a rotten fruit to a luscious one or inhaling carbon 
dioxide and exhaling oxygen? No. If you do that, you will not 
only spoil your health, you will put your life also to risk. Man 
should achieve physical health, mental satisfaction, and Atmic 
bliss. Man's life is a combination of the body, mind and Atma. 
The body performs actions, the mind enquires, and the Atma 
remains a witness. These three are essential for the human life 
to blossom. But no one is trying to understand this mystery. 

Nature also shows the truthful and right path. If you do not 
breathe out the air that you breathe in, your health will be 
spoilt. Likewise, if you do not excrete the body waste, your 
health will suffer. The lesson one has to learn from this is that 
one must accept good and give up bad. Tyaja durjana samsar- 
gam (discard bad company). Bad company does not mean the 
company of bad people alone. Even bad thoughts constitute 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 129 


bad company. You should not only discard bad company, but 
give up bad thoughts also. 

However, one does not become a noble soul by just giving 
up bad company and bad thoughts; one has to join good com- 
pany and also cultivate good thoughts. One can have good 
thoughts only by constant contemplation on God. Kuru pun- 
yam ahorathram (perform good deeds day and night). At all 
times, at all places and under all circumstances, man has to 
contemplate on God and involve himself in His work. Bhaja 
sadhu samagamam (join good company). You will get sacred 
feelings only when you are in good company. 


Undertake sadhana right from childhood 


Right from an early age, you should develop devotion to 
God. It will be of immense help in old age if you undertake 
spiritual sadhana right from your childhood. It is impossible to 
think of God in your old age if you squander your precious 
time in worldly matters in the early stages of your life. The di- 
vine feelings that you develop from your childhood are your 
true treasure. Thoughts based on Truth (sathya sankalpas) are 
your true wealth. But, you are giving up such sacred wealth 
and are hankering after the transient and ephemeral wealth. 
Start early, drive slowly and reach safely. It is impossible to 
remember God and contemplate on Him in old age unless you 
think of Him right from your childhood. It is easy to remember 
Him in your old age only when you practice contemplating on 
Him in your childhood. 


When the messengers of death 
start dragging you away, 

When the relatives make hurry to shift you 
outside the house saying there is no hope, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 130 


And when the wife and children 
start weeping and wailing bitterly, 
Is it possible to think of God at that moment 
[Telugu Poem] 


Turn senses Godward from early age 


I keep telling the students often that the childhood of man 
is like a tender banana leaf. At this age, this ‘banana leaf’ is 
very pure, attractive, and lively. This ‘leaf’, containing the 
delicacies of five senses (sound, touch, form, taste, and smell), 
should be offered to God. But, due to the impact of the Kali 
age, man is offering these five types of ‘delicacies’ to the six 
demons: kama, krodha, lobha, moha, mada, and matsarya 
(lust, anger, greed, attachment, pride, and jealousy). After the 
demons eat away the delicacies, spoiling the leaf in the proc- 
ess, man is offering the leftover unsacred food to God in old 
age. Is it proper to offer to God the remains of the food eaten 
by the demons? 

If man cannot recognise the uniqueness of humanness, 
what is use of taking the human birth? Janthoonam nara janma 
durlabham (among all beings, human birth is the rarest and 
noblest). Having got such a sacred human birth man should 
turn his senses Godward from his early age. From early age, 
man should contemplate on God and win divine grace. 


In old age, when you cannot see properly, 

When there are wrinkles on your face, 

When your hair turns grey, 

When children start making fun of you, 
calling you a decrepit monkemy, and 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 131 


When your limbs star shivering, 
How do you expect to think of God? 
[Telugu Poem] 


Those that start thinking of God only in old age have no 
sense of shame. 

Today man is wasting his youth by misusing his senses. He 
is seeing and listening to unsacred things and indulging in 
talking ill of others. In the early age, the five senses are like 
five delicacies. Your life will be sanctified, only when you of- 
fer them to God. Otherwise, it is better to be deaf, dumb, and 
blind! For what purpose are the eyes given to you? Is it to see 
anything and everything? No. Eyes are given in order to see 
God. The eye, which is not even an inch in size, is able to see 
the stars millions of miles away. Such a powerful and sacred 
eye is being used for seeing unholy things? Why don't you use 
your eyes for seeing the omnipresent God and the beautiful 
panorama of nature and having the darshan of holy men? 


Peddalu or Gaddalu? 


Today the so-called peddalu (elders) are discouraging the 
young from taking to spiritual path. They say one can start 
contemplating on God after retirement. Can such people be 
called peddalu? No. They are gaddalu (hawks)! They neither 
think of God nor allow their children to do so. Actually, some 
elders are spoiling the lives of their children. They are trying to 
make their children tread the wrong path as though they had 
benefited immensely by doing the same earlier. Tyaja durjana 
samsargam, give up the company of such evil-minded elders, 
even if they happen to be your parents. 

This was the ideal set by Bharata in the Ramayana. Rama, 
being the eldest, was the legal heir to the throne of Ayodhya, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 132 


but Kaikeyi sent Him to the forest, as she wanted her son 
Bharata to become the king. When Bharata came to know of 
this, he became very furious. He even did not like to look at his 
mother and set off to the forest immediately to bring back 
Rama. 


Disassociate yourselves form wocked persons 


Hiranyakasipu could not tolerate to hear his son, Prahlada, 
chant the name of Lord Narayana. He would at once close his 
ears whenever Prahlada uttered Om Namo Narayanaya. He 
even tried to kill him as he continued to chant the name of 
Lord Narayana against his wishes. Ultimately, Prahlada disas- 
sociated himself from his father as he was a durjana (wicked 
person). 

Sukracharya warned Emperor Bali that the Vamana was 
none other than Lord Vishnu Himself and that it would be dis- 
astrous for Bali to make the gift sought from him by Vamana. 
Bali reacted to the preceptor’s warning, saying that there was 
no greater sin than going back on one's word. He had given his 
word to the Lord Himself. Is it not a sin on the part of Su- 
kracharya to ask him to break his promise? That is why Bali 
told Sukracharya, “You are not my preceptor; you are my en- 
emy.” So saying, he forsook Sukracharya and fulfilled his 
promise to Vamana. 

Mira all the time thought of only Giridhara (Lord Krishna) 
and chanted His name. Her eyes were filled with the form of 
Krishna, and her mind was filled with the thoughts of Krishna. 
But her husband thought that she was crossing her limits in the 
name of devotion to Krishna. So, one day, he threw her out of 
the Krishna temple for the sake of false worldly honour. Then 
she wrote a letter to Tulsidas seeking his advice as to what she 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 133 


should do, whether to give up Krishna, the eternal companion, 
or to forsake her husband. 

Tulsidas sent a reply saying, “Mother, God is the greatest 
of all and the path leading to God is the noblest of all. Husband 
is like a passing cloud, but God is always with you, even be- 
fore your birth and after your death. Trikalabhadbyam sathyam 
(Truth transcends all the three periods of time). How can you 
give up God, who is the Embodiment of Truth? Husband en- 
tered your life in the middle and will go away in the middle. 
You may serve him as long as he is alive. But, when he him- 
self discards you, there is nothing wrong in leaving him for the 
sake of God.” 

It is not proper to expect the wife to suffer at the hands of a 
wicked husband. If the wife commits a mistake, the husband 
may punish her. But, it is a sin to punish a woman who is ab- 
solutely faultless. Mira prayed, 


Krishna, I went deep into the ocean of Samsara 
and caught hold of the pearl of Your divine name. 
How can I allow it to slip away from my hand? I 
will safeguard this ‘pearl' even at the cost of my 
life. 

[Tamil Verse] 


Better die rather than lead an untruthful life 


Worldly life is pravritti marga (outward path) and spiritual 
life is nivritti marga (inward path). It is a great mistake to give 
up God and His name for the sake of worldly gains. You need 
not be afraid of anybody when your conscience is clear. Truth 
and sacrifice are like your two eyes. Sathyam nasti paro 
dharma (there is no greater dharma than adhering to truth). 
But in this Age of Kali, people are giving up truth and right- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 134 


eousness. Better to die than to lead an untruthful life. It is bet- 
ter to live like a swan for a few minutes than to lead the life of 
a crow for a hundred years. 


Education is for serving society 


Today, students are becoming highly educated, acquiring 
degrees and occupying positions of authority. They think they 
are great intellectuals. What is the use of education and intelli- 
gence if they are misused? Why study and die ultimately. 
Study to be immortal. Bookish knowledge may feed your 
stomach but will not help you attain Divinity. You should ex- 
perience the bliss of your life after offering everything to God. 
The Vedas declare: Sarva karma Bhagavad preethyartham 
(whatever you do, do it with a desire to please God). 

It is enough if you have God with you. Lord Krishna de- 
clared in the Bhagavad Gita, Sarva dharman parityaja maam 
ekam saranam vraja (give up all the worldly dharmas and sur- 
render only to Me). All the worldly dharmas are burdensome. 
They are like ten thousand naya paisas. A hundred rupee note 
is equal to ten thousand naya paisas. It is rather difficult to 
bundle up ten thousand naya paisas and carry them with you. 
So, offer all the ten thousand ‘naya paisas’ to God. He will 
give you a ‘hundred rupee note’, which is light in weight and 
also safe and secure. The former refers to quantity and the lat- 
ter to quality. You should look for quality, not for quantity. 
One teaspoon of cow’s milk is better than barrels of donkey’s 
milk. 

This country, Bharat, is the land of sacrifice, the land of 
love and the land of yoga. If you do not have love for your 
motherland, you are as good as a living corpse. The modern 
students are neglecting their motherland and are going abroad 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 135 


in search of greener pastures. You may go abroad, but never 
give up motherland. It is foolish to give up the motherland and 
get enticed by foreign countries. 

Once, Vivekananda had gone to London and America. 
While returning to India, the American journalists asked him 
what he thought of his motherland, Bharat. He said, “I have a 
great regard and love for my country. I respect even the dust, 
the air and the environment of Bharat. I offer myself com- 
pletely to the service of my motherland.” He who has no love 
for his motherland, mother tongue and religion is no better 
than a living corpse. 


Only good and bad follow you when you die 


Today, people waste their time and energy in amassing 
wealth. They do not realise that one day or the other they will 
have to leave everything and go. 


Many great kings like Harischandra, Nala, and 
Mandatha ruled over this land 

But now, where are they? 

Is Sri Rama, who built a great bridge across the 
mighty ocean, alive today? 

Many kings have come and gone, but none could 
take even a fistful of 

Earth when they left the immortal coil. 

[Telugu Poem] 


If the people could take even a fistful of mud with them 
when they die, there would have been rationing of mud also! 
No one can take anything. Only good and bad follow you. 

Rama and Ravana were equally well versed in thirty-six 
forms of knowledge. But Valmiki called Ravana a foolish one 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 136 


and Rama a noble one. Why did Valmiki say so? Did he re- 
ceive any favour from Rama? No. Here, Rama and Ravana can 
be compared to a cuckoo and a crow respectively. 


The crow did not steal anybody's property but the 
people hate the very sight of a crow. 
The cuckoo did not do any favour to anybody, but 
still it is loved by one and all. 
One is respected if one's speech is good. 
[Telugu Poem] 


Though both look alike, people eulogise the cuckoo and 
criticise the crow. They throw stones at the crow when it caws, 
but feel joyous listening to the mellifluous singing of the 
cuckoo. Similarly, though Rama and Ravana were equally 
well-versed in all forms of knowledge, Rama set an ideal by 
practising what He learnt, whereas Ravana suffered from ‘in- 
digestion’, since he merely acquired knowledge without prac- 
tising it. 

Only God is your true property 


Education is for life, not for money. Every educated young 
man should serve society. Youth is very precious; let it not be 
wasted. Start early, drive slowly, reach safely. You must re- 
solve to work for the welfare of the society even if your par- 
ents at first oppose you. Never mind if they do not give you a 
share in their property. Only God is your true property. Do not 
aspire for temporary and ephemeral wealth. Enter the path of 
truth and lead a sacred life. That will make your parents also 
happy. If parents are not happy when the son leads a sacred 
life, then they are no parents at all. Such parents are fit to be 
called demons. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 137 


Today is the holy festival of Vishnu. All the Indian festi- 
vals are sacred and demonstrate great ideals. The Keralites 
celebrate their festivals Onam and Vishnu in the most sacred 
way. With each festival one should cultivate divine feelings. 
When you contemplate on God with all sincerity and devotion, 
you become God yourself. This is what the Vedanta says: 
Brahmavid Brahmaiva Bhavathi (the knower of Brahman be- 
comes Brahman himself.) You will become what you think. 
Ratnakara, a highway robber, was transformed into a great 
sage, Valmiki, because he thought of Rama continuously with 
a pure mind. His face shone with the divine effulgence of 
Rama. Even the young Prahlada’s face reflected the divine ra- 
diance of Lord Narayana as he contemplated on Him continu- 
ously. He had no sense of fear; he always put on a smiling face 
in the face of adversity. All the time he was chanting the name 
of the Lord. 

How can anyone, who steadfastly chants the divine name, 
be afraid of anything? Fear and grief will overpower those who 
forget the Lord and get immersed in worldly life. You will be- 
come divine if you contemplate on the Divine continuously. 
God is not somewhere else, He is within you. 


What is true happiness? 


Embodiments of Love! Every festival in India is suffused 
with divinity. On each festival day, people go to temples and 
offer their prayers to the Almighty. This is a positive trait. For- 
getting God and always thinking of the world is a negative 
quality. Today, we find elaborate arrangements and gala cele- 
brations in marriage functions. One is filled with joy when one 
gets married, but one does not realise that the happiness of 
married life is but momentary. Even dogs and foxes experience 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 138 


this happiness. This is not true happiness. Thyagaraja said, “O 
mind, tell me what gives the real happiness, is it nidhi (wealth) 
or the Eswara Sannidhi (divine proximity)?” Consider san- 
nidhi (proximity) as your pennidhi (great treasure). Then your 
life will be full of joy and bliss. Only devotees can understand 
this joy and bliss. 


Without peace, man is just pieces 


A true devotee always keeps singing the name of the Lord. 
Radha and Mira were always deeply immersed in Nama- 
sankirtan. They had broad feelings and broad mind. Broad 
mind is life, narrow mind is death. Mind can be broadened 
only through divine contemplation. Peace is a precious jewel, 
without peace man is just pieces. So attain peace and bliss by 
contemplating on the divine. Divine contemplation is possible 
only for the fortunate. They wear the crown of peace. The un- 
fortunate ones can never contemplate on the divine and can 
never attain peace. You may get fed up of eating Jaddus and 
other sweets, but you will never get fed up of chanting the di- 
vine name. The more you chant, the more you will feel like 
chanting. 

Embodiments of Love! Today injustice, unrighteousness, 
and falsehood are on the rise because faith in God is on the de- 
cline. The nation can attain peace only when people think of 
God. God is always with you, in you, around you, behind you, 
above you and below you. Today some people are prepared to 
give up God for the sake of worldly relations. But how long 
will the relations last? This body is only a doll, which may 
perish at any moment of time. Bliss cannot be attained as long 
as one has body attachment. This body is Sivam (auspicious) as 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 139 


long as there is the divine breath of life in it. It becomes savam 
(corpse) once it loses the divine breath. 

When man is born, he cries asking the question, “Koham, 
Koham (who am I).” What is the use of living if he has the 
same question on his lips at the time of death too? At the time 
of death, man should be able to declare cheerfully, “Soham, 
Soham (I am God).” Realising one’s own divinity is the pur- 
pose of life. 

Man is never satisfied. He is greedy for more and more 
wealth. There should be a limit to greed for wealth. What man 
has to earn is divine grace. No matter what he earns, he cannot 
take a single pie with him when he leaves the body. Alexander 
conquered many nations and became a mighty emperor. But, 
when the hour of death approached, no doctor could save him. 
Before passing away, he summoned his ministers and told 
them to keep his empty hands raised above when his body was 
taken for the final journey through the streets so that the people 
would understand that even a great and mighty emperor like 
Alexander, who achieved so much in life, had to go 
empty-handed. 


Only sacrifice will lead to immortality 


Alexander wanted to conquer the entire world. Today also, 
we find one country trying to overpower the other. People are 
becoming power crazy. People who have greed for power can 
never be good leaders. In fact, they are the persons who de- 
stroy the nation. Many ministers, prime ministers, kings, and 
emperors have come and gone. But everybody was concerned 
only about their position and power. Fie upon such leaders, 
who had no concern for the welfare of the nation! Such leaders 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 140 


are not human beings; they are demons. Leaders should have a 
sense of sacrifice. Only sacrifice will lead to immortality. 

Students! After you complete your education, do not con- 
fine yourself to your jobs alone. Work for the welfare of soci- 
ety. The culture of Bharat says: Sathyam vada, dharmam chara 
(speak the truth and follow righteousness). Uphold these prin- 
ciples even at the cost of your life. Help the poor and the 
downtrodden. Have the national interest foremost in your 
mind. Your welfare depends on the welfare of the nation. 
Creation (srushti) emerged from the Creator (Parameshti); so- 
ciety (samashti) emerged from the creation. From society 
emerged the individual (vyashti). There is no individual with- 
out society. So, the vyashti should serve the samashti, then 
serve the srushti and ultimately merge in Parameshti. This is 
the royal path to Divinity. 


Contemplate on God till your last breath 


I am not perturbed by criticism. What I am teaching you is 
good, only good and nothing but good. If you follow these 
teachings, you are bound to attain your goal. Take to the right 
path right from your young age; otherwise you are bound to 
repent in your old age. Cultivate sacred thoughts and offer 
them to God right from the young age. Knowingly or unknow- 
ingly you might have committed some mistakes. There is no 
point in worrying about the past. At least now, wake up from 
your slumber, think of God and sanctify your life. 

Divinity is the goal of life. You can attain divinity by fol- 
lowing the path of truth, righteousness and love. Give up body 
attachment and develop divine feelings. Body is weak, made 
up of five elements and is bound to perish some time or the 
other. People say that the life span of a human being is hun- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 141 


dred years, but you cannot take it for granted. No one can pre- 
dict when death will occur. It may occur either in childhood or 
in youth, or in middle age or in old age. Death is certain. So, 
try to know yourself while you are alive. Contemplate on God 
till your last breath. That is your primary duty. 

Discharge your other duties also such as taking care of 
your family and children, but consider even that as God’s work 
and treat all your family members as divine. All actions should 
be undertaken for the pleasure of God. Many people undertake 
Japa and dhyana only after their retirement. Their hand turns 
the rosary, mouth utters ‘Ram, Ram, Ram,’ but the mind wan- 
ders in the market, goes to the club and starts playing cards as 
they might have indulged in all this earlier in life. What is the 
use of such a japa? So, it is better to take to the spiritual path 
right from childhood. It is a great fortune and merit to take to 
the spiritual path from childhood. 


Sanctifying your heart is true pudding 


Embodiments of Love! Today the people of Kerala are 
celebrating the festival of Vishnu. The inner significance of 
Vishnu is to cultivate sacredness. It does not end with prepar- 
ing payasam (pudding) and partaking of it. Sanctifying your 
heart is true pudding. You will be celebrating Vishnu in the 
true spirit only when you make efforts to purify your heart. 

You may not undertake any sadhana (spiritual exercise), 
but never forget the Principle of Love. Never be afraid of trou- 
bles; sanctify your life with love. Love everyone. Where love 
is, there God is. Love is God. God is love. All the time we 
should think of God and contemplate on Him. 


15 April 1999 
Sai Ramesh Hall, Brindavan 


11 


The ephemeral and the transcendental 


Life without love is like 

An electric wire without power supply, 

A field without water, 

A temple without deity, 

A school without teacher. [Telugu Poem] 


Speech is the cause of prosperity, 

Speech is the cause of friendship, 

Speech is the cause of bondage, and 

Speech may even cause death. [Sanskrit Verse] 


In this world, speech carries also more value than the cur- 
rency note. In ancient times, people used to give immense 
value to speech. With the help of speech they were able to be- 
come rich and prosperous; they could even win kingdoms. 
Man becomes virtuous only when his speech is good; he be- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 143 


comes evil when his speech is bad. Speech promotes friend- 
ship. It also brings about differences between friends. Speech 
promotes affinity among relatives. It also creates discord. Ef- 
fects of speech are not confined to ephemeral and worldly 
matters only; speech affects our spiritual progress also. Speech 
may even cause death. Speech can save one’s life, too. Sweet 
speech brings you name and fame. Since man today has lost 
his pleasant speech and sweet temper, he is subjected to innu- 
merable ordeals and sufferings. That is why I tell the students 
now and then, you cannot always oblige but you can speak al- 
ways obligingly. When the speech is good, man becomes a 
hero. But man will become a zero if the speech is not good. 


Root cause of restlessness in the world 


Who is hero? God is hero and the world is zero. So, you 
should make friendship with that hero. The eternal nature of 
Divine Love, which is blemishless, selfless, and pure, alone 
stands the test of true friendship. When you enjoy the proxim- 
ity of such a friend, you will be free from fear even in the face 
of insurmountable difficulties. Lack of faith is the cause of fear 
in man. So, cultivating faith in the Divine is the foremost task 
of man. Endowed with such faith, one can achieve success in 
every kind of task. What is the root cause of disturbance and 
restlessness in the world? 


Due to their ignorance, people have lost 

Fear of sin and love for God, 

Resulting in the depravity of human nature. 

What a blow to the cause of peace in the world 
[Telugu Poem] 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 144 


Man today has made giant strides in all fields. But the pro- 
gress he has registered can be compared to an electric wire 
without current, since he does not possess human values. Love 
of God has infinite power. Here is an example. People are 
coming here from far off places in India and from different 
countries, spending a lot of money and time. Why do they 
gather here? What is the reason? They find something here that 
they do not find in their family members, in friends, in rela- 
tives, in the society they live in, and also in their countries. If 
they were able to find it in themselves or in their societies or in 
their countries, they would never come here. 

What do they find here? You find love here. For the sake 
of experiencing Divine Love, you all embark on long and ar- 
duous journeys. But, if you make a thorough observation and 
investigation into the matter, you will be able to know that love 
is present within you only. In the Gita, Lord Krishna declared: 
Mamaivamso Jeevaloke Jeevabhutha Sanathana (the eternal 
Atma in every human being is a part of My Being). Hence, Di- 
vine Love is present in every individual. 

But the human being, unable to realize the truth that love is 
present within himself, thinks that it is something separate or 
different from him and undertakes long journeys searching for 
love. Know that the Divine is not different from you. Sarvata 
panipadam Tat sarvathokshi siromukham (That omnipresent 
Brahman has His hands, feet, eyes, and mouth everywhere). 


Our foremost task is to cultivate sadgunas 


To have a vision of God, who is omnipresent, you have to 
make certain enquiries. The Vedas proclaim that Brahman is 
all-pervasive. Easwara sarva bhutanam (the Divine is imma- 
nent in every being). Man should cultivate good qualities if he 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 145 


wants to realize the truth of these statements. Without such 
qualities, man cannot realize even a fraction of the truth of the 
statement saryam khalvidam Brahma (verily all this is Brah- 
man). Only by means of good qualities can one recognize the 
Divine, who is omnipresent. Cultivating good qualities is the 
basic tenet of devotion. Cultivation of virtues, right attitude, 
adherence to truth, discipline, and sense of duty are the signs 
of devotion. Only those who develop these qualities can be 
called devotees. 

Our foremost task is to cultivate sadgunas (good qualities). 
The Sanskrit word sath stands for eternity, which is called Be- 
ing. We should acquire the qualities of Being. What are these 
qualities? They are attributelessness, purity, steadfastness and 
enlightenment. It is not an easy task to acquire all these quali- 
ties. However, there is one way out. Since all the virtues are 
embedded in pure, selfless, and divine love, if you develop 
love, all the virtues will manifest in you. The true nature of 
love should be cultivated to experience the Divinity latent in 
you. 


Who am I? 


Several ways were enunciated in Vedanta to clarify one 
question: “Who am I?” What is its inner significance? The “I” 
is all-pervasive. Question yourself, “Who am I?” A doubt may 
also arise as to why you should try to know “Who am I” when 
there are so many other things of interest in this age of infor- 
mation. If you find an answer to this question, you will be able 
to realize not only your true nature, your true identity, but also 
the true identity of the millions of people in the world. You 
will be able to recognize the true nature of every individual. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 146 


Whenever you come across a stranger you ask him, “Who 
are you?” and waste your time. Instead, question yourself, 
“Who am I?” By finding out the answer to this question you 
will be able to very easily find out who he is, since the true 
nature of every human being is one and the same. Every hu- 
man being refers to himself as “I”. The word “I” is applicable 
to every individual. If you understand this one word “I”, you 
can understand the real nature of every being in the world. 


There is only One without a second 


Here is an example. Look at these bulbs and tube lights. 
Their colors, wattage, and shapes are different. You know that 
the electric current that flows through these different bulbs is 
one and the same. Ekam sath viprah bahudha vadanti (Truth is 
one, but scholars refer to it by many names). Likewise, forms 
are different, names are different, but the divine vibration is 
one and the same. So, there is only One without a second. That 
is Divinity. If you recognize Divinity, you will be able to un- 
derstand the nature of the Self immanent in all individual be- 
ings. Everything has emanated from the Divine. 

Here is an example. First you were alone. Later you got 
married. Before marriage you had only two legs and you en- 
joyed greater freedom. You could go wherever you wanted to 
go. After marriage, you acquired two more legs and your 
movements were restricted, since you did not feel like leaving 
your wife alone at home. This is bondage. Your wish to have a 
son might be fulfilled after two years. With the arrival of the 
son, you added two more legs. Your movements were further 
impeded. With the passage of time, you might feel bad for not 
having a baby girl, though you had a son who could uplift your 
family and bring name and fame. Two more legs were added 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 147 


with the birth of a daughter. The greater the number of legs, 
the lesser the freedom would be. You would give away your 
daughter in marriage. Members of the bridegroom's family 
would become your relatives. With the arrival of the daughter- 
in-law, the members of her family too would become your 
relatives. In this manner one becomes many. Here oneness is 
the cause of multitudinous. 

If you realize this truth, the Vedantic axiom Ekoham Ba- 
husyam (one Brahman multiplies itself into many) can be un- 
derstood easily. To realize this oneness as the unifying force of 
the multitudinous is the summum bonum of the Indian culture. 
But, man today is not thinking on these lines. He is dividing 
oneness into many. He is carried away by attachments at the 
physical level and is fully immersed in worldly relations like 
son-in-law, daughter-in-law, grandson, and the like. This at- 
tachment leads to bondage, if he realizes the truth that the na- 
ture of the Self is one and the same in every being, there will 
be no suffering. 


Cultivate purity and divinity 


The world is like a cinema, and the Atma is the screen. The 
different projections that appear on the screen are transient, 
whereas the screen remains as it is. That is why Vedanta pro- 
claims Brahma sathyam jaganmithya (Brahman is truth, the 
world is an illusion). The pictures in the form of projections on 
the screen come and go, but the screen does not change. 

Let us analyze this from the standpoint of the Vedantic 
statement sarvain khalvidam Brahma (the entire universe is 
Brahman). When the pictures appear on the screen, it become 
invisible. Where does it go? It is there within the picture, but it 
is invisible. But without the screen you cannot see the pictures. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 148 


Observation reveals the fact that the screen is not at all af- 
fected either by the innumerable visuals or by the sound ef- 
fects. The fire that appears on the screen does not burn it. A 
tempest appears, it may even uproot the trees. The screen de- 
picts the scenes, but it is not affected by them. Sometimes, we 
see floods on the screen. Rivers like the Ganga, Yamuna, and 
Godavari may overflow, but the screen is not drenched. What 
is the reason? Floods, earthquakes, and tempest that appear on 
the screen are not real, so the screen is not affected by them. It 
remains as a witness. Your heart is a big screen, which is 
changeless. On the screen of the heart, you see sufferings, hap- 
piness and ordeals. All these are transient scenes, like passing 
clouds. None of the scenes is permanent. Only the screen of 
your heart is permanent. That is Divine. It is also called con- 
science which is the eternal truth. 


Where do you find consciousness? 


The conscious perception of what is going around and the 
people we come across through bodily senses and mental pow- 
ers is transient. Conscience is within. It vibrates throughout the 
body, whereas conscious perception is associated with the 
senses. Where do these two, conscience and conscious percep- 
tion, come from? Both have their origin in the all-pervading 
universal consciousness. Where do you find consciousness? It 
is not confined to one place. It is infinite, immutable, invisible, 
and all-pervasive. First, you should understand this conscious- 
ness. You can then attempt to merge it with Divine Conscious- 
ness. This merger leads to bliss and liberation. 

What should we do to attain this? Air is everywhere. It is 
invisible and we cannot catch it. But nobody has got any right 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 149 


to deny its existence. It is our life force. So, it does exist and it 
is all-pervasive. In your body, this air is in a limited quantity. 

If you inflate a balloon, the air, which is all-pervasive, en- 
ters the balloon. But its quantity is limited. If you tie the bal- 
loon securely with a string, the air in it cannot merge with the 
air outside. What is the reason? It has a limitation, since it is 
encased in a balloon. What should be done to overcome the 
limitation? The encasement should be destroyed. How? Pump 
more and more air into the balloon till it bursts. Then the lim- 
ited air in the balloon will get merged with the infinite air out- 
side. Likewise, the body, which is only a vesture of the divine, 
is the cause of bondage. In the body too there is the air of di- 
vinity. But it is limited and bound. If you cultivate purity and 
divinity more and more, attachment to the body gets destroyed, 
which will lead to liberation. 


The body is composed of the five elements. 
It is subject to change and death. 
It is stated that life span of man is hundred years 
but do not trust these words. 
It may drop away in childhood or in youth 
or in the middle age or in old age. 
It may fall away, Oh man, in a village or 
in a forest or in the midst of waters. 
The body is full of filth and is subject to 
all sorts of afflictions and diseases. 
It is bound by the cycle of birth and death. 
It cannot cross the ocean of life. 
Oh mind! Believe not that it will exist forever. 
Take refuge at the feet of the Lord. 
[Telugu Poem] 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 150 


For the sake of physical gratification, you undergo many 
ordeals from dawn to dusk. What do you gain out of it? You 
are able to experience only ephemeral pleasures. But you 
should realize the truth that eternal bliss is within you. You 
should strive to experience that bliss. 

God is not different from you. He is not confined to places 
like temples, mosques, and churches. He is omnipresent. He is 
the resident of your heart. The body is the temple of God. So, 
you should strengthen the feelings of love within you. You do 
develop love, but it is based on bodily relations. You love your 
son, father, and mother. You identify yourself with the body, 
so you direct your love toward those with whom you have got 
a relationship at physical level. You are not able to manifest 
the kind of love that is beyond name and form. Love has no 
form. It does not differentiate between young and old or man 
and woman. Love is love. It cannot be compared to anything 
else. Love is the very form of the Divine. Love is God. Live in 
love. How to do that? 


Start the day with Love 
Spend the day with Love 
Fill the day with Love 
End the day with Love 
This is the way to God. 


You can cultivate love in several ways. But, do not limit it 
to the bodily needs and relations. However, as long as you live 
in the world, you do need the warmth of relationship. You can 
wish for the welfare and progress of someone else. You can 
also share his happiness. But all these feelings are limited to 
the physical relationship, which is transient. 

The human being has both a head and a heart. Whatever 
comes from the head is related to worldly affairs only. Read- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 151 


ing, writing, walking, and feelings of pain and pleasure belong 
to the head. These are all ephemeral. 

Eternal values like truth, love, patience, and compassion 
emanate from the heart. What comes from the head is worldly 
and ephemeral. What comes from the heart is transcendental 
and eternal. That which comes from the heart leads to nivritti 
(inward path). But, all that comes from the head lead to pra- 
vritti (outward path). The head carries responsibility, whereas 
the heart is bestowed with right. Whatever is done by the head 
is temporary. You feel hungry. You go to canteen and eat two 
chapatis to satiate your hunger. But, after two hours. you feel 
hungry again. It is cyclic in nature. You feel hungry, you eat 
something, the food gets digested, and again you feel hungry. 
This can be compared to the cycle of birth and death. 


Sankaracharya said: 
The cycle of birth and death is repetitive. 
World is an ocean of woes; 
win the grace of God and transcend it. 
Oh fool! Chant the Lords name instead of 
memorizing the rudiments of grammar. 
Grammar would not come to your help 
at the time of death 
[Sanskrit Verse] 


The three states of consciousness 


As long as you are awake, you aspire for many things and 
indulge in many activities. You are also subject to manifold 
experiences. But you forget everything while sleeping. 

The state of sleep can be compared to a short death, and 
death can be compared to a long sleep. It is not easy to under- 
stand the true meaning of birth and death. You forget in sleep 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 152 


state what you experienced during the day. So, sleep state can 
be considered as a short death. Similarly, waking state can be 
considered as long life. However, the waking state and the 
sleep state are temporary. But in both the states witness- 
consciousness exists, which experiences everything. 

Here is an example. During the waking state, you move 
around with the help of the body, listen to many things, and 
experience happiness. When questioned, you claim that it is 
you who is experiencing all this. But, in the dream state, who 
is experiencing the dream? It is you only. In the deep sleep 
state, you forget everything and enjoy bliss. Here, who is expe- 
riencing bliss? Again, it is you only. So, in all these three states 
—waking, dream, and deep sleep— you do exist, and it is you 
who experience everything. 

Trikal badhyam sathyam (Truth is changeless in all three 
periods of time). You remain the same in all the three states. 
So, you are the very form of Truth. 


Live in the present 
Embodiments of Love! 


Time undergoes change. Waking, dream, and deep sleep 
states are subject to change. Matter, worldly things and bodies 
composed of the five elements also undergo change. Mind, in- 
tellect, feelings, and senses also undergo change. Senses are 
afflicted with various diseases. So, they are all transient. 

But you are permanent and experience everything. Do not 
brood over the past. Past is past; forget it. Future is not certain. 
It is beyond your perception. So, live in the present, since it is 
permanent. It is not ordinary present; it is omnipresent. How? 
Past is in the present, since the present is the result of past ac- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 153 


tions. Future is also in the present, since it depends on the pre- 
sent actions. So, you should pay attention only to the present. 

Instead of giving importance to ephemeral pleasures, you 
should follow the right path. That is all you are supposed to do 
now. But you are not doing what you are supposed to do. You 
simply brood over the past and worry about the future. In this 
way, you ignore the present. As a result, you are subjected to 
suffering. Why should you not derive happiness from the pre- 
sent state of affairs? 

Brooding over the past and worrying about the future are 
the main cause of man’s suffering. Why do you think about the 
past? You treaded that path consciously. Then why do you 
look back? Be happy in the present. That is all you should as- 
pire for. You may face many ordeals. But do not pay too much 
attention to them. Lead your life happily till the end. 


Experience divine bliss, which is within you 


Man yearns for happiness in every act, in every kind of ex- 
perience. He pines for happiness. All his actions are aimed at 
deriving happiness. Whether he does business or work in an 
office, his aim is to derive happiness. But does he find it? No. 
It is a temporary phase only as it is worldly happiness. He may 
be happy for a while, but permanent happiness is attained only 
by contemplation on God. So, contemplate on the Divine. 

You must understand that the final product depends upon 
the original material. From clay you can make a doll of clay. Is 
it possible to make a doll of gold from clay? Your bodies are 
composed of the five elements. They survive on food. You 
may prepare a several course meal. But, you should eat it be- 
fore it gets stale. If you waste time, the food may decay and 
become unfit for consumption. Likewise, you should experi- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 154 


ence the eternal divine bliss at the right time before the body 
decays and becomes decrepit. This is the task of the human 
beings today. 

You try to experience many things. Instead, experience the 
divine bliss, which is within you. That is the supreme bliss. 


It is the very form of supreme wisdom. 
It is one without a second. 
It is expansive and pervasive like the sky. 
It is eternal, pure and changeless. 
It stands as a witness of everything. 
[Sanskrit Verse] 


Cultivate Divine Love 


Look at those glowing lights. In this assembly, some per- 
sons are listening to My discourse, some are moving away. and 
some are sleeping. Different people are doing different types of 
work. The light stands as a witness. It is not affected by your 
sleep. It is not affected by your movements. It is not affected 
even though you do not listen to My discourse. It simply re- 
mains as a witness. 

Divinity, like light, is the witness of everything. Its efful- 
gence illuminates everything else. Where does it exist? We 
find santhi (peace) within asanthi (unrest). In the depth of the 
santhi (peace), there exists prakanthi (supreme splendor). In 
this prakanthi, one can experience Param Jyothi (Divine Efful- 
gence). Param Jyothi, in the form of Atma Jyothi, (the light of 
the Atma) is within you. That is the light of nonduality and 
eternity. That is the light of immortality. That is the light of the 
Self. 

Since you possess that light within yourselves, why should 
you be afraid of anything else? Why should you worry? Be 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 155 


happy. Where is happiness? How to experience it? Union with 
God is happiness. 

You should realize that love is the form of God. As long as 
Divinity, in the form of love, exists within you, unrest cannot 
reach you. But, these days, people are subjecting themselves to 
unrest and unhappiness by misinterpreting the nature of love 
and by attributing to it certain impure feelings. It is a blunder. 
Know that Divine Love is unsullied, selfless, and pure. With- 
out any hesitation you should try to acquire that love. Strive to 
possess it. 

The world today is full of misery. There is no place without 
fear and grief. People are afraid to travel by air, by trains or by 
cars, because they are wary of evil elements. Even walking has 
become unsafe. 

People are not happy at home also, since they are haunted 
by numerous fears. They are terribly fear-stricken. What is the 
reason? They are unable to bear difficulties and ordeals. But, 
think who is facing ordeals? Who is undergoing suffering? It is 
the body only, which is the composition of the five elements. 
Reduce attachment to the body. Then you will experience eter- 
nal bliss. Reducing body attachment and increasing attachment 
to the Self is the true meaning of devotion. Attachment to body 
leads to pravritti (outward path), while attachment to the Self 
leads to nivritti (inward path). The combination of these is hu- 
man life. 

Embodiments of Love! Strengthen love, saturate your lives 
with love and live in that Divine Love. 


26 April 1999 
Sai Sruthi, Kodaikanal 


12 


Dwell in God Consciousness 


Bend the body 
Mend the senses 
End the mind. 


This is one of the chief governing principles of the culture 
of Bharat. Every Bharatiya (Indian) is the inheritor of this leg- 
acy. So, Bharatiyas should make proper use of this legacy to 
redeem their lives. If a person abuses another, he really abuses 
his own self, because the abuser and the abused are both one 
and the same, because the indwelling Atma is the same in both. 
Who reprimands whom? The principle of the Atma is the same 
in all. On this basis, the scriptures declare: “Ekam sath viprah 
bahudha vadanti (the truth is one, but wise men speak of it in 
many ways).” 

There is water in this tumbler. Telugu people call it 'neeru', 
Tamilians call it 'thanni', Hindi speaking people call it ‘pani’, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] ifaw 


Englishmen say 'water', while those who speak Sanskrit say 
'vaari'. Though it is called by different names, yet water re- 
mains the same; its basic quality does not undergo any change. 
In this vast world of diverse species, human beings have dif- 
ferent names and forms. Despite these outward variations, the 
Atmic principle in all of them is the same. The recognition of 
this unity in diversity constitutes spiritual sadhana. When one 
enquires deeply into the question whom one is praising or 
denigrating, loving or trusting, it will become evident that one 
indeed praises, denigrates, loves, or trusts only one’s Self and 
none else. 


Fundamental unity of mankind 


Though lakhs of years have passed since the advent of man 
on this earth, yet he does not know his real Self even today. 
The entire creation has divine origin, and the Creator is God. 
He willed: “Ekoham Bahusyam (J am alone, let Me be many),” 
and the creation manifested by His Will. Srishti (creation) has 
its origin from Parameshti (supreme power). Samashti (soci- 
ety) is a limb of srishti. Similarly, vyashti (individual) is a limb 
of samashti. Without srishti, samashti has no existence, and 
without samashti, there can be no vyashii. 

Since man has limbs such as hands, feet, head, etc., which 
constitute his body, likewise man is a limb of society and soci- 
ety is a limb of creation (srishti). Man is therefore not separate 
from samashti, srishti, and Parameshti. All human beings are 
just the limbs of the same body of God. 

If man realizes his intimate relationship with samashti, 
srishti, and Parameshti, he will not hate or abuse anyone be- 
cause all are the limbs of the same body. To recognize the truth 
of the relationship between the limbs and the body, i.e., the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 158 


relation between the part and the whole is a major element in 
Sadhana. One who recognizes this truth will be unaffected by 
praise or blame. 


Story of a noble person 


Once, a noble person was proceeding from one village to 
another. He was followed by an ungodly man, who went on 
criticizing and abusing the noble person all the way. But the 
noble man was unaffected by the abusive attacks on him. He 
never paid any heed to them, nor did he show any anger or 
worry. As they approached the village, the villagers came in 
large numbers to welcome the noble man. This was noticed by 
the other man also. The noble soul spoke to one of the villag- 
ers, “Before attending to my needs, please serve this person 
with some butter milk and food, since he is very much tired 
from continuously abusing me all along the way.” 

The critic then realized the greatness of the person whom 
he had abused all along. He thought to himself, “He is unaf- 
fected by abuse and is indifferent to praise or blame. He must 
be very noble and worthy of veneration.” He fell at the feet of 
the noble soul and said, “Swami, even though I abused you so 
much, you did not show any anger.” 

The saintly man replied, “You simpleton, you do not real- 
ise that the same spirit resides in you and me. What are you 
condemning, the body or the self? If you are condemning the 
self, you are condemning yourself, because the same self is 
present in you and me. If you are abusing my body, I am, my- 
self, every moment condemning this body of mine, which is 
made up of the five elements and is full of foul smelling dirt 
and fecal matter. I decrying my own body because I am myself 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 159 


disgusted with it. So, if you are abusing my body, you are only 
helping me.” 


The nature of Brahman 


Thinking that you are only a body is delusion (Bhrama- 
tathwa) since you see multiplicity in unity. On the other hand, 
when you see unity in multiplicity, you attain self realization 
(Brahmatathwa). So, the perception of unity as diversity is 
Bhramatathwa, while discerning unity in all things is Brah- 
matathwa (perception of the divine). 

The stories of the Lord (Vishnu Charitra) are full of won- 
der (chitra). They sanctify the lives of the people of all the 
three worlds (Trailokya Pavitra) and are the tools that cut the 
creepers of worldly bondage (bhavalatalavitra). They are like 
noble friends (sanmitra). For the gardens of sages and seers, 
they are like spring season (munijanavanachaitra). 

The Divine is beyond description. Even great sages like 
Narada, son of Brahma, could not understand the majesty and 
mystery of God. Some people have a wrong notion that Narada 
is one who always creates discord. This is not correct. Narada 
means one who propagates wisdom. It was he who proclaimed 
that understanding nonduality is wisdom. He could go to Kai- 
lasa (Siva’s abode) or Vaikunta (Vishnu’s abode) in a moment. 

The ever-wandering Narada once went to Vaikunta. He met 
Vishnu there. Vishnu wanted to test Narada. He said, “Narada, 
you have no attachments. You are constantly wandering in the 
three worlds, chanting My name continually. But have you 
tried to understand the mystery of My creation? I created the 
five elements. This entire cosmos is made up of these five ele- 
ments. Which of these five elements is most important?” 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 160 


Narada replied, “How can I not know this, my Lord? I have 
cognized everything in this creation. If I cannot understand this 
truth, who else can?” 

The Lord then asked, “Which among the five elements is 
most important?” 

Narada replied, “Water is most important, for three-fourths 
of the earth is enveloped by water. Land is only one-fourth of 
the earth's surface.” 

Vishnu remarked, “But the sage Agastya drank up the 
ocean in a single gulp. So, is Agastya greater or water?” 

Narada replied, “You are right my Lord, Agastya is greater 
than water.” 

Vishnu asked again, “But this Agastya is a tiny star in the 
sky (akasa). Now, is this star greater or the sky?” 

Narada replied, “It is the sky that is greater.” 

The Lord agreed and said, “Your understanding is correct. 
The sky indeed is greater. In His incarnation as Vamana, the 
Lord asked for three steps from king Bali. And in the course of 
taking the gift of three steps, Vamana assumed the form of 
Thrivikrama and covered the entire earth in one step, the space 
from the earth to the sky in second, and there was no room for 
the third step. King Bali had to offer his head for the third step. 
So now, is God great or the sky?” 

Narada replied, “Swami, when the mere foot of the Lord 
covers the entire sky, how much greater His full form would 
be? God indeed is greater.” 

Vishnu now asked, “God, who envelops the entire cosmos 
dwells in the heart of His bhakta (devotee). So now, is the 
heart of the devotee greater or God?” 

Narada replied, “Indeed, the devotee’s heart is greater.” 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 161 


So, you see there is nothing greater than the heart of the 
devotee. The infinite God is enshrined in the heart of a true 
devotee in His subtlest form. That is why He is described as 
"Anoraneeyan mahato maheeyan" (subtler than the subtlest 
and vaster than the vastest). How can anyone grasp or describe 
the truth about the Divine? 


Live like a lotus 


If you want to understand the divine principle, you have to 
understand the essence of Bharatiya culture. The culture of 
Bharat teaches that to be reputed as a great man is of no conse- 
quence. To acquire a good name is all that matters. Ravana 
was a great personality in the Ramayana. But Rama was the 
embodiment of goodness. Ravana was great; Rama was good. 
What is the difference between greatness and goodness? A 
great man sees nara (man) in Narayana (God), while a good 
man sees Narayana in every nara. Greatness lies in seeing the 
divine in man. This is true Vedanta. Sarvam khalvidam Brah- 
ma (all this is verily Brahman). Sarvam Vishnumayam jagat 
(the universe is permeated by the Divine). Jshwara sarva bhu- 
tanam (God is immanent in all creatures). The one who knows 
this truth is a good man. 

What is the difference between man and God? The one 
with the feeling of separateness and individuality (vyakti) is 
human, while God sees everything in the cosmos as His mani- 
festation. Recognizing the truth that all are His forms is the 
perception of the divine. A noble man will perceive himself as 
part of society (samashti). The nobler man will perceive him- 
self as part of the entire creation. The one who perceives the 
entire creation as the manifestation, of God (Vishnumayam) is 
a Paramahamsa (fully self-realized one). He sees the divine in 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 162 


every part of this creation. What are the attributes of a Para- 
mahamsa? The heart of a Paramahamsa is like a lotus. Where 
is the lotus born? It is born in mud. Where does it live? It lives 
on the surface of water. The lotus is neither defiled by mud nor 
wetted by water. Yet it cannot survive even for a second with- 
out mud and water. Man's accumulated samskaras of past lives 
are like mud. The present life can be compared to water. A 
Paramahamsa is one who is not affected by his past life. 
Though his present life is the consequence of his past sam- 
skaras, yet it can be pure and free from the mud of past traits. 


Jealousy and its three sons 


The divinity present in man endows him with sacred quali- 
ties as mere means of his worldly existence. He wastes time by 
spending it in mundane activities. Why? The main reason is 
man’s ahamkara (ego) and mamakara (attachment). Besides 
these two, man is also a victim of asuya (jealousy). Jealousy is 
the source of great danger. No matter how great a scholar one 
may be, or a man of authority and position, or one with great 
virtues, when once one falls prey to jealousy, one loses every- 
thing in life. 

Here is a green tree full of blooming flowers. A pest enters 
this tree and destroys it in a short time. The pest is not visible 
as it eats away the tree’s roots. Jealousy is like this pest. The 
Kauravas met their ruin due to jealousy. A jealous man is not 
happy to see the happiness, health, wealth, or higher perform- 
ance of others. The feeling that no one should excel one in life 
is the root of jealousy. Jealousy has three sons. They are kama 
(desire), krodha (anger) and dwesha (hatred). But this jealousy 
has a sister named anasuya (one without jealousy). 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 163 


Anasuya, the wife of sage Atri, made Brahma, Vishnu, and 
Maheswara, the Supreme Trinity, into babes. She could make 
the gods forget their Divinity. She could make Divinity her 
child. However, in this world, jealousy is growing beyond lim- 
its. It is highly dangerous. Jealousy causes the fall of man. One 
should eschew jealousy. Jealousy is totally contrary to the 
culture of Bharat. Bharatiya culture has always considered 
humanity as one entity. That is the import of the Vedic prayer: 


Saha Navavathu 

Saha Nau Bhunakthu 

Saha Veeryam Karavavahai 
Tejaswi Navadheethamasthu 
Ma Vidvisavahai 

Om Santhi Santhi Santhih. 


May we be protected and nourished together! 
May we perform heroic deeds! 

May we be filled with divine effulgence. 
May we never have any hatred between us! 
Om peace, peace, peace. 


How sacred are these words of the Vedas, which are a part 
of the heritage of Bharat! There are so many similar sacred 
tenets in the samskriti (culture) of Bharat. What is samskriti? 
That which refines. Man has forgotten his tenet of refinement. 
He has also forgotten his humanness. He is fostering animal 
nature. This animal nature in turn becomes demonic. Strive to 
get rid of the animal traits and develop human qualities. 


Offer the sacred food to God first 


Man undertakes several spiritual practices today. But what 
is their effect on him? The body of man is like a tender plan- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 164 


tain leaf. On this fresh green leaf, you serve five items of deli- 
cious food of nectarine qualities. These items of food are com- 
posed of the five elements (earth, water, fire, air, and ether), 
the five life principles (prana, apana, vyana, udana, and 
samana), and the five senses of man. To whom do you offer 
this sacred food first? Instead of offering to God first, you offer 
it to demons of kama, krodha, lobha, moha, mada, matsarya 
(desire, anger, greed, attachment, pride, jealousy). Thus, you 
offer all your five senses to these demons. After these demons 
have satiated themselves, and when the tender plantain leaf of 
the body has become a tattered remnant, you turn to offer it to 
God. Is this what you should do? As soon as the food is served, 
it should be offered to God. Then you partake of it. Why do 
you offer this wonderful feast to the demons of desire, anger, 
greed, pride, jealousy etc.? 


When old age overtakes you, the body becomes 
weak, vision fails, the face is full of wrinkles; 
Urchins surround you and tease you as stuffed 

monkey 
And your body itself becomes a burden of misery. 
Is that when you should offer your body to God? 
No, not at all. Offer yourself to God in your youth, 
when all your faculties 
Are at their peak performance and the body is full 
of vigor and vitality. 
[Telugu Poem] 


Start prayer and devotion to God at early age 


How can you do that? You can do it by following the prin- 
ciples of sathya, dharma, santhi, prema, and ahimsa. These are 
sacred delicious items of food to be offered to God. And they 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 165 


must be offered on the fresh, green plantain leaf of tender, 
supple, and efficient body. Prayer and devotion to God at early 
age will bring fulfillment in your life. You have forgotten this 
truth. When somebody asks why you don't think of God, you 
say, there is still time for it; you can do so after retirement. 
Even after retirement, some people run after re-employment. 


What is the use of all your earnings, 
when your end is near? 
You fool, think, who will follow you in death. 
It is a folly to forget God while striving to live. 
Look after your family, perform your duties, 
but hold in your heart always God. 
[Telugu Poem)] 


Lead a worthy and noble life as a human being 


That is the real meaning of manava (human being). What 
does manava imply? Ma means ignorance, na means without, 
and va is to act. Thus, manava is one who acts without igno- 
rance. There is another interpretation of manava, viz. ma = not, 
nava = new. Man is not new. He has had several previous 
lives. He has not become a human being all of a sudden. So it 
is quite natural for him to know how to lead a worthy and no- 
ble life as a human being. 

Here is a small example. A cow gives birth to a calf. The 
new-born calf instinctively goes to the udder of the cow to 
drink milk. Who has taught the calf? Similarly, a new born 
babe seeks its mother’s milk. All this is only carryover from 
several previous births. A new-born animal needs no training 
to seek milk from its mother. You must realize from this that 
you are not a brand new creation, but one in fact truly ancient. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 166 


You have taken several births, but you are yet to realize 
God. Merely repeating Krishna, Rama, Govinda is of no use. 
You must have full faith in God. Only then can you attain sal- 
vation. You should consider viswasa (faith) as your swasa (life 
breath). Without swasa (life breath), you cannot live. 


Where there is breath, there is life. 

Where there is faith, there is love (prema). 
Where there is love, there is peace (santhi). 
Where there is peace, there is truth (sathya). 
Where there is truth, there is God. 

Where there is God, there is bliss (ananda). 


Experience inner bliss 


Human life should begin with faith and end in bliss (anan- 
da). When you have no faith, how can you attain happiness? 
Increase your faith in God and attain peace (santhi). Through 
truth experience God. God is bliss. The experience of divinity 
is true bliss. 

Bliss is with you. Bliss is in you. It is behind you, above 
you, below you and all around you. When you are immersed in 
bliss, what is it that you need to search? The way to experience 
this bliss is what I mentioned in the beginning —bend the 
body, mend the senses, end the mind. This is true culture. Have 
faith in this culture, lead a pure and meaningful life and attain 
the goal of human life. 

Perform your duty. Karthavyam yogamuchyate (perform- 
ing your duty properly is indeed yoga). Duty is God. Today, 
you have forgotten yoga and are running after udyoga (job). In 
the job you may get promotion, but you have to face retirement 
too. There is no retirement in yoga. It is nithya and sathya 
(eternal and true). Yoga karmasu kausalam (perfection in ac- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 167 


tion is true yoga). Discharging one's duty efficiently and with 
love is yoga. Duty is God. 

Divinity permeates everything in this universe. God has in- 
grained mystery and beauty in nature. Everyone must try to 
discover this divine mystery in nature. Nature is invested with 
divine beauty. No man can create this wonderful beauty. At 
sunrise, everything looks golden. God’s creation is described 
in various ways. If God’s creation is so beautiful, how much 
more beautiful would God be? Before trying to visualise the 
beauty of Creator, discover and appreciate beauty of nature. 

As long as you are in this world, carry out your duties dili- 
gently. While discharging your duties, spend time in thoughts 
of divinity. Today, you waste time. Time is the very form of 
God. The Vedas says: “Samvatsaraya Namah.” In fact, Sam- 
vatsara is God's name. We even say Nutana Samvatsara (New 
Year). God is ever new. This ever new effulgent God takes the 
form of man, and is called Avatar. Actually, every new human 
birth is an Avatar as God resides in each heart as the Atma. 

There is no living body without Azma. It is not possible to 
realize Atma without the body. The body and soul are related. 
They are interdependent. The body should be maintained 
strong and healthy to experience the divine bliss. Do not waste 
all your time in eating, sleeping, and in sensual pleasures. Per- 
form your worldly duties at their proper time, and set apart the 
time when you offer yourself to God. 


Start early, drive slowly, reach safely 


Perform all your actions in the service of God. “Sarvaka- 
rma Bhagavad preethyartham (all your actions should be to 
please God).” Do not have any worldly preferences. Actions 
performed for personal satisfaction are attributed to pravritti 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 168 


marga (worldly path); those to please God relate to nivritti 
marga (inward path). Do not wait till you are unable to move, 
your vision fails, folds and wrinkles appear on the face, and 
hair turns gray. Why don’t you think of God from the begin- 
ning? Start early, drive slowly, reach safely. This should be 
your guiding principle for your life’s journey as well. 


Think of God early in life. 

Be not proud, oh man, of your beautiful body, 
youth, and power. 

Do not forget the fact that very soon you will have 
to face the misery of old age. 

Your body is nothing but a mere puppet, a doll of 
skin. 

Understand the truth of this ‘puppet dance. 

[Telugu Poem] 


This is not life. Make proper use of the body and experi- 
ence the ultimate reality. Within this mrinmaya (body of clay) 
is Chinmaya (awareness of the Atma), which imparts value to 
the body. 


The body is a box of rusty tin. 
Inside the box are priceless gems —diamonds, 
emeralds, sapphires. 
The box is worthless, 
but the gems are highly valuable. 
The body is of little worth, 
but the indwelling Lord is of real worth. 
The body is a mud doll, leather puppet, 
a delusive toy. 
[Telugu Poem] 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 169 


But the nectarine, non-dual, eternal bliss (amritananda, ad- 
vaitananda, amarananda) is in you. With this treasure inside 
you, you search around and undertake pilgrimages. No need. 
Bliss is inside you. Make it come out. This is real sadhana. Do 
not bother about worldly problems. They are passing clouds. 
There is only one permanent truth. This is the principle of the 
Atma. The body is temporary. But what is inside is the perma- 
nent, eternal Atmatathwa. 

Embodiments of Love! All of you are embodiments of di- 
vinity. God is in you as the Atma. Make proper use of the 
body. How? Speak in a pure way, speak the truth. Act right- 
eously. Discriminate between right and wrong and act accord- 
ingly. Do not act under the impulses of anger and hatred. Do 
not lie or abuse. Do not cause hurt to anybody. 

We see pollution everywhere. We should not give room to 
this. What is the solution? Fill your heart with love. 


27 April 1999 
Sai Sruthi, Kodaikanal 


My mission is to raise the consciousness of man to 
a level at which he neither rejoices nor mourns 
over anything. In that supreme state, one is going 
through re-birth and re-death each moment, for 
these acts are one and the same, emerging from 
the formless into form, merging from the form into 
the formless. Then, there is no success or adver- 
sity, no joy or pain. When the devotee attains this 
Oneness, their journey toward Me ceases. For, 
they will be with Me endlessly. 

—Baba 


13 


Nature of Self 


Trees bear fruit for the benefit of others; 

Rivers flow for the betterment of all; 

Cows yield milk for the benefit of others; 

Human body has been given to man to help others. 
[Sanskrit sloka] 


In this world, trees, rivers, and cows help others without 
any trace of selfish motive. They do not expect anything in re- 
turn. Without trees, rivers, and cows, the world cannot exist. In 
fact, it is they that sustain it. But the irony is that man does not 
make any effort to help and serve others. The spirit of sacrifice 
evident in trees, rivers, and cows is absent in man today. He 
spends all his time in fulfilling his selfish desires and does not 
give even a moment for doing good to others or for helping 
them. Sai Avatar has incarnated in this Kali age with the divine 
mission of making every individual realize his relationship 
with the community, and ultimately with Divinity. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 171 


True individuality of man 


Transformation at individual level is absolutely essential. 
But today, man is wasting his time in evil practices. He in- 
dulges in unholy activities day in and day out. He demeans 
himself by his evil habits. He kills animals and eats their flesh. 
Instead of purifying his mind, he debases it by taking intox1- 
cants. He defiles time, which is the very form of Divinity, by 
gambling. He nurtures evil qualities by indulging in evil ac- 
tivities. In addition to this, he involves himself in demeaning 
activities like stealing and denigrating others. He reads vulgar 
books, which generate evil thoughts and violent feelings in 
him. As he indulges more and more in wicked activities, he 
also pollutes and corrupts the society. When individuals take to 
evil ways, the entire society degenerates. Teaching and propa- 
gation of spirituality is essential for the purification of the in- 
dividual and the society. 

What is spirituality? That which destroys man's animal 
nature, nurtures humanness, and finally transforms him into a 
Divine being is spirituality. Worshipping, singing devotional 
songs, and performing rituals are acts of secondary importance. 
They cannot be identified with true spirituality. The word SAI 
spells out to the world the significance of transformation at 
three levels. The letter S stands for transformation at spiritual 
level, A for transformation at association (social) level, and I 
for transformation at the individual level. 

Individual transformation is the basis for the other two. 
Therefore, this is the first step. But, these days, the word indi- 
vidual is not properly understood. You usually take only the 
human form into consideration and identify it with an individ- 
ual. Who is an individual? He, who manifests his Avayakta 
(unmanifest) Divinity through his conduct is an individual 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 172 


(vyakti). This latent divine principle permeates the entire being 
of an individual from head to foot and is called conscience. To 
manifest and demonstrate the presence of this conscience is the 
characteristic of a human being. Instead of manifesting the 
pure inner being, the Self, man today is manifesting evil quali- 
ties and evil tendencies, which are related to his outer being i.e. 
the body. The Chaitanya (Divine Consciousness) latent in 
every human being is his true individuality. This consciousness 
should be put on the right track. 


Put your senses in right direction 


I said the other day, “Sarvam khalvidam Brahma (verily all 
this is Brahman).” This is a mantra. “Easwara sarva bhutanam 
(God is the indweller in all beings)” is another mantra. It is es- 
sential for everyone to understand and realize the inner signifi- 
cance of these mantras. Every mantra is pregnant with deep 
inner meaning. It is impossible to understand the true meaning 
of the mantras without acquiring virtues. 

What are these virtues? Right vision (samyak drishti) is 
one. Humanity will be in danger without right vision. The im- 
age of every seen object gets imprinted in the mind. Therefore, 
first of all one must have right vision. Right vision is that 
which is untainted by the baneful influence of evil feelings, 
evil thoughts, and evil deeds. See no evil; see what is good. 
That which develops your insight to understand what is good, 
eternal, and true is right vision. 

Next comes right listening (samyak sravanam). You should 
lend your ear only to good speech. Under no circumstances 
should you listen to evil talk. For this, you should listen to sa- 
cred texts, bhajans (devotional songs), and talks about sacred 
acts. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 L73 


Everything in this world is impermanent. The Vedas say, 
"Yath drisyam thannasyam" (all that is seen is bound to per- 
ish). All that you see will disappear one day or the other. For 
the nine-fold path of bhakti (devotion) good listening (srava- 
nam) is the beginning. Sravanam, keerthanam, Vishnusma- 
ranam, padasevanam, archanam, vandanam, dasyam, sneham, 
and Atmanivedanam (listening, singing the glories of the Lord, 
constant remembrance of the name of Vishnu, serving the 
Lord’s feet, worship, salutation, servitude, friendship, and self- 
surrender) are the nine paths of devotion. The first step to the 
final act of self-surrender (Atmanivedanam) is sravanam (lis- 
tening). Sruti (divine sound e.g. Vedas) is derived from srava- 
nam only. 


Right thoughts lead to right action 


The next virtue is right speech (samyak vak). Right vision 
and right listening lead to right speech. Your speech should be 
good. Never utter harsh words. Speak softly and sweetly. That 
is why I tell you often, “You cannot always oblige, but you can 
always speak obligingly.” Say what you have to say without 
harshness. Speak softly so that only the person for whom your 
words are intended may hear you. Such soft and sweet speech 
should be developed. Good vision, good listening and good 
speech lead to good thoughts. “Yad bhavam that bhavathi (as 
are your thoughts, so is the result).” Right thoughts lead to 
right action (samyak karma). Without good thoughts it is not 
possible to perform good actions. 

Buddha performed tapas (penance) for many years to put 
his five senses on the sacred path. Mere bookish knowledge is 
of no consequence. It is related to art, and is in fact artificial. 
Mere textual knowledge will not lead you to right vision. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 174 


Similarly, your sense of hearing does not become holy by lis- 
tening to the expositions of a teacher. Good thoughts cannot be 
acquired by reading scriptures or by listening to the teachings 
of the preceptor. By self-effort you should put your senses of 
sabda (sound), sparsa (touch), rupa (form), rasa (taste), and 
gandha (smell) to right use. That alone leads you to proper 
sadhana (spiritual practice). 


Senses are the cause for the wrong attitude of man 


When you put your senses in the right direction, your life 
will also enter the right path. For the wrong attitude of man 
today, senses are the cause. As the senses become impure, the 
entire life too becomes impure and unsacred. It you want to 
make your life sacred, you have to first sanctify your senses. 
So, Buddha who did penance for several years, understood that 
all ritualistic practices were useless. He declared right vision, 
right listening, right speech, right thoughts, and right acts as 
the five primordial principles for the guidance of man. 

These five principles are the pancha pranas (five life 
forces) and five koshas (life sheaths) of man. Physical body is 
annamaya kosha (food sheath). Body is transient. But you 
should nourish it, because only a properly nourished healthy 
body can support the pranamaya kosha (life sheath) and ma- 
nomaya kosha (mind sheath). Pranamaya kosha helps in the 
balanced flow of prana (life force) in the body. 

Human beings limit themselves up to these three koshas. 
Nobody attempts to reach fourth sheath, vijnanamaya kosha 
(wisdom sheath), which is beyond food sheath, life sheath, and 
mind sheath. This sheath is reached only after transcending the 
first three sheaths. What is the nature of these three sheaths? 
The one you think you are is the food sheath (physical body). 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 175 


What others think you are is the mind sheath. The one you 
really are is the life sheath. 

When the human being enters the wisdom sheath, only then 
does he experience true bliss. So, man has to maintain sound 
body. But he should know that as the body is associated with 
the senses, he should channelise them into the right path. When 
the senses follow the right path, only then does the life force 
vibrate in the body properly. This vibration is Divine in nature. 

In the Gayathri Mantra, the word bhur refers to the body. 
Body is composed of gross materials such as water, lime, lead, 
iron, etc. All these materials may not cost more than one rupee. 
But the value of the body is not one rupee. Its value is im- 
measurable. Bhur also stands for the earth. The earth is made 
up of matter, which is transient. 

The word bhuvah in the mantra stands for vibration. The 
body is made up of gross matter, which cannot have any 
movement without the life force of vibration. In the absence of 
this vibration, the body is mere lifeless matter. 

What is the source of this vibration? This vibration origi- 
nates from radiation (suvaha), which is related to spiritual 
knowledge. 


Purity in thought, word, and deed 


This spiritual knowledge comes from the Vedas. The four 
mahavakyas (profound statements) of the Vedas that give this 
knowledge are Prajnanam Brahma (knowledge is Brahman), 
Ayamatma Brahma (Atma is Brahman), Aham Brahmasmi (1 
am Brahman) and Tatthwamasi (That you are). Life force 
(prana) or vibration works only through radiation. Without the 
radiation of prajnana, vibration cannot have any movement. It 
becomes inert. True humanness lies in harmonizing these three 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 176 


principles. Man should therefore achieve the unity of materi- 
alization, vibration and radiation. Harmony in thought, word, 
and deed, is referred to as trikarana suddhi. 


Example of trikarana suddhi 


I shall relate to you an example from the Mahabharata to 
illustrate this. Dharmaraja, the eldest brother of the Pandavas, 
was an embodiment of sathya, dharma, santhi, prema, and 
ahimsa. Draupadi, born out of fire, represented prana. Bhima, 
the son of the wind God, symbolized chaitanya shakti (power 
of awareness). You know that life without awareness is jada 
(inert). Arjuna symbolized the antahkarna shakti (power of the 
inner motivator). Nakula and Sahadeva represented the 
jnanendriyas (organs of perception) and karmendriyas (organs 
of action), respectively. 

Truth, righteousness, peace, and love join the senses of ac- 
tion and cognition, enter the antahkarna (seat of thought and 
feeling) with the help of life force called vibration and live 
there. So, Divinity, which exists in every individual, is associ- 
ated with the five cognitive senses: sound, touch, vision, taste, 
and smell. To recognize the nature of this truth, man should 
first attain the unity of thought, word, and deed and bring 
about complete harmony in them. This is the real spiritual 
practice. 

Today, the typical individual thinks something, speaks 
something else, and acts in altogether a different way. “Ma- 
nasyanyath vachasyanyath karmanyanyath duratmanam.” 
Such a manner of functioning is typical of a wicked person. 

Arjuna was the epitome of trikarana suddhi (purity of the 
triad thought, word, and deed). Nakula and Sahadeva, who 
symbolized the senses of cognition and action, provided the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 177 


right sources. Bhima, the son of the wind God, stood by the 
side of Dharmaraja. His presence was as vital as the presence 
of oxygen in the environment. Draupadi symbolized life force. 
Only with the help of this life force could Dharmaraja foster 
truth, righteousness, peace, and love. The Pandavas thus repre- 
sent the proper use of all the powers in the body in purity and 
harmony. 


Idealism of Draupadi 


Epics like the Mahabharata and the Bhagavata and other 
Bharatiya (Indian) scriptures expound these spiritual realities. 
Though Bhima and Arjuna were seethed with anger and re- 
venge when their sons were killed by Aswatthama, Draupadi 
pacified them. Though she was grief-stricken at the loss of her 
children, she maintained a perfect state of equanimity. When 
Arjuna, in a fit of anger, was ready to kill Aswatthama, she 
quoted the scriptures and changed his mind. Draupadi was 
known for her immaculate character. She was also called 
Panchali. This word is often misinterpreted as a woman mar- 
ried to five men. No, it is not correct. She was able to co- 
ordinate the functions of the five cognitive senses —sound, 
touch, vision, taste, and smell— in an impeccable manner. 
When Arjuna was about to kill Aswatthama, she advised him 
in the following manner: 


Oh Arjuna, it is an unrighteous act to kill 
the one who is fear-stricken, 

the one who is in distress, 

the one who is asleep, 

the one who is unaware, 

the one who has surrendered himself, 

the one who is helpless, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 178 


the one who is unarmed, and 
the one who is a female. 
[Telugu Poem] 


Your speech is full of anger. 

It is a dangerous trait. 

No human being should possess anger. 

The one who is filled with anger 

achieves nothing but disgrace. 

Anger motivates one to do evil deeds. 

Such an individual is despised by everyone. 
[Telugu Poem] 


Bhima was also furious. Draupadi spoke to him thus: 


Anger destroys one’s riches. 
It destroys one’s respect. 
It distances one from relatives. 


It causes loss of everything. 
[Telugu Poem] 


Aswatthama had killed all her five sons. One can imagine 
the state of her mind. She would have been justified in using 
the harshest language. But she did not have harsh feelings. She 
ran and fell at the feet of Aswatthama and questioned his ruth- 
lessness in a gentle way: 


They didn't wear weapons and rage against you. 
They were not in the battlefield. 
They didn’t cause you even the least harm. 
They were not adept in fighting. 
How did you feel like killing such 
innocent children who were asleep! 
[Telugu Poem] 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 179 


Draupadi spoke in such a gentle manner. She never used 
harsh words. Even in moments of extreme distress, Draupadi 
could speak softly and graciously. In fact every individual 
should speak softly. 

What should a man learn today? He should utilize his 
senses in the right way and thereby make an endeavor to attain 
Divinity. 

Purpose of the Avatar 


In this human life, the most significant thing to know is de- 
votion. Jnana (wisdom) is the root of the tree of love. Its fruit 
contains sweet juice. It is the juice of devotion. The juice or 
essence (raso) is the very form of the Divine. Raso vai sah (He 
is sweet essence). So, bhakti (devotion) is the very essence of 
Divinity. Sweetness of bhakti should reflect in your speech. 
Hence, every word uttered by you should be sweet. Only then 
do you deserve to be called a human being. When can you 
speak sweetly? When you contemplate on the Divine, your 
speech becomes sweet. 

However, it may sometimes necessary to use harsh words 
to correct people who act and behave in evil ways. Though the 
words may appear to be harsh, the feelings behind them should 
be saturated with love. Sometimes when it rains, hailstones 
also fall along with the gentle raindrops. They are nothing but 
water in frozen form. In this context, I give you an example. 

During the Mahabharata war, one day Aswatthama vowed 
that he would behead the Pandavas before the sun sets. Drau- 
padi came to know of this vow. She prayed to Krishna, “I don't 
want anything. I don't want the kingdom. Save the Pandavas” 
Krishna said, “That is not in my hands. The vow cannot be 
changed?” Draupadi pleaded with Krishna, “Nothing in this 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 180 


world is beyond Your capacity. Everything is in Your hands. If 
You will, You can do anything.” And she fell at His feet. 


Krishna’s plan to save the Pandavas 


Lord Krishna blessed her and immediately chalked out a 
plan. In the darkness of night, He went to sage Durvasa. The 
Pandavas, who accompanied the Lord, waited outside as in- 
structed by Krishna. To protect His devotees, the Lord has to 
enact many roles. If He does not act, the play simply loses its 
significance and it becomes uninteresting. Durvasa gave an 
ecstatic welcome to Krishna. 

Krishna said, “I have come here with a purpose. It is a very 
difficult task. You have to help me.” Durvasa said, “I am ready 
to do any task except telling a lie.” Krishna said, “Uttering lies 
is not acceptable to Me also. I am Divine Myself. I always ad- 
here to truth. How can I tell you to utter a lie? I have made a 
plan. Please act according to it. That will fulfil My desire.” 

“Lord, do You have a desire?” asked Durvasa. "I have de- 
sires for the sake of others. I have no desires for My own sake. 
Whatever I do, whatever I speak, it is for the welfare of others. 
I never seek My own welfare,” Krishna replied. 

“Lord! what should I do?" asked Durvasa. Krishna said, 
“Dig a big pit. Put a strong plank over it and place your throne 
on it. Then sit on the throne. The Pandavas will hide in the pit. 
When Aswatthama comes here along with his accomplices and 
asks the whereabouts of the Pandavas, tell him that the Pan- 
davas are under you. But say this in a harsh tone.” 

Durvasa was known for his temper. Aswatthama searched 
everywhere and at last came to Durvasa. He offered salutations 
to Durvasa and asked about the Pandavas. Durvasa said in an 
angry tone, “Pandavas are under me.” He spoke truth but 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 181 


changed the intonation. Fearing that the sage would curse him, 
Aswatthama ran away from that place. 

In this way, God has to contrive some situations for the 
protection of the world. His attempts are not only to protect the 
holy people but to protect holiness itself. This sacredness is 
present in every being. To protect this sacredness the Lord in- 
carnates. “Paritranaya Sadhunam Vinashay Cha Dushkritam 
Dharma Sansthapanarthaya Sambhavami Yuge Yuge (to pro- 
tect the righteous and destroy the wicked I incarnate from time 
to time to establish dharma).” Righteousness can never be an- 
nihilated. It is ever present in every age. But occasions arise 
when its very existence is threatened. The Lord incarnates to 
re-establish dharma and to accord proper place to it. If dharma 
is vulnerable to destruction, how can we call it dharma? So, 
dharma can never be vanquished. But, it becomes obscure. To 
make dharma more manifest is the purpose of the Avatar. 


Saturate your life with Love 


The question arises, “Who is God?” You are all the forms 
of God. The Atmatathwa (Self) present in every being is in fact 
God. It is Divinity in its true sense. "Vamaivamso jeevaloke 
jeevabhuta sanathana," (an aspect of My Divinity is resident 
in each being). Do not search for God. Look within. Divine 
will manifest in you. 

Spiritual texts may be many, the teachings of spirituality 
may be different, but the Atma is the same. In any country, at 
any time, in any surroundings, the Atma is the same. There is 
no such thing as a Japanese Atma or American Atma or Atma 
of any other country. It transcends all divisions of creeds and 
castes. It has no distinctions like man and woman. It is beyond 
all distinctions. Nirgunam, niranjanam, sanathanam, niket- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 182 


anam, nithya buddha mukta nirmala swarupinam (The nature 
of the Self is described as attributeless, pure, eternal, free from 
bondage, unsullied and immortal). This eternal Atma is present 
in every human being. 


Love is the essence of all fruits 


At one time, someone questioned Shirdi Sai Baba, “Are 
you God?” What was His reply? “All are the forms of the Di- 
vine. I am not only Divine, but also the Divinity that is present 
in the Divine,” said Baba. So, the same Divinity is present in 
every being as all are the forms of the Divine. 

But, people are not able to realize the Divine because they 
drink intoxicating wine of worldly desires. Wine leads to igno- 
rance but not to the Divine. So, you should consume something 
that promotes Divinity. What is it? It is love. If you taste the 
fruit of love, you need no other nourishment. Love is the es- 
sence of all fruits. It is the goal of all goals. It is the end of all 
spiritual practices. Cultivate such love with pure and steady 
mind. For this, you should keep the body, mind, and senses on 
the right track. 

I told you yesterday the three ways that would help you to 
streamline your life: Bend the body, mend the senses, and end 
the mind. What does the maxim, bend the body stand for? Is it 
bending the body to carry out some task? No. You should bend 
your body with humility, respect, and love when you see elders 
and your parents. In olden days, in town and country, the en- 
trances to the houses were a bit low. Visitors had to bend their 
heads to enter the houses. To highlight the significance of the 
maxim, bend the body, the ancients used to keep the height of 
the entrances low deliberately. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 183 


Less luggage, more comfort makes travel a pleasure 


Mend the senses. Through right vision, right listening, right 
speech, right thoughts, and right actions you have to control 
your senses. That is the end of the mind. Here is an example. 
This is a piece of cloth. You call it cloth as long as the threads 
are intact. If you remove the threads one by one there will be 
no cloth. The threads symbolize your desires. 

It is said, “less luggage, more comfort make travel a pleas- 
ure.” You are increasing your luggage day after day. This bur- 
den has become a great hindrance to your progress and happi- 
ness. You should remove this hurdle and move closer to Di- 
vinity. Salokya is closeness to Divinity. Sarupya is to attain the 
form of Divinity. How is this possible? The Vedas say, 
“Brahmavid Brahmaiva Bhavati (the knower of Brahman be- 
comes Brahman).” Prahlada, who contemplated on Lord Nara- 
yana, became Narayana himself. The dacoit Ratnakara recited 
the name of Lord Rama and transformed himself into sage 
Valmiki. Hanuman contemplated on the name of Lord Rama. 
He is worshipped by the devotees of Rama. Sayujya is com- 
plete integration or merger with the Lord. This is the end of all 
sadhanas (spiritual exercises). 

Several ways of spirituality are enunciated in the Vedas, 
the epics and the Puranas, but love is the essence of all these 
ways. Love is changeless. There should not be any change in 
love. Cultivate this changeless love and redeem your life. 


Start the day with love, 
Fill the day with love, 
Spend the day with love, 
End the day with love, 
This is the way to God. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 184 


Saturate your life with love and end your life with Divine 
love. All other thoughts will disturb your equanimity. 


Gifts of God 


Man possesses all types of wealth except two. These two 
are possessed by God. You can attain them by praying to God. 
These two are santhi (peace) and ananda (bliss). You may feel 
happy otherwise too, but know that such happiness is transient. 
Eternal peace and eternal happiness are the gifts of the Divine. 
So, you should pray for these gifts. Your prayer should be like 
this: “My Lord, I do not want anything that can be found in 
this world. Please grant me that which is with you alone, santhi 
and ananda (peace and bliss). I want nothing else other than 
these two.” Pleasure and happiness obtained from objects of 
this world are short-lived. “Anithyam Asukham Lokam, Imam 
Prapya Bhajasva Maam,” says the Gita. Let not your prayer to 
God be for these impermanent things. Pray to God for santhi 
and ananda. With such prayer you can win God’s love and 
grace. Once God’s love is obtained, you can win the whole 
world. When you pray to God for His love, your worldly de- 
sires also get fulfilled automatically. 

Once, a king did penance. He had no children. God mani- 
fested before him and asked him to tell his wish. The king said, 
“Lord, I want to see my great grandson ruling the kingdom.” 
How many desires are contained in one desire! He should have 
children. His children should also beget children. The kingdom 
should be under his control till his great grandson grows up 
and rules over it. His eyesight should be intact to watch this 
progress. This single desire expressed by him contains all the 
other desires. Likewise, if you pray to God for love, all your 
worldly desires too will be fulfilled. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 185 


Man is seated under a tree 
Bearing twelve worries. 
Birth is a worry, life is a worry, 
Family is a worry, death is a worry, 
Childhood is a worry, old age is a worry, 
Success is a worry, failure is a worry, 
Action is a worry, obstacles are a worry, 
Joy itself is a worry, all uncertainties are a worry. 
Oh ye, all come and carry away this gift. 
All your worries will end. 
[Telugu Poem] 


This tamarind tree of worries is not a fit tree for shade. If 
you receive God’s love, all these worries will vanish. This is 
your only need. This should be your only desire. All other 
spiritual practices are of no use. Love cannot be acquired by 
these practices. Prayer and bhakti (devotion) with intense 
yearning for Gods love and grace will fill your heart with love. 
Chant the Lord's name ceaselessly to attain that love. 


28 April 1999 
Sai Sruthi, Kodaikanal 


I have repeatedly declared that students are My 
property. I consider students’ welfare as My wel- 
fare and their happiness as My happiness. I never 
think of My happiness and My comfort. 

—Baba 


14 


Women Symbolize Sacrifice 


Rama’s divinity blossomed under Kausalya's loving care; 
Lava and Kusa could become powerful and famous 

Due to their noble and virtuous mother Sita; 
The love and care of Jijabai made Shivaji a great warrior; 
Fostered with the love of 

his mother Putlibai, Gandhi became a Mahatma. 
Is there anyone in this world who can 

Take care of you the way your mother does? 
Amma (mother) is the first word that man picks up in life. 
The first letter of the word 'Amma' also happens to be 

The first letter of the alphabet. 

[Telugu Poem] 


Embodiments of Love! 


In this world, there are many types of relationships, but 
none equals the relationship that exists between the mother and 
the child. It is because of this intimate relationship with the 
mother that one’s own country is called motherland. Similarly, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 187 


one’s own language is called mother tongue, not father tongue. 
Among the parents, the first place is given to the mother; next 
comes the father. Not only in day-to-day life but also in the 
field of spirituality, mothers and women are given the highest 
regard. For example, when we mention the names of Divine 
couples such as Sita Rama, Radha Krishna, Lakshmi Nara- 
yana, etc., the names of the goddesses come first. What is the 
inner significance of this? Mother represents Nature, which is 
the manifest aspect of Divinity. Similarly, the body and the 
Atma, the creation and the Creator, are closely interrelated. The 
body cannot function without the Atma. The Atma cannot be 
experienced without the body. 

The Bhagavad Gita refers to swadharma and paradharma. 
Swa refers to the Atma and para to the body. But today, people 
are under the mistaken notion that swadharma refers to the 
dharma of one’s own caste and community such as brahmin, 
kshatriya (warrior), vaisya (merchant), and sudra (labourer). 
Swadharma is Atmadharma. The letter Sa denotes Divinity. It 
also signifies the four stages such as Salokya (contemplation 
on God), Sameepya (nearness to God), Sarupya (identity with 
God), and Sayujya (merger with God). Today, man performs 
all his activities having faith in the external world. All that is 
physical and external is temporary. Only the Atma is perma- 
nent and eternal. In fact, the Atma is the real mother. It is not 
proper on your part to forget this divine mother. 


Mother is one’s first God 


Mother is given the utmost importance in human life. 
There may be a wicked son, but not a wicked mother. It is be- 
cause of the noble feelings of the mothers that sons become 
virtuous, intelligent, attain exalted positions and earn name and 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 188 


fame. The Vedas declare: Mathru Devo bhava, pithru Devo 
bhava, acharya Devo bhava, atithi Devo bhava (worship the 
mother as God, the father as God, the preceptor as God and the 
guest as God.) It is the mother who fosters you and nourishes 
you. It is she who knows your choices and preferences and ful- 
fils all your needs. So, be grateful to your mother always. 

Though you cannot see Rama, Krishna, Siva, and Vishnu, 
you are worshipping them because you believe in scriptures 
and what the elders say. But how is that you are forgetting 
your parents, who are responsible for your progress in life? 
First and foremost, you should show gratitude to your parents, 
love them, and respect them. Your blood, your food, your 
head, your money are all the gifts of your parents. You do not 
receive these gifts directly from God. All that is related to God 
is only indirect experience. It is only the parents whom you can 
see directly and experience their love. 

So, consider your parents as God. God will be pleased and 
will manifest before you only when you love and respect your 
parents. 

Children can understand the meanings of the word fox or 
dog only when they see their pictures. Similarly, it is only after 
seeing the parents that one can understand the existence of 
God. When you love and respect your parents, only then you 
can understand the love of the Divine Parents (Jagatmatha and 
Jagatpitha). This is what I tell you often: if you understand the 
‘T’ principle in you, you will understand the ‘I’ in everybody. 
Vyashti (individual) has emerged from samashti (society), 
samashti from srushti (creation), and srushti from Parameshti 
(Creator). Only when you understand the principle of creation, 
can you understand the Creator. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 189 


It is the mother who teaches you the sacred principles like 
love, compassion, forbearance, tolerance, and sacrifice. Mother 
shows the father, father takes you to the preceptor and precep- 
tor directs you to God. That is why among mother, father, pre- 
ceptor and God, mother comes first. 


Woman is embodiment of virtues 


When Hanuman went to Lanka in search of Mother Sita, he 
found her sitting surrounded by demons under a tree in Aso- 
kavana. Hanuman felt very sad seeing Sita being harassed by 
the demons. He went back to Rama and told Him, 


Lord Rama, I have seen Mother Sita 

being harassed and frightened by 

demons pointing sharp swords at her. 

She was shivering with fear like a parrot in a cage 
[Telugu Poem] 


On hearing this, Rama and Lakshmana immediately set out 
to Lanka with the army of Vanaras, fought a battle with Ra- 
vana, and killed him. As per the command of Lord Rama, Ha- 
numan went to Sita and conveyed the good news to her. Then 
he requested Sita to permit him to punish the demons sur- 
rounding her, who had put her to great suffering. 

Sita said, “O Hanuman, it is the responsibility of the sub- 
jects to obey the commands of the king. Just as you obey the 
command of Lord Rama, these demons also had to obey the 
dictates of their king. It is not their mistake. They acted ac- 
cording to the instructions of the king. So, it is rather unfair to 
punish these demons. In fact, I suffered not because of these 
demons, but because of separation from Sri Rama.” So saying, 
she narrated the following story. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 190 


The story of the ungrateful man 


Once, in a forest, a hunter, on being chased by a tiger, felt 
tired and climbed up a tree. There was a bear sitting on the top 
of the tree. The tiger was waiting under the tree, since it could 
not climb up. It was very hungry, so it wanted to gobble up the 
hunter. It asked the bear to push the hunter down, so that it 
could kill him and appease its hunger. The bear refused to do 
so, saying that the hunter was its guest and it was its moral 
duty to extend hospitality to guests. But the tiger continued to 
wait under the tree. 

After some time, the bear started to doze. Noticing this, the 
tiger addressed the hunter, “O man, I am very hungry. It does 
not matter whether I eat you or the bear. I will go back once 
my hunger is satiated. The bear is dozing. So, push it down 
without delay. I will eat it and spare you.” 

The man did not have the morality of even the bear. He 
thought he could escape from the clutches of the tiger by of- 
fering the bear as bait. So, he committed the ungrateful act of 
pushing the bear down. As luck would have it, the bear, as it 
was falling, caught hold of a branch, climbed up, and saved 
itself from the tiger. 

The tiger said, “O bear, you should never believe human 
beings. This hunter tried to harm you, though you were kind 
enough to give him shelter and protect him. So, without further 
delay, push the ungrateful wretch down, I shall devour him.” 

But the bear said, “I have done my duty. Each one has to 
face the consequences of his own actions. I will not harm him 
just because he tried to harm me.” 

Narrating this story, Sita said, “No doubt, these demons 
have put me to a lot of suffering without knowing what is truth 
and what is dharma. Being the consort of Lord Rama, I cannot 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 191 


stoop down to their level and seek revenge. I do not want to 
cause harm to anyone.” 

Hanuman said, “O Mother, it is but natural that you, being 
the consort of Lord Rama, are broadminded and noble hearted. 
You are the embodiment of dharma. It is a mistake on my part 
to think that you would permit me to punish these helpless de- 
mons.” 

Sita said, “Hanuman, not only me but all the women are 
endowed with the noble qualities like compassion and love.” 

There is a proverb in Telugu that the house mirrors the 
qualities of the housewife. The women, barring a few excep- 
tions, never stray away from the path of truth and righteous- 
ness even in the face of adversity. When the mendicant stands 
at the doorstep stretching his hands for alms, the husband may 
possibly drive him away, but the housewife always comes for- 
ward to give aims. There may be dispute over property matters 
between the father and the son, but the mother always tries to 
calm down the son with good counsel. The mother will always 
pray for the welfare of the son wherever he may be. At times, 
she may be angry or have a difference of opinion, but such dif- 
ferences are only passing clouds. One should not disregard 
one’s parents yielding to the vagaries of the mind. 


Easwaramma, the Divine Mother 


Easwaramma, the mother of this physical body, was first 
christened as Namagiriamma at the time of birth. But after her 
marriage, Kondama Raju, the grandfather of this physical 
body, being a jnani (one of wisdom) and blessed with a vision 
of the future, started calling her Easwaramma (mother of Eas- 
wara). He used to worship Venkavadhuta. His was a joint fam- 
ily. He had two sons. The elder son, Pedda Venkama Raju, was 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 192 


the father of this physical body. His younger son was Chinna 
Venkama Raju. Two sons of his deceased brother, Subba Raju 
and Venkatrama Raju, also lived with him. One day, as there 
was some difference of opinion, it was decided to divide the 
property. 


How Kondamu Raju craved Swami 


At that time, this body was eight years old. Kondama Raju 
said he did not want any share in the property and told them to 
divide it among themselves. The four brothers asked Kondama 
Raju to spend the rest of his life staying with each one of them. 
But Kondama Raju said, “I do not want to stay with you, I do 
not expect anything from you. Whatever I have earned, dis- 
tribute among yourselves. But give me one property, Sathya. If 
He is with me, I don’t want anything else.” He asked me, if I 
was willing to stay with him. I readily agreed. 

Both of us were staying in a small room. I used to get up 
early in the morning, clean the vessels, and cook food for both 
of us. After making the food ready, I used to run to Bukkapat- 
nam to attend school. The lunch bell would go at I o'clock. I 
would run back to Puttaparthi, serve him lunch, have it Myself, 
and then rush to school for the afternoon session. I maintained 
punctuality both at school and at home. 

Kondama Raju, being one with wisdom, always craved 
Me. One day, he called Pedda Venkama Raju and told him to 
change his wife’s name to Easwaramma. He told this because 
he felt the divine vibrations originating from within. His inten- 
tion was to convey that she was the mother of Easwara, God 
Himself. But Pedda Venkama Raju was not aware of the inner 
meaning of this name. He implicitly obeyed the command of 
his father and changed the name of his wife to Easwaramma. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 193 


Kondama Raju's last desire 


The new mandir was built before Kondama Raju left his 
mortal coil. He lived for 116 years. But, even at that ripe old 
age his eyes and legs were in good condition. So, he used to 
walk from old mandir to the new mandir every day, without a 
walking stick. 

I used to say, “Why do you walk the distance? There may 
be cows and buffaloes on the way. You can take the help of a 
walking stick at least?” He would say that his legs were in per- 
fect condition and that he did not need the help of a walking 
stick. 

He was an ardent devotee of Swami. He used to come to 
Me early in the morning at 5 o'clock. Seeing him coming at a 
distance, I used to cover Myself with a blanket, pretending to 
be asleep. He would come slowly, lift the blanket, touch My 
feet, and return. He used to come early in the morning because 
he did not want anyone to notice him touching My feet. He 
was a little apprehensive about what the villagers would think 
if they noticed a 116 year-old grandfather touching the feet of 
his grandson. 

On a particular evening, I went to Puttaparthi to see him. 
At that time, he was sitting on a cot, deeply immersed in sing- 
ing a ballad, which described Rama lamenting over the fainting 
of Lakshmana in the battlefield. He was very fond of this par- 
ticular episode from the Ramayana. 

Rama lamented, “In this world, I might find another 
mother like Kausalya, a wife like Sita, but definitely not a 
brother like Lakshmana.” This is what he was singing to him- 
self when I entered his room. I said, “O grandfather, what are 
you doing?” 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 194 


He exclaimed, "O Swami, You have come,” and fell at My 
feet. He said, “Swami, I am fully aware that You are not an 
ordinary child, but Easwara Himself. You are born in our clan 
to redeem all of us. But, I pray that You fulfil a small desire of 
mine. Dasaratha did not have the good fortune of drinking 
water from Rama's divine hands at the time of' his death. But 
Jatayu was fortunate enough to be the recipient of such an act 
of grace in his last moments. Swami, let me also have the good 
fortune of sipping water from Your divine hands when my end 
approaches.” I promised that I would certainly fulfil his desire. 


Easwaramma’s motherly affection for Swami 


The following week, I went to see him again after visiting 
Subbamma's house. Kondama Raju came to know that I was 
coming to his house. Immediately, he called Easwaramma and 
told her, “I am not going to live any longer. Having known that 
my end has approached, God is coming to shower His grace on 
me?”, 

She responded in an innocent way saying, “Where is God? 
How do you know that He is coming?” 

Then Kondama Raju said, “O mad woman, still you are 
deluded by the feeling of a mother toward her son! Look there, 
God is coming.” So saying, he pointed at Me as I was entering 
his house. She too was aware of My Divinity. But she used to 
get carried away by her motherly affection toward Me. Similar 
was the case with Yashoda. Though she had seen all the four- 
teen worlds in Krishna's mouth, she thought it was a dream or 
an illusion. 

Kondama Raju told Easwaramma that Swami did not take 
sweets. Right from birth till today, I have not touched sweets. 
Why? If I were to take sweets, thousands of devotees would 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 195 


start bringing sweets for Me. I do not take fruits either. I do not 
even touch milk or curds. I lead a very simple life. I take only 
ragi gruel and groundnut chutney. Kondama Raju also used to 
relish this food. He used to say, “Sathya, serve me whatever 
you eat.” 

Early in the morning, I used to prepare tasteful ragi gruel, 
groundnut chutney and some green leaves curry. The whole 
street was very fond of My cooking. Sometimes, on My return 
from Bukkapatnam, I used to find all those afflicted with fever 
making a beeline in front of the house waiting for Me. Kon- 
dama Raju would tell Me that they were all waiting to take the 
pepper rasam from Me as it would give them relief. Immedi- 
ately, I used to prepare pepper rasam and distribute a glassful 
to each of them. They used to feel very happy, and later on ex- 
pressed their gratitude saying, “Swami, your pepper rasam has 
given us great relief.” 


Swami’s culinary skills 


In those days, on festival days such as Sankranti and 
Ugadi, the dhobis and barbers used to come to the house for 
food. In the house, there was no one else other than Kondama 
Raju and Myself. So, I had to prepare food for many people. 
Easwaramma (Swami’s mother) and Venkamma and Parvath- 
amma (Swami’s sisters) used to prepare various delicious 
items including sweet puris in their respective homes on festi- 
val days. When they could prepare sweet puris, why couldn’t I 
also prepare them and serve grandfather? So, I also would pre- 
pare sweet puris and serve not only grandfather but also the 
washerman, the barber, and others. On one such occasion, 
Pedda Venkama Raju (Swami’s father) came to see us at lunch 
time. Kondama Raju invited him for lunch, since it was a festi- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 196 


val day. Pedda Venkama Raju had his lunch with us and felt 
that the food items were very delicious. He went home and 
chided Easwaramma and Venkamma for not being able to 
make the items tasteful. He said, “Look at Sathya, what a fine 
cook he is! Why can't you prepare the food items the way 
Sathya does?” From the next day onward, he started sending 
them to Me asking them to bring whatever food items I pre- 
pared. They would come and complain that it was because of 
My cooking that they were being blamed at home. 


How things happened they way they were destined 


When I was nine years old, Seshama Raju, the elder 
brother of this body, decided to take Me with him to Ka- 
malapur for studies. He felt that I was wasting My time staying 
with Kondama Raju. But, grandfather objected to this, saying 
that I did not require any studies. But things happened the way 
they were destined to happen. 

After the construction of Prasanthi Nilayam, one day I 
went to see Kondama Raju. He asked Easwaramma to get a 
glass of water. He told her, “God has come to take me away. 
He made a promise that He would pour water into my mouth 
with His Divine hands, before I leave this body. He has come 
to fulfill His promise.” 

Puzzled by Kondama Raju's request, Easwaramma said, 
“You are not suffering from any disease, you don't even have 
fever or a cold. What makes you think that your end has ap- 
proached.” 

Kondama Raju said, “Death occurs as per the Will of God. 
Just as birth has no reason, death too has no reason. This is the 
Truth of truths.” Easwaramma did not want to argue with him. 
According to his wish, she brought a glassful of water and 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 197 


gave him. He sat down on the floor and made Me sit on the 
cot. He kept his head on My knees and said, “Swami, please 
listen to My prayer.” Easwaramma was watching all this. She 
wondered, how is that he had so much love and regard for his 
young grandson. Kondama Raju said, “As You know, I was 
doing a small business to make both ends meet. Perhaps I may 
still have to pay a paisa or an anna to certain people. Please 
bless me so that I am not indebted to anyone in my death.” 

I said, “So shall it be,” and started pouring water into his 
mouth. He breathed his last as he was drinking water. His de- 
sire was fulfilled. 

Before leaving his mortal coil, he told Easwaramma not to 
get deluded by body attachment. He said, “Bodily relationship 
is temporary, whereas Atmic relationship is permanent. So, 
give up body attachment and develop attachment to the Atma.” 


Three wishes of two noble mothers 


From that day onward, Eswaramma never stayed at home; 
she started staying in Prasanthi Nilayam. Every day, in the 
morning and evening she used to come upstairs and talk to 
Swami. She also understood My Divinity very well. When I 
appeared in the form of Lord Siva to her, she would ask, 
“What Swami? Why are you adorning the snakes around your 
neck?” 

I would act innocent, “Well, I don't have snakes on Me.” 

She would move away saying, “Look, there are some 
snakes inside.” But later, on not finding any snake inside, she 
would ask for forgiveness. Like this on many occasions, she 
had the experience of My Divinity. Similar was the case with 
Kausalya and Yashoda. Though they knew that their sons were 
divine, they used to get carried away by their motherly affec- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 198 


tion toward them. Mothers are highly noble and virtuous. Their 
nobility cannot be described in words. It does not matter if you 
do not acquire worldly wealth, but try to win the wealth of 
your mother's grace. Only then your life will be sanctified. 


Three wishes of a noble mother 


Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar was a noble soul. He was born 
in a poor family. He was living with his aged mother. He used 
to feel very sad seeing his mother wearing old and torn saris. 
After he completed his studies, he took up a job and started 
earning some money. One day he sat by the side of his mother 
and said. “Mother, please tell me if you have any desires. Now 
that I have started earning money, I am in a position to fulfil 
them.” 

She said, “Son, I don't have any desires. It is enough for me 
if you lead a noble life.” 

After some time, he got a better job and started earning 
thousands of rupees. Again, he asked his mother to tell him if 
she had any desires. She said she had three desires and could 
not live in peace unless and until they were fulfilled. “Ours is a 
small village, and there are many children who are wasting 
their time without going to school. So, please construct a small 
school out of the money you have earned.” As per the wish of 
his mother, Vidyasagar got a school constructed in his village. 

Then he asked his mother to express her second desire. 
“Our villagers are suffering for lack of medical facilities. There 
is nobody to take care of them when they are afflicted with fe- 
ver, cough or cold. So, I want you to construct a small hospi- 
tal.” Vidyasagar built a hospital, too. 

After some time, he asked his mother, what her third wish 
was. She said, “The villagers are suffering due to lack of 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 199 


drinking water. They are being afflicted with various diseases 
as they are drinking polluted water.” Immediately, he got a few 
wells dug and provided drinking water to the villagers. 


Story of Viduasagar’s humility 


As the days rolled by, Vidyasagar's name and fame spread 
far and wide. He was a good orator. His speeches were not 
based on bookish knowledge. He used to speak on matters of 
daily relevance. So, people in large numbers used to throng his 
meetings to listen to his speech. He was a very simple and 
humble man. 

One day he was going to a neighboring village to address a 
gathering. He boarded the train carrying a small suitcase. An 
I.A.S officer, who was going to attend his meeting, was trav- 
eling by the same train. He was carrying a small handbag with 
him. He had not seen Vidyasagar before. As soon as he got 
down from the train, he started calling out for a coolie. Seeing 
this, Vidyasagar went up to him and asked where his luggage 
was. The officer showed his handbag. Vidyasagar said, “Why 
do you misuse your money? Do you need a coolie to carry 
your handbag? Let me carry it for you.” He took the bag from 
the officer and carried it. 

After reaching the destination, the officer asked Vidyasagar 
how much money he wanted for carrying the bag. Vidyasagar 
said, “I do not want your money, I did it as an act of service.” 

The officer proceeded to the meeting place where Vidyasa- 
gar was supposed to deliver his speech. He was stunned to see 
the same person who carried his bag giving a speech on the 
dais. What a humble person he was, he thought to himself and 
felt ashamed of his behavior. Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar spent 
all his earnings to fulfill the desires of his mother. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 200 


Easwaramma’s similar wishes 


Easwaramma had similar desires. Once, she told Me, 
"Swami, our Puttaparthi is a small village. Since there is no 
school in this village, the children are forced to walk long dis- 
tances to attend schools in the neighboring villages. I know 
that You are the ocean of compassion. Please construct a small 
school in this village.” I asked, where she wanted the school to 
be built. She said she had a piece of land behind her house. She 
wanted the school to be constructed there. As desired by her, I 
got the school constructed. Though it was a small school, the 
inaugural function was a grand affair, attended by many devo- 
tees. 

The next day, Easwaramma expressed her happiness over 
the inaugural function and said that she had one more desire. 
She wanted a hospital also to be built in the village. She said, 
“Swami, I don't want to put You to trouble. If You are trou- 
bled, the whole world will be in trouble, and if You are happy, 
the whole world will be happy. So, if it gives You happiness, 
please construct a small hospital.” As per her wish, I got the 
hospital constructed. Bejawada Gopal Reddy, a highly reputed 
person in those days, was invited to inaugurate the hospital. 

The inaugural function was a grand one, attended by thou- 
sands of people from the neighboring villages. Easwaramma 
did not imagine that this would be such a grand affair. 

Next day, she came up to Me and said, “Swami, it does not 
matter even if I die now. I have no more worries, you have ful- 
filled my desires and mitigated the suffering of the villagers to 
a great extent.” 

I said, if you have any more desires, ask Me now. 

She replied hesitantly that she had yet another small desire. 
“You know that the river Chithravathi is in spate during the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 201 


rainy season. But in summer it dries to a trickle and people do 
not have drinking water. So, please see that some wells are dug 
in this village.” I told her that I would not stop with these small 
wells and that I would provide drinking water to the entire 
Rayalaseema region. Easwaramma said, “I don't know what 
Rayalaseema is. I am satisfied if our village is provided with 
drinking water.” 


Easwaramma’s sacred love for Swami 


Once, on a Sivaratri day, after I had completed My dis- 
course, and the Lingas were ready to emerge from My mouth. I 
sat on the chair and was in severe pain. Seeing Me suffering, 
Easwaramma got up from the gathering, came up to Me and 
said, “Swami, why do You suffer like this? Come inside, come 
inside.” 

I said I would not come inside. 

She cried and tried to persuade Me, but I did not budge an 
inch. Unable to see My suffering, she went inside. As soon as 
she left, Hiranyagarbha Linga emerged. All the devotees burst 
into thunderous applause. Listening to this, she came back, but 
by then the Linga had already emerged and I was showing it to 
the devotees. All the people got up to have a glimpse of the 
Linga. As a result, Easwaramma could not see it. 

Next day she pleaded with Me to show the Linga to her. I 
said I had given it to somebody. But she said, “Swami, I have 
not seen. I want to see.” I told her that she would see in the 
future anyway. She said, “I do not want to put You to incon- 
venience,” and went away. 

She never had put Me to trouble any time. Whenever she 
asked Me for something, she would come back and ask if she 
had given any trouble. To all the devotees who came, she used 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 202 


to entreat not to cause any inconvenience to Swami. She used 
to be very much worried whenever any minister came to have 
My darshan. The situation in those days was such that even a 
policeman with a red cap was enough to frighten the villagers. 

Easwaramma used to be very much afraid of the ministers, 
thinking that they might cause some problem to Me. This was 
only the result of her sacred love for Me. That is the greatness 
of mother’s love. That is why she could lead a life of fulfill- 
ment and peace. In order to propagate this sacred ideal, this 
day is being celebrated as Easwaramma Day. This is to empha- 
size that each one of you should make your mother happy. If 
your mother is happy, Swami is happy. 


Sacrifice everything for God 


Everyone should love and respect their parents. But, if any 
relation becomes an obstacle in your path to God, there is no 
harm in leaving them. 

Here is a small example. Mira was the wife of Maharana of 
Chittor. She was always seated in Krishna's temple, forgetting 
herself while chanting His name. One day, Emperor Akbar 
came to the temple and offered a gold necklace to Lord Krish- 
na. Mira accepted it and put it around Krishna’s idol. Akbar 
was an enemy of Maharana. When Maharana came to know 
that Mira had accepted a necklace for Krishna from his enemy, 
Akbar, he became very furious. He took it as an insult and 
threw her out of the temple. Mira felt very sad. 

Crows start cawing at the cuckoo when it begins to sing, 
but that does not deter the cuckoo from its singing. The people 
of the world are like crows. They speak as they like. But the 
noble souls will not be affected by what others say. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 203 


Mira was in a dilemma, whether to give up Krishna or her 
husband Maharana. She resolved that she would not give up 
Krishna even at the cost of her life. Then she wrote a letter to 
Tulsidas seeking his advice in this regard. 

Tulsidas sent her a reply: “From the worldly point of view, 
you should respect your father, mother, preceptor and husband. 
But when it comes to God, everything else is secondary. God 
alone is important. Bharata left his mother Kaikeyi for the sake 
of Lord Rama. Prahlada gave up his father Hiranyakasipu for 
the sake of Lord Narayana. Emperor Bali forsook his precep- 
tor, Sukracharya, for the sake of God. So, there is nothing 
wrong in giving up your husband for the sake of Krishna.” 
Taking the advice of Tulsidas, Mira left her husband. 

She sang, 


O mind, go to the banks of the 
sacred rivers Ganga and Yamuna, 
the pure water of which cools 
and purifies the body. 
[Hindi Song] 


These two rivers stand for the primal nerves ida and pin- 
gala, which converge at the center of two eyebrows. She 
started singing the praises of Krishna and proceeded toward 
Brindavan. 


You can sacrifice anything for the sake of God 


Many such great devotees sacrificed everything for the 
sake of God. Women symbolize sacrifice. The Vedas declare: 
Na karmana, na prajaya, dhanena thyagenaike Amruthatwa- 
manasu (immortality can be attained only through sacrifice; 
neither wealth nor progeny nor good deeds can confer it). You 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 204 


can sacrifice anything for the sake of God. But, sacrifice 
should not be done with a selfish motive or for self satisfac- 
tion. 


Do not hurt mother’s feelings 


The Bhagavad Gita says that a woman has seven qualities, 
whereas a man has only three. So, never look down upon 
women. They are most virtuous. They are the very embodi- 
ments of nature. 

Some women may think that they would have enjoyed 
greater freedom had they been born as men. This is a wrong 
notion. In fact, women are more powerful than men. With all 
the sacred feelings in your heart, respect women and be re- 
spected. Respect your mother, obey her commands. Mother 
protects her children in many ways. Even after death, she 
comes back and helps you in various ways. Never disrespect 
your mother or disappoint her. Do not hurt her feelings. Try to 
satisfy her in all respects. Only then will the seed of devotion 
sprout in you. Everyone should follow the dictum, mathru 
Devo bhava in letter and spirit and be a recipient of his 
mother's love. 


6 May 1999 
Sai Sruthi, Kodaikanal 


15 


Control Your Senses 


If money is lost, one need not be worried about it, 
For one can earn it again. 
If a friend leaves, one can have another; 
If wife is lost one can marry again. 
If one loses ones piece of land, 
One can purchase another piece of land. 
All these can be regained; but 
If body is lost, one cannot get it back. 
[Sanskrit sloka] 


Embodiments of Love! 


If wealth is lost, nothing is lost. If health is lost, something 
is lost. If character is lost, everything is lost. This is the teach- 
ing of the culture of Bharat. But, for the modern man, every- 
thing is lost if wealth is lost; something is lost if health is lost 
and nothing is lost if character is lost. 

Since time immemorial, the Bharatiyas have been adhering 
to the principles of spirituality. Thus, they attained bliss and 
shared it with others in the world. The Himalayan mountains 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 206 


form the boundary of Bharat on the northern side. Hima means 
pure and sacred. Mountains symbolize steadiness. Purity, sa- 
credness, and steadiness are the hallmarks of the Bharatiyas 
(Indians). 

The perennial rivers, the Ganga, Yamuna, and Saraswathi 
(underground) flow in this land. These three symbolize the 
threefold path of work, worship, and wisdom through which 
man can attain Divinity. The holy texts of the Ramayana, the 
Mahabharata, and the Bhagavata set noble ideals before man- 
kind. What is the inner meaning of the word Bharat? Bha 
means light, effulgence, and divinity. So, Bharatiyas are those 
who spread light and effulgence of wisdom. The Indian scrip- 
tures like the Bhagavad Gita, the Upanishads, and the Brahma 
Sutras are shining resplendently, showing the path of divinity 
to man. 


Spirituality starts with faith 


Buddha was born in this sacred land of Bharat. He declared 
to the world Ahimsa paramo dharma (nonviolence is the great- 
est dharma). He undertook penance for several years, met 
many noble souls, listened to spiritual discourses, and studied 
various scriptures. But he was not satisfied. Man aspires for 
bliss, but how can he attain it? Where there is faith, there is 
love. Where there is love, there is peace. Where there is peace, 
there is truth. Where there is truth, there is God. Where there is 
God, there is bliss. The path of spirituality starts with faith and 
ends with bliss. Bliss cannot be attained from materialistic 
pleasures or people of the world. It can be experienced only 
when the five senses are put to proper use. 

Today, man reads sacred books to attain bliss, but all these 
books have their own limitations. One cannot get infinite bliss 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 207 


by studying scriptures. One must study an infinite book in or- 
der to experience infinite bliss. This world itself is an infinite 
book. There are so many things to be learnt from this world. 

Who are your friends? Not your classmates or roommates. 
Only God is your true and eternal friend. It is only with the 
help of this friend that you will be able to study the infinite 
book, the world. 

When one undertakes the study of this infinite book, one 
has to put into practice the five important teachings of Buddha. 
They are samyak drishti (right vision), samyak bhavam (right 
feeling), samyak sravanam (right listening), samyak vak (right 
speech), and samyak karma (right action). A true human being 
is one who follows the path of truth. Truth, righteousness and 
sacrifice should be the way of life. Buddha said, Buddham sha- 
ranam gachhami, dharmam sharanam gachhami, sangham 
sharanam gachhami. It means: buddhi (intellect) should follow 
the path of dharma, and dharma should be fostered in society. 
Only then the country will prosper. 

This is also the inner meaning of the word SAI. S denotes 
spiritual change, A denotes association (social) change, and I 
denotes individual change. Man's mind will become pure and 
sacred only when these three changes take place. 


Life principles of man 


Divinity is latent in every individual. But, today, man has 
forgotten his divine nature and is getting deluded by the 
worldly, ephemeral pleasures. Sathya, dharma, santhi, prema, 
and ahimsa are verily the five life principles of man. They are 
like his pancha pranas, namely, prana, apana, vyana, udana, 
and samana. Losing sathya amounts to losing one part of his 
life-breath. And when he loses all the four, viz., sathya, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 208 


dharma, santhi, and prema, he loses four parts of his vital life 
breath. As a result he is confronted with sufferings and vio- 
lence from all sides. Who is responsible for this? Man himself 
is to be blamed for this. 

Buddha said nonviolence is the greatest dharma. Love will 
be fostered only when nonviolence is practiced. When love is 
fostered, there will be peace in the world. When there is peace 
in the world, man will naturally take to the path of dharma. 
When man follows the path of dharma, he will attain Truth. It 
is, therefore, the primary duty of every man to foster these life 
principles. 


The sacredness of Bharat is unmatched 


Once, Buddha was traveling from village to village giving 
spiritual discourses. One day, he felt tired and asked one of his 
disciples to address the gathering. He went inside to take rest. 

The disciple during the course of his speech said, “In this 
world, there has never been a spiritual master greater than our 
master, Buddha, and there will not be another like him in fu- 
ture.” The audience gave a thunderous applause. 

On hearing this, Buddha came out. One of the disciples 
told him the reason for the people's joyous applause. Buddha 
smiled and called the disciple who delivered the lecture. “What 
is your age?” he asked. 

The disciple said he was thirty-five years old. 

“How many kingdoms have you visited so far?” Buddha 
asked him again. 

The disciple said he had visited only two kingdoms. 

Buddha said, “You are thirty-five years old and have seen 
only two kingdoms. You have not understood the present com- 
pletely. Then how can you say anything about the past and the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 209 


future? It is meaningless to say that a master like Buddha was 
never born before and will never be born again. Many Avatars 
and sages have taken birth in this sacred land of Bharat. Many 
more Avatars and noble souls will be born here in future also. 
There are many noble souls in this world, I offer my respects 
to all of them.” 

In this way, Buddha reproached his disciple. It is foolish 
for a man with little knowledge to behave like a learned man. 

No one can estimate the sacredness and greatness of this 
country, Bharat. To be called an Indian is in a great qualifica- 
tion and honor. How can one describe the great good fortune of 
the Bharatiyas, for the Lord Himself has taken birth several 
times in this sacred land to show the path of divinity to man- 
kind? Many saints, sages, and men of sacrifice were born here. 
The sacredness and renown of Bharat are unmatched. That is 
why Buddha chose this country as his motherland. 


Character is important, not money 


The story of Buddha is highly noble and sacred. He sacri- 
ficed everything and went around in search of truth. He said, 
"Dharmam sharanam gachhami (I take refuge in dharma).” 
One has to practice, propagate and experience dharma. But, 
today, dharma has declined. People think that money is eve- 
rything. Just as the earth revolves around the sun, people go 
around money. 


Some people take to corrupt ways to earn money. 
They may cheat others, 
But can anyone hoodwink God? 
They will certainly reap the 
Consequences of their misdeeds. 
[Telugu Poem] 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 210 


This was the teaching of Buddha. Character is important, 
not money. Bliss can be attained only through control of 
senses, not through penance, japa, or meditation. Neither by 
penance nor by going through scriptures nor by having a dip in 
holy rivers can one attain liberation. Only by serving noble 
souls can one cross the ocean of Samsara. There is no easier 
path to peace and bliss other than controlling one's own senses. 


Right vision confers double promotion 


But today, man has given up this easy path and is craving 
sensual pleasures, which confer only misery and grief. Even 
birds and beasts enjoy sensual pleasures. The happiness that 
results from sensual pleasures is no happiness at all. So, first 
and foremost, man should try to control his senses. This is pos- 
sible only when the vision is properly utilized. Once the vision 
is controlled, other senses can also be easily controlled. But, 
today, man has no control over his vision. He looks at things 
that he is not supposed to look at. Whatever man looks at gets 
imprinted in his heart. So, develop sacred vision. 

There are forty lakh light rays in the human eye. But their 
radiance is destroyed on account of wrong vision. When you 
look at wrong things, you waste the enormous power of radi- 
ance of the eyes. There are thirty lakh taste buds on the tongue. 
But they get destroyed because of bad talk. So, first and fore- 
most vision and tongue should be kept under check. Otherwise 
man may lose his humanness and ultimately ruin his life. 

Along with right vision and right talk, cultivate right listen- 
ing. If someone were to indulge in bad talk in your presence, 
leave the place at once. Right vision confers double promotion, 
it strengthens the will power and enhances the power of radi- 
ance of the eyes. Having understood this truth, Buddha made a 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part1 211 


concerted effort to control his senses. Meditation and penance 
confer only temporary happiness. Eternal happiness results 
only from control of the senses. Buddha was the crown prince 
and had the entire kingdom under his control, but he sacrificed 
everything and tried to control his senses. He could experience 
bliss and attained Nirvana only after controlling his senses. 

Man can get limitless powers through love of God. But, to- 
day, man is not making any effort to understand the principle 
of Love. Man’s love is like an atom when compared to divine 
love, which is infinite, eternal, and nectarine. It is foolishness 
and ignorance on the part of man to think that he knows eve- 
rything without understanding the Principle of Love. He 
should see through the eyes of love, hear through the ears of 
love and cultivate the feelings of love. 


Giving up body consciousness is liberation 


No benefit accrues from doing spiritual sadhana if man 
does not have unity of thought, word, and deed. The unity of 
these three constitutes humanness. The proper study of man- 
kind is man. What does MAN stand for? M stands for giving 
up maya (illusion); A for gaining the vision of Atma; and N, 
denotes attaining Nirvana. Man has to give up materialistic 
pleasures in order to attain liberation. What is moksha (libera- 
tion)? Getting rid of moha (attachment) is moksha. Giving up 
body consciousness is liberation. But, today, man is immersed 
in body attachment. He can attain liberation only when he de- 
velops attachment toward the Atma. 


Humanness has declined in man 

Since he lacks fear of sin and love for God. 
This is the root cause of 

Unrest in the world [Telugu Poem] 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 212 


Man should develop love for God and fear of sin. Only 
then there will be morality in society. 

Embodiments of Love! You may celebrate any number of 
festivals and undertake various types of spiritual exercises, but 
all this will go waste if there are no divine feelings in your 
heart. Do not look at things that are unsacred. Let your vision 
be suffused with divine feelings. You will understand and ex- 
perience the sacred principles like Sarvam khaividam Brahma 
(Brahman is immanent in everything), Viswam Vishnumayam 
(Vishnu pervades the entire universe), Easwara sarvabho- 
othanam (God is the indweller of all beings) only when you 
cultivate noble qualities. In order to cultivate divine feelings 
and noble qualities, you have to control your senses. Your life 
will be ruined if you do not control your senses. 


A doubting man perishes 


A river should flow within its banks; otherwise it will flood 
the villages causing untold sufferings. Similarly, human life, 
which can be compared to a river, should also have two eight- 
lettered dictums as its banks: sraddhavan labhate jnanam (only 
a person with steadfast faith can attain wisdom) and samsa- 
yatma vinashyati (a doubting man perishes). 

Only then will the river of life merge in the ocean of grace. 
If your river of life does not flow within its two banks, not only 
will your life be wasted but you will also cause harm to others. 

One who has doubts about God cannot have divine grace. 
One who has no sincerity of purpose cannot come up in life. A 
man with sincerity will make the best use of even the smallest 
opportunity given to him. For example, he can turn even a 
small bit of live ember into a big fire. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 213 


On the other hand, a man who lacks sincerity cannot make 
fire even if large quantifies of live embers are given to him. He 
will turn all the live embers into charcoal with his lackadaisical 
attitude. You should have utmost sincerity in matters pertain- 
ing to divinity. 


Individual, society, creation, and Creator 


You are struggling hard to acquire worldly education. You 
are spending hours together concentrating on it. What is the 
benefit that accrues from it? You acquire this education merely 
to fill your belly, Even this education can be used for the wel- 
fare of the society. Leave selfishness and aspire for the happi- 
ness of all. Loka samastha sukhino bhavantu (May all the peo- 
ple of the world be: happy!). This should be our prayer and 
aspiration. That is the true spiritual practice. 

Vyashti means individual, samashti means society. So, you 
should progress from vyashti to samashti, from samashti to 
srushti (creation), and ultimately merge in Parameshti (God). 
You should attain the unity of individual, society, creation, and 
the creator. Only spiritual transformation can bring about so- 
cial welfare. The first letter S in the name Sai stands for serv- 
ice (work), A for adoration (worship), and I for illumination 
(wisdom). So, the very name of Sai symbolizes the unity of 
work, worship, and wisdom. 

Today, man has failed to understand the sacredness and 
purpose of human birth. Having taken human birth, you should 
try to experience bliss. You have the desire to attain bliss, but 
you are not making the necessary effort. You cannot collect 
even a drop of water if you keep the vessel upside down, al- 
though there may be a heavy downpour. Some water will be 
collected in it if the mouth of the vessel is turned upward. So, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 214 


if you want to attain divinity, you have to practice dharma. 
That is the meaning of dharmam sharanam gachhami. But, 
this must also lead to the welfare of all (Sangham sharanam 
gachhami). This is the inner meaning of the teachings of Bud- 
dha. 

Once, Buddha entered a village along with his disciples. A 
lady approached him and requested him to have food in her 
house. Buddha blessed her and accepted her invitation. Seeing 
this, many villagers, including the village headman, warned 
Buddha, saying, “O Buddha, you are one of wisdom and have 
renounced everything. She is not a woman of good character. It 
is not proper for you to have food in her house.” 

Buddha smiled and asked the village headman to come 
forward. Buddha, holding the right hand of the headman, asked 
him to clap. The headman said, it was not possible for him to 
clap since one of his hands was in Buddha’s hold. 

Buddha said, “True, it is possible to clap only when two 
hands come together. Likewise, this lady cannot turn bad by 
herself unless there are men of bad character in the village. The 
men of this village are the root cause of her bad character.” 

The villagers realized their folly, fell at Buddha’s feet and 
sought his forgiveness. Through his teachings, Buddha in- 
stilled sacredness and wisdom in people. Buddha’s teachings 
are highly sacred, with profound inner meaning. 


Develop friendship with Truth 


Buddha’s mother, Mayadevi, passed away when he was 
just 8 days old. His stepmother Gautami brought him up. That 
is how he got the name Gautama. He was christened as 
Siddhartha at the time of his birth. He came to be known as 
Buddha because he developed buddhi (intellect) and discrimi- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 215 


nation power. Discrimination is of two types: individual dis- 
crimination and fundamental discrimination. Individual dis- 
crimination arises out of selfishness, whereas fundamental dis- 
crimination is concerned with the welfare of one and all. One 
should discard individual discrimination and have only funda- 
mental discrimination. This was the teaching of Buddha to 
Ananda, son of Gautami, before he attained Nirvana. 

When Buddha was on the verge of attaining Nirvana, 
Ananda started shedding tears of sorrow. Then Buddha con- 
soled him, saying, “Ananda, why are you unhappy over my 
attaining Nirvana? J have been craving this state of Nirvana for 
the past many years. Why do you shed tears of sorrow when I 
am experiencing supreme bliss?” 

Ananda understood the truth and followed the teachings of 
Buddha. Ultimately, he too attained Nirvana. 


Divinity transcends space and time 


True ideal is to give practical knowledge of dharma to oth- 
ers. One should be a hero in practice, not merely in preaching. 
This was the ideal of Buddha. All the Avatars and noble souls 
led their lives in the most exemplary manner and helped people 
experience divinity. Buddha said, “O man. you don't need to 
search for God anywhere. You are God yourself.” 

The Bhagavad Gita, the Upanishads, and the Vedas also 
echo the same principle. The Vedas declare: Tat Thwam Asi 
(Thou art That). Man today does meditation in the morning 
like a yogi, eats sumptuous food during the day tike a bhogi 
(pleasure seeker), and sleeps at night like a rogi (sick person). 
This is not the way one should lead one's life. Sathatham yogi- 
nah (one should be a Yogi all the time). Be filled with divine 
feelings all the time. Sarva karma Bhagavad preetyartham 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 216 


(whatever one does, one should do it to please God). Divinity 
transcends space and time. Sarvam khalvidam Brahma (eve- 
rything is Brahman). 

In order to understand this truth, one should cultivate sad- 
gunas. Sadgunas do not denote good qualities alone. Sath 
means Being, that which is permanent. So, sadgunas mean 
having divine feelings. Similarly, the word sathsang means 
being in the company of the Divine, not merely in the company 
of good people. Divinity is within us. That is Sath. One has to 
develop friendship with Sath. That is true sathsang and true 
friendship. 

Never depend on worldly friendship. Worldly friends come 
and go. Only friendship with God is true and eternal. God is 
your true friend, world is a text and hridaya (heart) is your 
preceptor. Your life will find fulfillment if you understand this 
truth and put into practice. 

All the worldly gurus are not gurus in the strict sense of the 
term. How can they be called gurus if they cannot tell you the 
goal of life? Mind itself will become your guru once you un- 
derstand its mystery. 


One God has many names 


Embodiments of Love! You may call Him by any name, be 
it Jesus, Buddha, Allah, Rama, Krishna; God is one. Ek prabhu 
ke anek nam (one God has many names), if you understand this 
truth, you will realize that all are divine. Sarva jiva nama- 
skaram kesavam prathigatchhathi (saluting the individual 
amounts to saluting God). Your life will be sanctified only 
when you cultivate such broad feelings. Develop broadmind- 
edness. Never give any scope for any doubt on divinity. All 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 217 


such doubts are but imaginations. Never succumb to them. 
Follow only divine feelings. 


Follow the Master, 
Face the devil, 
Fight to the end, 
Finish the game. 


That should be the goal of your life. 

Embodiments of Love! Many devotees from Hong Kong, 
Japan, Thailand, and other countries have gathered here today 
with great devotion and dedication. Truly speaking, their hearts 
are highly sacred. Though they do not have many comforts and 
conveniences here, they have considered it a sadhana, treated 
everything with a sense of equal-mindedness, and are experi- 
encing bliss. Their devotion is true devotion. In path of spiritu- 
ality, have the determination to face any constraint that you 
may come across. That determination is the true thapas (pen- 
ance). Bereft of determination, it becomes thamas (sloth). 


You are determined to achieve something, 
do not give up until you achieve what you want. 
You have desired for something, 
do not give up until your desire is fulfilled. 
You have asked for something, 
do not give up until you get what you have asked for. 
You must pray to God forgetting yourself and 
make Him accede to your request. 
It is not the quality of a true devotee 
to give up half way. [Telugu Poem] 


Cultivate the spirit of sacrifice and be prepared to face any 
difficulties. Na sukhath labhyathe sukham (happiness cannot 
be attained through happiness). Ancient sages and seers had to 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part] 218 


undergo a lot of difficulties. They had to live in the forest eat- 
ing leaves and tubers. They could have the vision of God only 
after all this suffering. They declared to the world: Vedaha- 
metham Purusham mahantham aditya varnam thamasah para- 
sthath (O people, we have seen God who is beyond the dark- 
ness of ignorance, shining resplendently like a thousand suns.) 
They also declared, “He is all-pervasive. We have seen Him 
not outside, but within ourselves. You can also see Him if you 
turn your vision inward.” 

In order to attain divinity, one has to undertake spiritual 
sadhana. What type of sadhana? Not penance or meditation. 
One has to control the senses. Talk less and work more. Only 
then will the individual, society and country as a whole pros- 
per. Don't waste time. Time is God. Time wasted is life wast- 
ed. The Upanishads declare that human life is highly sacred 
and unique. So, sanctify your life by contemplating on the Di- 
vine. Offer all your actions to God. Only then you can attain 
peace. 


30 May 1999 
Sai Ramesh Hall, Brindavan 


Santhi is full of spiritual feeling and wisdom that is 
the natural accompaniment of bliss. Genuine san- 
thi is won only by control of the senses. Then it can 
be call prasanthi. The experience of that stage is 
as a stream of peace. 

—Baba 


