vaya Sa Speaks 
Volume 46 








Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


INDEX 
01. STRIVE FOR UNITY, PURITY, AND DIVINITY ...... cc eeeeeeeeee eee e eee eee eeeees 2 
02. DEDICATE YOUR EVERYTHING TO GOD... cecceee eee eee ee teen teen eeennaee 12 
03. EXPERIENCE OF UNITY IS REAL SATSANG.......ccceeeeeee seen eee eee eeeenees 20 
04. LET UNITY BE THE UNDERCURRENT EVERYWHERE .......cseeeeeeeeeeeeees 29 
05. EXPERIENCE INNATE DIVINITY TO ATTAIN PEACE AND HAPPINESS. 38 
06:RISE ABOVE. BODY CONSCIOUSNESS -sstseattuornetsiasiebi teeta eeninnee: 47 
07.RAMA NAVAMI DISCOURSE: va cciccsncesiccsseediscossecrssotanes we arereseresesas ers 57 
08. CHANTING GOD'S NAME --THE ROYAL PATH TO LIBERATION ......... 65 
09. PRACTISE AND PROPAGATE OUR SACRED CULTURE ........cceeseeee eens 73 
10. LOVE AND RESPECT YOUR PARENTS AND SANCTIFY YOUR LIFE...... 81 
11. SPIRIT OF SACRIFICE IS THE HALLMARK OF A TRUE DOCTOR....... 91 
12. CAST OFF BODY ATTACHMENT TO DEVELOP ATMIC 

CONSCIOUSNESS -2 sto sanutiey tuations bata aah haitahee tedster okbebonauoseametialtint 97 
13.,GOD'S. BIRTHPLACE IS: A:PURE HEAR Fi iss cecnissccsnedsaceseceaees ena awas 107 
14. GIVE UP DEHABHIMANA, DEVELOP ATMABHIMAN ........:ceeeeeeeee ees 114 
15..'DEVELOP THE SPIRIT OF BROTHERHOO Disc scecccceaceuscaveceeanhyedscass 120 
16: THE CULTURE OF BHARAT scceccseccseresteaseresnecenaretonsearssaveennsranee at: 125 
17. THE ATMA TATTWA IS ONE IN ALL 2... sce ee cece e eee eee e eee eee eeennes £27 
13. LOVEIS:GOD = LIVEVIN LOVE acc ccutcenesanecueacaeeiuneieh tianuiavevaesender ss! 137. 
£9) DIVINE DISCOURSE. .t:ticeireticid: edieidieeeaciawesnerk aah eae aebaearaenenne? 145 
20. MOTHER'S ROLE IN HUMAN VALUES 1... .. ccc cette ee eee eeeeeeeeene ene e nena 151 
21 YOUU ARE-GOD YOQURSELP scasssccasvsesectecsseiecesstsee atte AM sacseah 162 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


1. STRIVE FOR UNITY, PURITY, AND 
DIVINITY 


Date: 01 January Occasion: New Year Place: Prasanthi 
2003 2003 Nilayam 


Intellect, education, prolific scholarship, 
Victory in verbal battle, 

Vanquishing the adversary in physical strife, 
Sovereignty over kingdoms vast, 

Charity profuse of cattle and gold, 

Piercing vision counting the countless stars, 
Numbering each of creatures unnumbered, 
Achieving the mystic eightfold powers, 

Or even stepping on lunar dust -- 

All these are easy to the man of strength. 
But to restrain the urges of body and its parts, 
To turn the senses inward, 

Difficult far is it to attain the vision 

And still the mind in supreme peace. 
(Telugu Poem) 


A skilled tongue entices even the goddess of wealth, 
A sweet tongue wins family and friends, 

Tongue it is that ties your life in knots, 

A vicious tongue begets instant death. 

(Sanskrit Verse) 


Embodiments of Love! 


Having been endowed with such a sacred power of speech, man is unable 
to make proper use of it. No other form of life has the mighty intellect and 
Capacity for inner peace but the human kind. In this world every object 
has five aspects, namely, sath, chith, ananda, rupa, and nama (being, 
awareness, bliss, form, and name). Being, awareness, and bliss are the 
three core attributes of a man. They are true and eternal. Name and form 
are transitory. The delusion of permanence of name and form leads 
mankind to waste away its precious life. 


In this world, there are two types of intellectuals. The first type is the 
scientists who are totally materialistic in their outlook. They have in their 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


mind only the physical and worldly goals and gains. They are fascinated 
by the external appearance of a gigantic tree with its numerous branches 
and twigs, but they are not interested in finding its "roots". Vedantins 
(philosophers) are the second type of intellectuals, who are not fascinated 
by the external appearance of the tree but evince great delight in finding 
the "roots". People who are worldly in outlook waste their time in 
watering the "branches", whereas, the Vedantins water the "roots" and 
thereby enjoy the "fruits". 


Once, the asuras (demons) and devas (demigods) churned the ocean of 
milk with the hope of acquiring divine ambrosia (amrita). They used the 
Manthara mountain as the churning rod. But, initially, they had to put up 
with the emergence of deadly poison. The demons were frustrated and 
disheartened to see poison emanating instead of (amrita. They wanted to 
give up the churning process. But the demigods relentlessly continued the 
churning with courage and determination. Their sustained efforts yielded 
rich rewards in the form of the goddess of wealth, Lakshmi Devi, Iravatha 
(divine white elephant), Kamadhenu (wish-fulfilling cow), Kalpatharu 
(wish-fulfilling tree), and ultimately the divine ambrosia itself. In the 
same manner, man should churn his mind and try to know his true 
identity; He should not be deterred or depressed by the initial 
impediments and obstacles that beset his path. 


Sath-chith-ananda (being-awareness-bliss) are the very nature of man. 
But man has forgotten his very nature and is wasting his time in the vain 
pursuit of fleeting pleasures. He is not able to realise the value of his 
innate nature, sath-chith-ananda. Once he realises its value and 
experiences it, he can reach any exalted state. In fact, he becomes verily 
God. Man can accomplish any mighty task when he realises his innate 
divine nature. The power latent in man is not found anywhere else. Every 
man is endowed with the three chief attributes of sath-chith-ananda. But 
having been enmeshed in the web of delusion, man considers that the 
"name and form" are real, ignoring his innate qualities of sath-chith- 
ananda. First of all, what man has to recognise is his own innate divine 
nature. But man is not making any effort in this direction. He has become 
a slave to his senses, and is wasting his time on trivial matters. The 
primary duty of man therefore is to understand properly his innate human 
nature and then putting it into practice. 


The value and significance of human nature is beyond all estimation. Only 
when you practise human values will your life be redeemed. Man is but a 
spark of Divinity. That is why Lord Krishna said in the Bhagavadgita, 
Mamaivamsho Jeevaloke Jeevabhutah Sanathana (the eternal Atma in all 
beings is a part of My Being). In fact, the antarvani (inner voice) keeps 
reminding man of his divine nature day in and day out. But man is not 
making any effort to listen to his inner voice. He is craving for physical 
and ephemeral objects, forgetting his own divine nature and thereby 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


distancing himself from the ultimate goal of life. Names and forms are 
momentary like water bubbles. He is being deluded by names and forms 
and is losing the very precious gem of divinity. Man is endowed with 
infinite divine power. A piece of red-hot iron can be put to better use than 
the fire itself. The body can be compared to an iron piece and the divinity 
within to fire. Man should therefore understand this truth and make 
proper use of his body. 


Embodiments of Love! 


People are full of hopes and aspirations on the dawn of a New Year. In 
fact, you should consider every moment as the beginning of a New Year. 
Names and forms have no value without the eternal virtues. Man suffers 
from various ailments, some internal and others external. A doctor can 
cure the external ailments. The Atmic feeling is the only remedy for all 
the internal ailments. You should make efforts to know the principle of 
Atma. The Atma is a synonym for Brahma, which is nothing but the 
Chaitanya permeating every human being. Man has a name and form, 
but Chaitanya has no form. The Chaitanya that is present in the human 
body is called "conscience". The all-pervasive Chaitanya is called 
"consciousness". When the individual understands the principle of unity in 
diversity, the "conscience" gets transformed into "consciousness". In spite 
of being endowed with such a sacred power, man gets deluded by the 
vagaries of the world. He is giving importance to the New Year, which is 
fleeting. In fact, he should give importance to the changeless "Time" and 
sanctify it by proper use. 


In this world, only truth and goodness will remain with us for ever. Their 
value cannot be quantified. So, we should strive to develop truth and 
goodness in us. We should not hanker after name and fame. For example, 
we should not be under the delusion that we are providing Telugu Ganga 
water to Chennai. Water is not something that one gives to another. It is 
nature's gift to all. Each one gets one's share based on one's prapti 
(deservedness). Man's activities yield the desired result only when the 
kala, karma, karana, and kartavya (time, action, cause, and duty) are in 
harmony with each other. Hence, one should make sincere efforts and 
wait for the right time. When the action fructifies, he should utilise it in 
accordance with the time and circumstances. 


Boys (former students of Swami) are doing a lot of good work. They are 
going to various villages and giving happiness to the people there by 
performing service activities and bhajans. They should undertake all these 
activities with the spirit of love. There is nothing greater than love. You 
should lead your life filled with selfless love. 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


Embodiments of Love! 


The service activities and the bhajans that you perform alone are not 
enough. You should give up the feeling that you are serving others. That 
is very important. You are serving your own self when you serve others. 
You should consider all as yours. In fact, others are not others but are the 
very forms of God. Hence, service rendered to humanity is service 
rendered to God. All service activities are meant to foster this feeling in 
you. You should plunge into the field of service with selfless love. That 
alone is true service. All other service activities are worldly and 
momentary. 


Students! 


You are under the mistaken notion that you are rendering service to 
others. You should give up such a feeling. Only then does the service you 
perform become real service in the strict sense of the term. Service does 
not merely mean helping others. The best way to love God is to love all 
and serve all. Your acts of service should be suffused with the spirit of 
love. Without the positive aspect of love, all service you render becomes 
negative in nature. 


All bodies are like bulbs, and love is the main switch. Only when the main 
switch is pressed will the bodies radiate light and happiness to one and 
all. You are switching off the main switch and trying to enjoy happiness. It 
is impossible. Hrid + daya (compassion) = Hridaya (heart). Your heart 
should be filled with compassion. All your activities should be suffused 
with love. There is no strength superior to love. 


Our ancient sages and seers used to live in dense forests amidst wild 
animals. They did not carry any weapons with them, yet they could move 
about without any sense of fear. What was the source of their courage? 
They possessed the single weapon of love, which protected them from the 
wild animals. The ancient culture of Bharat is divine, most precious, 
wonderful, and blissful. But you are not making any effort to understand 
its greatness. In fact, you are belittling such a sacred culture. You are 
deluded by the differences based on caste and culture. In fact, there is 
only one caste, the caste of humanity. The love that originates in the 
heart is true religion. The entire humanity is one family. All are brothers 
and sisters. The whole world is but one mansion. It is impossible to 
describe in words the happiness you would experience when you develop 
such broad-mindedness. Hence, make every effort to visualise divinity in 
humanity. 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


God's creation is most wonderful and mysterious. There are innumerable 
stars in the sky. The light emitted by some of them is yet to reach the 
earth, in spite of the fact that light travels at a speed of thousands of 
miles per second. Such being the case, you can very well imagine the 
distance between earth and stars. When the creation itself is such an 
infinite and indescribable phenomenon, how mighty and powerful must 
the creator be! 


The stories of the Lord are most wonderful and sacred in all the 
three worlds. 

They are like sickles that cut the creepers of worldly bondage. 
(Telugu Poem) 


The stories of God cannot be described in mere words. Man imagines and 
describes Him based on his own estimates. Truly speaking, God is beyond 
all definition. 


There are various types of pramanas (experiences) in this world. They are 
pratyaksha pramana (direct experience), anumana pramana (experience 
based on inference), dvaita pramana (experience based on duality), and 
advaita pramana (experience based on non-duality). As God is beyond all 
these pramanas, He is known as Aprameya (immeasurable and 
indefinable). God is present in the heart of every man with all His divine 
powers. 


The beauty and grandeur of God cannot be described in words. He is 
extolled as "Hiranyagarbhaya Namah" (salutations to the one with the 
golden womb). Hiranya means gold. It is present in His heart. Just as the 
essence of the food partaken is supplied to all parts of the body, likewise, 
gold permeates His entire body. Hence, He is the most handsome One. He 
is the primordial basis of all beings. 


Everything happens according to His Will. Since He is the creator of all 
beings, He is called Prajapati. Since He is the most intelligent One, He is 
called Dakshinamurthi. In this manner, God has infinite names. Man 
attributes names and forms to God based on his limited understanding 
and worships Him: Nirgunam, Niranjanam, Sanathana Niketanam, Nitya, 
Suddha, Buddha, Mukta, and Nirmala Swarupinam (God is attributeless, 
pure, final abode, eternal, unsullied, enlightened, liberated, and 
embodiment of sacredness). When such a divine principle is present 
within his own self, why does man consider himself to be small and 
feeble? You should give up such a feeling of inferiority. There is no 
greater being than the human being. In fact, divinity is immanent in the 
entire humanity. But, unfortunately, you are considering such a sacred 
human birth as trivial. As you think, so shall it become. These petty 
thoughts are the result of your petty mind. 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


When you see smoke emerging from the hills, it is an indication that there 
is fire. When you see the fire directly, it is called pratyaksha pramana 
(direct experience). If you see only the smoke and not the fire, you 
presume that there is fire behind the smoke. It is only a possibility. It is 
anumana pramana (presumptive experience). It is possible that 
sometimes fog appears as smoke and, actually, there may not be fire in 
the hills. Therefore, anumana pramana gives rise to doubt. 


Love is the only pratyaksha pramana (direct experience) of divinity in a 
human being. When a question arises as to where God is, the immediate 
answer is God is love and love is God. Similarly, truth is God. There is 
nothing greater than truth. There is no divinity higher than truth. Truth is 
all-pervading. Countries may be different; but, truth is one and only one. 
There is nothing like American truth, Japanese truth, German truth, etc. 
To make such distinction is the nature of petty-minded people. 


We are not petty-minded and mean. We are the embodiments of infinity. 
Man should always remind himself that he is the embodiment of Truth, 
embodiment of Love, embodiment of Bliss, etc. Man has got infinite 
Capacity for spiritual thoughts and spiritual quest. But, does he realise his 
true nature? 


Take, for instance, a handful of sea-sand in a plate. The scientists 
determine the sand as belonging to such and such country on the basis of 
the colour and weight of the sand. But the philosophers do not at all think 
that way. They say that it is God's creation and God's maya (illusion). 
Thus, there is a gulf of difference between the perceptions of the 
scientists and the sages. Science is like semi-circle. It starts at some 
place and ends at some other place. But, spirituality originates and ends 
at the same point of origin. It is a full-circle. It is verily Divinity. That is 
why it is said, 


Poornamadah poornamidam poornat poornamudachyate 
Poornasya poornamadaya poornameva avashishyate. 

(That is full, this is full. When the full is taken out of the full, 
what remains is again the full). 


Such a divinity, which is the embodiment of fullness, is immanent in every 
human being. But, unfortunately, man is not making any effort to realise 
the divinity within. Who is protecting his body while he is fast asleep? 
How does the body function perfectly, even without his knowledge? 
Nobody knows. For creation, protection and sustenance --for everything-- 
, God is responsible. Such a divine power is immanent in every human 
being. In spite of this, man is depressed in times of difficulties and is 
elated in times of joy. But this is not the goal of his life. His true goal is to 
maintain a perfect state of equanimity at all times and not to get caught 
in "sorrows and joys". Pleasure is an interval between two pains. 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


Therefore, we need not go in search of pleasure. It is very much within 
us. In fact, you, yourself are the embodiment of bliss. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Always be happy and cheerful, for your innate nature is bliss. You need 
not go in search of happiness. Bliss emerges out of Atma. Whenever you 
wish for it, you will get it. Happiness is union with God. Therefore, always 
be in the company of God. Once you are in the company of God, 
happiness will follows you like a slave. 


Today, man is in search of happiness, and, in the process, is becoming a 
slave to happiness. This is not correct. In fact, happiness should become 
a slave to you, for you are verily the embodiment of Divine Atma. Believe 
it or not, Iam always blissful. You can also experience such a state of 
bliss. You should not go in search of happiness. Instead, happiness should 
follow you wherever you go. 


Hanuman was a great hero in the episode of Ramayana. He was 
courageous, mighty and invincible. He possessed good qualities of 
character and peace. He was always happy and cheerful, chanting the 
divine name of Rama. You should also develop such noble qualities. First 
and foremost, you should become a human being in the true sense. You 
should develop kindness toward all. Only then do you deserve to be 
identified as belonging to mankind. 


Embodiments of Love! 


You are acquiring a high level of worldly education. You are reading 
several great books. You are acquiring great powers. But, all these are 
ephemeral and evanescent. Therefore, always keep your thoughts 
steadily fixed on the divine power that fills your heart with bliss. The 
divine power is infinite. The more you contemplate on the divine, the 
more and more the bliss gets multiplied. When such an infinite divine 
power is within your own self, why should you be exposed to difficulties? 


Today, our old students have assembled here. They are undertaking 
several types of service activities in various parts of the country and even 
abroad. They are deriving great pleasure out of this service activity. 


In My opinion, they should confine themselves to their own areas and 
render service to society, within their means. It is neither good nor 
necessary to associate others in their service activity, which will turn it 
into business. As far as possible, they should undertake such activities in 
their respective villages and give them happiness. 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


In rural areas, there is a vast scope for different service activities. A few 
decades ago, some people invited Me to shift to bigger cities like Mysore, 
saying that they would provide a big palace for Me. But, as for Me, I don't 
need palaces. I must stay in this small village. I have not given up My 
place of birth. In such place alone, mighty tasks need to be accomplished. 
So, I refused to move from Puttaparthi, which was then a remote village 
with no modern facilities. 


In those days, if one were to visit Puttaparthi, one had to alight from the 
train at Penukonda, which was the nearest railhead, and then travel to 
this place in a bullock-cart. Such were the conveyances in those days. But 
now, one can straightaway reach Puttaparthi comfortably by air. One had 
to go to Anantapur by bus in those days for availing oneself of medical 
services. Now, we have a Super Speciality Hospital right at our doorstep. 
Thus, all modern conveniences and facilities are now available in this 
village of Puttaparthi. 


Therefore, there is no better place than a village to live in. The villages 
are the most valuable assets of a nation. If you serve the villagers 
properly, nothing could be a greater service than that. Grama seva is 
Rama seva. 


There is no satisfaction in service undertaken in towns and cities. The 
urban people are indifferent and self-centred. Even if thieves break into a 
neighbouring house, they will not bother. On the other hand, in the 
villages, even for a small commotion, all the villagers will gather. Such a 
type of unity and camaraderie still exists in the villages. Where there is 
unity, there will be divinity. Where there is divinity, there will be bliss. 
Hence, work sincerely for the development of the village in which you are 
placed. Thus, all of you should work for the development of your 
respective villages. 


Your activities should not be on the lines of political activities. By 
associating with various types of people, this turns into a political activity. 
I am not happy with that. Do come together for bhajans wherever you 
are. But do not allow separatism. All should be united. 


Wherever you are, undertake service activities with a spirit of cooperation 
and unity. Do not strike discordant notes. For ages, India has been a 
peaceful country and all Indians were united like a big family. But what is 
the position now? In the olden days, whenever somebody visited a 
village, all the villagers used to gather round him and enquire about his 
welfare lovingly. Now, that spirit of love and oneness is lost, totally. 
Wherever you go, you will find differences and tensions even on trivial 
matters. Especially, after Independence, riots and disturbances are taking 
place in almost every part of the country. The sanctity of human life 
seems to be totally lost. Human life has no value. People are killed like 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


ants and mosquitoes. These are inhuman and demonic acts. This is not 
what is expected of a human being. 


We must transform the divine power latent in us into skill, for undertaking 
service to society. When knowledge is converted into skill, you acquire 
balance in life. In such a state of equanimity, you will develop insight. 
With such an insight and divine power when you undertake service 
activity, it will be most fruitful and beneficial to the society. 


Every village in the country has to be developed in all respects. You have 
come from Hyderabad, Madras, America, etc., to participate in service 
activity. Where is the need for all this? This is not a fair where different 
people from different parts gather to sell their commodities. Wherever 
you are, develop your area with your service. People of one place may 
even go to another place for developing that place. But this kind of mixing 
up of people from different areas adulterates the very purpose. It ends up 
in confusion, turns into pollution. Do not give scope for confusion and 
pollution of your mind with unnecessary differences. 


You should always undertake service activities with a pure mind. Unity 
brings purity, and purity in turn leads to divinity. Therefore, always 
remember the inseparable relationship between unity, purity, and divinity 
and strive to achieve that. You may come together and work together in 
the spirit of sacrifice. But if people from various places come together this 
way for Grama Seva, no good accrues to the villages. Each has his own 
feelings and by mixing they get polluted. Then the place becomes a 
business centre. 


Spirituality is not a business activity. Spirituality is a divine mansion. It is 
associated with unity. This unity in diversity alone will bring you 
happiness. I wish that you cultivate that principle of unity. It is only then 
that the service undertaken by you will acquire value and sanctity. There 
is no use polluting the sacred service activity with all sorts of differences. 
A small example. Gold is in the form of deposits in the gold mines. When 
you take it out and purify it, it becomes pure 24 carat gold. It acquires 
great value. However, when you add other metals like copper, its value 
comes down. Not only that. Its brightness also comes down. If you add 
some more metals, it loses its value altogether. Our heart is like a temple 
of gold. It is Hiranyagarbha. We should never defile that Hiranyagarbha. 
It should always be bright and shining. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Share love with everybody. Always maintain unity and purity. As you 
have planned earlier, you can commence your musical programme now. 


Date: 01 January 2003, Occasion: New Year 2003, Place: 


10 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


Prasanthi Nilayam 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


2. DEDICATE YOUR EVERYTHING TO GOD 


Date: 14 January 2003 Occasion: Sankranthi Place: Prasanthi Nilayam 


The sun appears serene and peaceful. 

The days have become shorter. 

And the chill wind is blowing. 

The fields are ripe with golden crops. 

Marigold flowers are blossoming like garlands on the banks 
of rivers. 

The farmers are rejoicing and singing. 

The sweet festival of Sankranti has arrived, 

filling our homes with the newly harvested grain. 

(Telugu Poem) 


The festival of Sankranti has arrived in all its beauty and splendour. The 
sports and cultural activities of our students --boys and girls-- have added 
grandeur and bliss to the festivity. This day is no ordinary day. It marks 
the beginning of the sacred Uttarayana (summer solstice). It confers on 
us plenty and prosperity and helps us to develop virtues and undertake 
sacred activities. In addition, this day happens to be the auspicious one of 
Mukkoti Ekadasi also. That is, the day on which the devas (gods) and 
asuras (demons) obtained the pot of divine ambrosia (amrita kalasa) after 
churning the ocean of milk. 


Since man has filled his heart with worldly thoughts and feelings, he is 
not able to put into practice his innate divine qualities. Hiranyaksha, 
Hiranyakasipu, Duryodhana, and Kamsa were by no means ordinary. 
Though they were very strong in their body and mind, they became weak 
as they were immersed in worldly feelings. Man can conquer the entire 
world when his thoughts are noble. Hiranyaksha and Hiranyakasipu were 
great scientists. Hiranyakasipu could reach not only the moon but even 
the sun. In spite of all his power, he became weak because he was full of 
worldly feelings. Every individual is endowed with mighty power and 
intelligence. But one should not fill his heart with worldly feelings. Young 
men and women of today are the future leaders of the world. The 
prosperity of the nation depends on its youth. Hence, youth should 
develop virtues, noble thoughts and sterling character. One who has filled 
his heart with noble thoughts can accomplish any great task. 


12 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


Students - Boys and Girls! 


You have participated in the sports and cultural activities with all 
enthusiasm and gave joy to one and all. Virtues are of paramount 
importance to youth. Today, students are able to excel in various fields. 
But they are not making any effort to understand the fundamental 
principle by knowing which they would have known everything. In every 
man there are noble feelings springing forth from within. Every man is 
endowed with a mind which is most powerful. Such a mighty power is not 
present in any other kind of being. The mind is but a bundle of thoughts. 
One who has conquered the mind can achieve any mighty task. There is 
no power greater than the mind. Manah eva manushyanam karanam 
bandhamokshayoh (mind is responsible for both bondage and liberation of 
man). But today, man is unable to conquer the mind. Consequently, bliss 
eludes him. 


Students - Boys and Girls! 


You have to achieve purity of mind in the first instance. The Sports and 
Cultural Meet has come to an end. You should not consider sports as mere 
worldly and physical activities. They teach you many moral and spiritual 
principles. A true student is one who achieves excellence in the moral, 
social, and spiritual fields. One should not strive for physical strength and 
happiness only. One should strive hard for the control of the mind. One 
who becomes a slave to his mind is bound to become weak, however 
powerful one may be. So, you should make the mind your slave. The 
power of mind is matchless. It is from the mind that the most precious 
virtues originate. If wealth is lost, it can be earned again. If health is lost, 
it can be restored with the help of an efficient doctor. But if human values 
are lost, human life becomes a waste. Human values are the need of the 
hour. They cannot be acquired solely from sacred texts nor can they be 
passed on by learned preceptors. They originate from within. When we 
develop noble thoughts and follow the path of truth in our daily life, 
human values will blossom in us and protect us under all circumstances. 


Embodiments of Love! 


More than the worldly education, you should strive to uphold human 
values, for, all powers are latent in them. Truth is God. Righteousness is 
the very foundation of life. That is why the culture of Bharat (India) 
declared, Sathyaannasti paro dharma (there is no dharma greater than 
adherence to truth). Hence, you should be prepared to sacrifice your life 
to uphold these twin principles of truth and righteousness. You should not 
crave for worldly bahu mathi (prize). Man is facing a lot of hardship, as he 
is unable to control the one mathi (mind) he is endowed with. What will 
be his plight if he has bahu mathi (many minds)? He will become worse 
than a monkey. What you should aspire to attain is nija mathi (true 


13 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


mind), not bahumathi. Nija mathi is the pavitra sukti (sacred message) 
that originates in your heart. Mind is the source of all types of powers. 
Hence, you should make friendship with the mind. Once the mind 
becomes your friend, it redeems your life. 


The culture of Bharat has prescribed nine paths of devotion: sravanam 
(listening), kirtanam (singing), Vishnusmaranam (contemplating on 
Vishnu), Padasevanam (serving His Lotus Feet), vandanam (salutation), 
archanam (worship), dasyam (servitude), sneham (friendship), and 
Atmanivedanam (Self-surrender). Self-surrender is possible only after 
developing friendship with God. Friendship leads to Self-surrender. So 
long as you do not develop friendship, all your talk of self-surrender 
cannot be translated into action. More than the action, God sees the 
feeling behind it. Hence, you should foster noble feelings. 


Students! 


Wherever you are, develop divine feelings and a steady mind. Sarvam 
Vishnumayam jagat (Divinity pervades the entire universe), Sarvam 
khalvidam Brahma (verily all this is Brahman). God is not confined to a 
particular place. He is with you, in you, around you. Just as the eyelid 
protects the eye, He protects you always. How is it that you have lost 
faith in such divine power? Having attained human birth, you are 
supposed to develop human values. On the contrary, you have lost them. 
Consequently, you have become weak in body and mind. You may secure 
high marks in your examinations. At the same time, you should also take 
care that you do not get any adverse remarks. Today students are going 
abroad in pursuit of education and wealth. One can acquire the true 
wealth of values only when one searches the recesses of one's heart. True 
wealth and prosperity are present in our heart and not outside. Hence, 
students should turn their mind inward and develop values. Only then will 
they have the strength and capacity to emancipate the nation. 


Students! 


For the past one week, I have been observing the enormous amount of 
hard work you have put in to make this Sports Meet a grand success. You 
strove hard, even forgoing your food and sleep. Here, people have to 
understand the difference in the sports activities of our students and the 
students elsewhere. The students outside have only one goal in their 
mind, i.e. to win a prize or a medal, whereas our students only aim is to 
please Swami. How can you please Swami? First of all, you have to 
develop virtues. You should have unwavering mind and a steady vision. 
You should have firm faith that God is all-pervasive. With faith in God, 
any mighty task can be accomplished. 


14 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


Where there is faith, there is love; 
Where there is love, there is truth; 
Where there is truth, there is peace; 
Where there is peace, there is bliss; 
Where there is bliss, there is God. 


Faith is the seed and bliss is the fruit. When a seed is sown, it gradually 
grows into a huge tree and yields flowers and fruits. In the same manner, 
when man sows the seed of a sacred thought in the field of his heart, it 
grows into a gigantic tree of spiritual power and confers the fruits of 
peace and bliss. Everyone aspires for peace. It cannot be acquired from 
outside. Peace originates from faith within. But modern man does not 
have strong faith. He just pretends to have faith. Today, there are very 
few true devotees; most others are merely pretending. When you have 
steady mind, your faith will also be steady. 


Students! 


If you want to experience eternal bliss, you should have a strong and 
unwavering faith. People have no idea what faith actually means. They 
say, we believe in God, we love God, but in reality they do not understand 
the spirit behind the terms love and faith. True love has righteousness as 
the undercurrent. It originates from the heart and confers bliss. Love is 
related to the heart, not to an object or an individual. Love is like the air 
that wafts around in the firmament of human heart. It is around you and 
sustains you. This is the nature of true love. The synonym of love is 
dharma. Love is the main goal of our life. That is our way of life. When 
you fill your heart with love, you will become all-powerful. Even mighty 
personalities like Hiranyaksha and Hiranyakasipu will be no match to you. 
All other powers pale in comparison to the power of love. 


The culture of Bharat (India) has laid great emphasis on the principle of 
love. It demonstrates the underlying unity in diversity. Names and forms 
may be different but the inherent divinity is only one. Man is the 
repository of all powers. He is one of courage, valour, and majesty 
(dheera, veera, and gambhira). Hanuman is extolled as santhudu, 
gunavantudu, and balavantudu (one of peace, virtue, and strength). The 
divine name of Rama was the basis for all his accomplishments. He could 
cross the mighty ocean because of his love and faith toward Rama. 


Today is also the most auspicious day of Mukkoti Ekadasi. It is also called 
as Vaikuntha Ekadasi. The great warrior of Mahabharata war, Bhishma 
laid down his arms after fighting a heroic battle and lay on the bed of 
arrows for 56 days. His body was pierced all over with arrows. As he lay 
on the bed of arrows, his body rested on the arrows, but his head was 
sagging down for want of support. Meanwhile, the Pandavas along with 


15 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


Droupadi went there to see Bhishma. They were greatly moved on seeing 
the condition of Bhishma. 


Bhishma said, "I have done my duty in the Kurukshetra war. The body is 
given to us to protect truth and righteousness. It is dedicated for the 
welfare of the country. Of what use is it if we do not perform our duty? I 
have done my duty and I do not regret for the present condition of my 
body. But, Oh! Arjuna! The arrows shot by you during the war struck only 
my body. They, however, did not affect my head. Hence, as I lay on this 
bed of arrows, my head is without a support and is hanging. You gave me 
a bed, but without a pillow. Please provide a pillow also for me, so that I 
can comfortably lie down on this bed of arrows." 


Arjuna was deeply moved by Bhishma's words. His heart melted. He 
enquired from Bhishma what he should do to provide comfort to him. 
Bhishma requested Arjuna to shoot two arrows into the earth into an X 
position and then place his head on them. Arjuna did accordingly. 
Thereafter, Bhishma further requested Arjuna, "Oh! Arjuna! I am the son 
of Ganga. I, therefore, acquired the name of 'Gangeya’'. I am now in the 
last moment of my life's journey. Please, therefore, provide the Ganga 
water and help me to merge in my mother, Ganga." 


Arjuna was a great warrior and all-powerful. He earned many titles: 
Arjuna (the pure one), Phalguna (the one born under the star Phalguna), 
Paarthah (scion of the Prithu clan), Kireeti (crowned one), 
Swetavaahanah (rider of a milk-white horse), Beebhatsu (eliminator of 
disgust), Vijayah (embodiment of victory), Krishnah (swarthy one), 
Savyasaachi (ambidextrous), Dhananjayah (winner of wealth). He shot an 
arrow into the earth. Immediately, water gushed forth from the earth like 
a spring and fell into the mouth of Bhishma. 


Bhishma was very happy that Arjuna could fulfil his last desire. He 
expressed his gratitude thus: "Oh! Arjuna! There are several people in 
this world who help others in different ways. But there is none to help one 
to return to his mother. Today, you helped me to reach my mother. You 
provided great joy to me with the help of your dhanus (bow)." So saying, 
he blessed the Pandavas that they would win the Mahabharata war. 


Thus, if you wish to earn the blessings of elders, you must provide 
comfort and solace to them and win their hearts. 


In the Sports and Cultural Meet held two days ago, our students 
participated in several sports and games and displayed their talent to 
please Swami. But this happiness and satisfaction must not be limited to 
sports. It should pervade every aspect of your life. Your entire life must 
run smoothly and happily. 


16 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


Nityanandam, Parama Sukhadam, Kevalam Jnanamurtim, 
Dwandwateetam, Gagana Sadrisham, Tattwamasyadi Lakshyam, 
Ekam, Nityam, Vimalam, Achalam, Sarvadhee Sakshibhutam, 
Bhavateetam, Trigunarahitam 

(Telugu Poem) 


(God is the embodiment of eternal bliss, He is wisdom absolute, 
the One without a second, beyond the pair of opposites, 
expansive and pervasive like the sky, 

goal indicated by the Mahavakya Tattwamasi (I am That), the 
eternal, pure, unchanging, 

the witness of all functions of the intellect, 

beyond all mental conditions and the three gunas (qualities) 

of sattwa (purity), rajas (passion), and thamas (inertia, laziness)). 


Every human being must lead a life full of joy. We have the body. We are 
performing several chores with the help of this body. But, that is not of 
much importance. There is a great Atmic principle in this body. We must 
strive to realise that principle. Every human being has a mind. But today, 
that mind is polluted. Wherever you see, pollution and pollution. The food 
we eat, the water we drink, the air we breathe, and finally our behaviour 
itself --everything is polluted. Therefore, ensure that your mind is not 
polluted by bad thoughts. You must always have a positive mind, not a 
negative mind. You may undertake a great task, but it cannot succeed if it 
is undertaken with a negative mind. You must always have a positive 
mind to experience happiness. You should also share that happiness with 
others. That is the real nature of a human being. A human being is also 
called "manava". What is its underlying meaning? It means: he who 
conducts himself with peace and joy, without doing injustice to others. 
You must cultivate such noble feelings, free from pollution. 


Dear Students! 


You have acquired great academic qualifications. Some of you have 
acquired more than two postgraduate degrees. This is really a great 
effort. But it is not enough. You must also acquire the degree of "amruta 
puthra" (son of immortality), since the Upanishads exhort Srunvanthu 
viswe amrutasya puthrah (Oh! The sons of immortality, listen!). The 
degree of "amruta puthra" is the real degree one has to acquire. We 
should not hanker after trivial titles. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Fill your hearts with love. Undertake divine activities. This is the type of 
education you have to pursue. No doubt, worldly education is also 
necessary. But, true education is that which teaches unity among all 
human beings. The main principle of Indian culture is to seek unity in 


17 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


diversity. It is not to divide unity into diversity. That is true culture. What 
is culture? It is not related to any particular religion. It is purely related to 
the heart. It is not a caste or a faith. It is fully associated with divinity. 


Embodiments of Love! 


You have provided great happiness to one and all with your display of 
talents in various events of sports and games. Keep up this happiness 
throughout your life. True love lies in realising the Ekatma Bhava. That is 
the real love which does not change with the passage of time. It is 
eternal. No doubt, you love Swami with all your heart. But that love 
should not be a fleeting love. You must always develop the feeling, "I 
belong to Swami and Swami belongs to me." Only then you will achieve 
oneness with Swami. That is the real sadhana (spiritual exercise). That is 
the true path. 


The creation emerges from truth and merges into truth, 
Is there a place where truth does not exist? 

Visualise such pure and unsullied truth. 

(Telugu Poem) 


It is said, "Truth is God." You may belong to any country or religion, but 
truth is the same for one and all. There is nothing like American truth, 
Pakistan truth, etc. Truth is truth. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Lead a life full of truth. Lead the life of an eternal being. Lead an ideal life, 
which is an example to others to emulate. An education that teaches such 
a sadhana (spiritual exercise) is the true education. It is not to transform 
your brain into a book shelf. True happiness lies in your own heart. 
Realise it. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Wherever you are, in whatever circumstances you are placed in, do not 
ever forget God. Sarvada sarva kaleshu sarvatra Hari chintanam 
(Everywhere, at all times, under all circumstances contemplate on God). 
Devoid of God, you will become devils verily. You must live like 
embodiments of Divine Atma, not devils. 


The Upanishads declare, Srunvanthu viswe amrutasya puthrah (Oh! The 
sons of immortality, listen!). You are "amruta puthras" (sons of 
immortality). Live up to that name. Only then your life will become fruitful 
and sanctified. 


18 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


Whatever activity you undertake, dedicate it to God. All the powers in 
your body are the gifts of God. In fact, divinity pervades every inch, every 
cell and every atom of your body. If you waste such a divine power, it 
amounts to sacrilege. Dedicate your body, mind, and intellect, in fact, 
everything of yours, to God. The games you play should not be limited to 
one day. In fact, Life is a game; play it. Unity is divinity. Whatever you 
do, whatever you speak, whatever you think --in every aspect of your lif-- 
that unity must reflect. That is the true culture of the Bharatiyas 
(Indians). The essence of Bharatiya culture is: Sathyam vada, dharmam 
chara (speak truth, practise righteousness). I exhort you to cultivate 
these two principles throughout your life. With blessings, I conclude My 
discourse. 


Bhagawan concluded His discourse with the bhajan, "Hari bhajana bina 
sukha santhi nahi". 


Date: 14 January 2003, Occasion: Sankranthi, Place: Prasanthi 
Nilayam 


19 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


3. EXPERIENCE OF UNITY IS REAL 
SATSANG 


Date: 01 March 2003 Occasion: Place: Prasanthi 
(evening) Mahasivarathri Nilayam 


Oh spiritual aspirants! 

Whether one is a renunciant or a householder, 
whether one is attached to the world or not, 
whether one performs actions or not, 

when one realises that the same Atmic principle 
is present in oneself as well as in others, 

one will always experience and enjoy 

the company of God in all three states of 
existence. 

(Sanskrit Sloka) 


Devotees should recognise the unity of the Atmic principle that exists in 
all beings. Satsang (good company) is very essential to understand the 
oneness of Atmic principle. Satsang does not mean association with good 
people, devotees, or spiritual aspirants. 'Sath' is that which is changeless 
in all the three periods of time. It is the Atmic principle. When sath and 
chit come together, what results is ananda (bliss). Sath-chit-ananda is the 
very form of Atma. This is referred to as Transcendental Truth. In order to 
understand this truth, three mantras are to be practised. They are 
Bhadram Trunvantu, Bhadram Srunvantu, and Bhadram Kurvantu. When 
you practise these three principles, you don't need to search for God. 


BBhadram Trunvan means, "I am not different from the Atma." There is 
no entity in this world other than the Atma. Bhadram Srunvantu means "I 
do not listen to anything else." Bhadram Kurvantu means "I don't need to 
perform any sadhana (spiritual exercise)." When one recognises the 
oneness of the Atmic principle, where is the need to undertake 

any sadhana? Every sound that is heard is a resound of the Atmic 
principle. One who realises this will not listen to anything other than 

the Atma. 


Divinity is the essence of all actions. Bhadram Trunvantu, Bhadram 
Srunvantu, and Bhadram Kurvantu means that the divine darshan, divine 
sambhashan and divine activities are embodied only in God. Hence, to live 
always in the company of God is true satsang. 


20 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


God is one. He is referred to as Sath. Ekam sath viprah bahudha vadanti 
(Truth is one, but the wise call it by different names). That which is 
changeless in all the three periods of time is Sath'. You should live in the 
company of the One who is changeless, with unwavering mind and steady 
vision. Your thoughts, words, and deeds should be steady and sacred. But 
due to the impact of Kali Age, modern youth find it difficult to control their 
thoughts, words, and deeds. They do not have steady vision. They do not 
keep up their word. Their activities belie their thoughts and words. 


Manasyekam vachasyekam karmanyekam mahatmanam 
Manasyanyath vachasyanyath karmanyanyath duratmanam 


Those whose thoughts, words, and deeds are in complete 
harmony are noble; 
Those who lack harmony of these are wicked. 


Your deeds should be in consonance with your thoughts and words. 
Harmonising thoughts, words, and deeds is true satsang. To experience 
the oneness of Self is true satsang. The Atma is only one. It attracts the 
entire world. What is prakriti (nature)? It consists of objects that delude 
man. All objects in nature are transitory. You do not find anything 
permanent. They attract man and delude him. The objects that are 
temporary in nature will give only momentary happiness. The Vedas 
speak about the principle of ritam. It symbolises the truth that is 
changeless. All worldly objects undergo change. When you develop ritam, 
you will be able to understand the changeless and eternal Divinity. 


You may question, "How can I have the vision of God?" Oh simpleton! You 
don't need to search for God! Wherever you see, He is there. He is 
imbued in every object. You are unable to see Him because you are 
deluded by external appearances. Pashyati iti pashuhu (that which goes 
purely by external vision is an animal). Whatever you see, whatever you 
experience is but the manifestation of God. In fact, you are God yourself. 
Hence, the Veda exhorts man to develop faith that "I am God and God is 
none other than myself." Names and forms are many, but God is one. 
Sarvam khalvidam Brahma (verily all this is Brahman). Such unity in 
Divinity has to be realised. There is underlying unity in apparent diversity. 
Satsang means experience of unity. 


Today, people think that satsang means a congregation of spiritual 
aspirants. People join such congregations and think that they are 

in satsang. But it is not satsang in the true sense of the term because 
people whom you think to be good may turn wicked. They are bound to 
change. How can such temporary association confer everlasting 
happiness? It is impossible. Till this day, people have not understood the 
true meaning of satsang and its significance. 


21 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


Tell me your company I shall tell you who you are. When you associate 
yourself with ephemeral things, the results also are bound to be 
transitory. You should develop friendship with Divinity, which alone is true 
and eternal. Divinity is very much present in you. You cannot find it 
outside. The external world is subject to change. The world is nothing but 
a combination of matter. Everything in this world is transitory. Nothing is 
permanent. All that is seen in this world is illusory. The unseen Atmic 
principle alone is true and eternal. 


If you pose the question, "Where is God?" some people will say, "He is in 
me", pointing to their body. Body is not permanent. Hence, this is not a 
proper answer. (Swami holding a rose) When I say the flower is in My 
hand, the flower is smaller than Me. In the same manner, when you say 
God is in you, you are bigger than God! In fact, the whole world is in the 
hands of God. Hence, it is not proper to say that God is in you. You are in 
God. All are in God. The world itself is a manifestation of God. This is the 
Transcendental Truth. This is the changeless truth. The word Sivam 
symbolises truth. Here, truth does not correspond to your body. It 
corresponds to the changeless and eternal Sath. Today, people go by the 
physical and worldly meanings and, as a result, spoil their mind. 


Man's life can be compared to a tree. Asuya (jealousy) and ahamkara 
(ego) are like pests that destroy the tree of life. The day man rids himself 
of these pests, he can become a true human being. 


What you have to know today is the principle of eternal and changeless 
truth. Our Narasimhamurthi (one of the previous speakers) said Divinity is 
in the form of the Atmic principle. How can one visualise the Atma? 

The Atma has no form. How can one visualise that which is formless? 

Bliss is the form of the Atma. It is present in everyone. Man is the 
embodiment of ananda. But he is unable to experience bliss because he is 
deluded by the material objects. 


One should not crave for materialistic possessions. How long can they 
last? Here is a flower. Now it looks fresh, but by tomorrow it will fade 
away. Likewise all objects are bound to change with the passage of time. 
The Atma is permanent. Ananda is permanent. Bliss can only be 
experienced; it cannot be expressed in words. None can explain the 
nature of bliss. It can be understood only by experience. As I told you 
earlier, your drishti (vision), sravanam (audition), and karma (action) 
should be constantly focused on the Atma. Then you will certainly 
experience nijananda, nityananda and advaitananda (true, eternal, and 
non-dual bliss). 


People sit in meditation for some time and start shedding tears of joy. 
They say they have experienced bliss. It is nothing but their imagination. 
Bliss is not that which comes and goes. It is permanent. In whatever 


22 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


state you may be, waking, dream or deep sleep, you should be able to 
experience it continuously. 


Embodiments of Love! 


You should strive to attain Atmic bliss right from a young age. That should 
be your only endeavour. Your thoughts, words, and deeds should be 
aimed at this. This can be termed as true satsang. Worldly experiences, 
however long one may enjoy them, cannot confer the eternal bliss. You 
can experience the eternal bliss only in the company of God. All the 
worldly activities and experiences are bound to change. The Atma alone is 
changeless. This is referred to as ritam in Sanskrit. In order to experience 
this eternal principle, you should give up body attachment and 
understand the truth that the Atma in you is the same as the one in 
others. Just as the same electric current flows in different bulbs, the 
same Atma is present in all beings. Ekatma sarva bhutantaratma (the 
one Atma is present in all beings). But, today, man does not have such 
broad-mindedness. In order to experience divinity, which is the very form 
of love, you have to become the very personification of love. Divinity and 
love are not separate. Since man is endowed with such sacred divine 
principle, it is said, Jantunam nara janma durlabham (out of all living 
beings, human birth is the rarest). 


Today man does not enquire as to what is gamyamu (goal of life). Instead 
of trying to know the goal of life, he is worrying about his janmamu 
(worldly life). Even animals and insects are concerned about their worldly 
existence. It is not essential to know the secret of life; one should know 
the purpose of life. That is very important. The goal of our life is Truth 
which is symbolised by the principle of Atma. Instead of enquiring into the 
goal of life, man is trying to know the secret of life. It is a futile exercise. 
Any number of births will not be sufficient to know this. Fix your mind on 
the gamyamu (goal). Do not worry about the janmamu (life). 


The Adi Sankara said, 


Punarapi Jananam Punarapi Maranam 
Punarapi Janani Jathare Sayanam 

Iha Samsare Bahu Dustare 
Kripayapare Pahi Murare. 


Oh Lord! I am caught up in this cycle of birth and death; 

time and again, I am experiencing the agony of staying 
in the mother's womb. 

It is very difficult to cross this ocean of worldly life. 

Please take me across this ocean and grant me liberation. 


23 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


You are born again and again, seeing, doing, and experiencing what you 
have already seen, done, and experienced. You should realise that you 
are born not to be born again. You should see and experience that by 
which your life will find fulfilment. That is the oneness of Atmic principle. 
Once you have experienced the Atma, you do not need to experience 
anything else. 


Thousands have gathered here today. Each of you has a different form 
and behaviour. But the Atmic effulgence that shines in all of you is one 
and the same. When a bulb is glowing, one may sit and do his homework. 
Another person may write accounts with wrong calculations. Yet another 
person may write a letter with evil motives. Whatever one may do, the 
light is unaffected and untainted. It remains a witness. Likewise, the Atma 
also remains an eternal witness to all that man does. External activities 
undergo change, but the eternal truth of Atma remains the same at all 
times. 


God is one; goal is one. The same is conveyed in the following 
statements: "I am in the light; the light is in me, I am the light." Here 'T' 
symbolises love and devotion and light stands for wisdom. When you say, 
"Tam in the light," it means devotion is contained in wisdom. The 
statement "the light is in me" reflects the truth that wisdom is contained 
in devotion. Light and love --you have to understand the unity of these 
two. 


Devotion is an essential prerequisite to know the reality. You should 
develop love more and more and ultimately transform it into wisdom. You 
should not follow the vagaries of the mind. Come what may, your vision 
must be firmly implanted on the Atma. With such one-pointed devotion, 
sages and seers of yore performed penance and experienced bliss. Today 
people chant mantras and perform japa (soft repetition of the name). 
They do so for the sake of their mental satisfaction. They want to attain 
peace. In fact, what they get out of such practices is not peace but 
pieces! In a rosary there are 108 beads, but the thread that strings them 
together is one and same. It symbolises Divinity. 


Divinity is like a magnet that attracts the entire world. In some places, 
this power of attraction is maximum. It is something very special. Here is 
an example. So many of you have gathered here. Who sent you 
invitations? It is the Divine Magnet that has drawn you here. This magnet 
is present not only here, but everywhere. Here, there, and everywhere, 
Divinity is present in the form of Atma. Here you can experience the 
power of divine attraction. Such power cannot be acquired for the mere 
asking. It can be acquired only through love. Love is something that 
originates from the ‘source’. It cannot be obtained by 'force'. Worldly 
knowledge can be thrust on you, but love has to spring forth from within 


24 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


in a natural way. Love is God. Love alone can confer true wisdom. Jnanad 
evatu kaivalyam (wisdom leads to liberation). 


Worldly knowledge is associated with multiplicity. Love enables you to 
visualise unity in multiplicity. Hence, you should develop love and 
understand the fundamental truth that the same Self is present in all. 
Different people partake of different items to satisfy their hunger. Food 
items are different, but hunger is the same. You should understand such 
unity. 


Each one of you may undertake a different sadhana (spiritual practice). 
Whatever may be the sadhana, it should be performed with Atmic feeling. 
You should make efforts to understand the principle of oneness. That 
alone constitutes true sadhana. 


The principle of love in you should be steady. However, the love in 
modern youth keeps vacillating. One day it is sacred and the very next 
day, it is unsacred. Such love cannot be termed as true devotion. Ekam 
Sath (Divinity is one). You are in the light and the light is in you. Bear this 
in your mind. Ultimately, you will realise that "I am I". If you want to 
understand the principle of Atma, you should not give scope to 
multiplicity. All that you see and hear in this world are merely reflections, 
reactions, and resounds. The reality is within you. 


I see many students here. Where have they come from? They are My 
reflections. Otherwise, they cannot be seen. Likewise, every person and 
every object is your own reflection. Life is like an ocean with the waves of 
Samyoga (union) and Viyoga (separation). You should treat this duality 
with equanimity. The principle of Atma is beyond union and separation. To 
Me, there is neither samyoga nor viyoga. Viyoga results only when there 
is Atma. They are but your imagination. In order to realise the principle 
of Atma, you have to get rid of such imagination and develop the faith 
Ekam Sath. It is only one and not two. It is changeless and remains the 
same at all times and in all states of existence. You should join satsang to 
know this truth. 


This body is an angamu (limb) of society. There exists a sangamu 
(association of attributes) in angamu, a jangamu (individual soul) 

in sangamu, and Lingamu (Paramatma) in jangamu. Linga is Atma, which 
is our very life principle. That is why the Atma is considered to be of the 
form of Linga. A Linga has neither a beginning nor an end. It has no head 
or feet. Hence, when you perform worship, you can keep it anyway you 
like. The Atma has a name but not a specific form. Bliss is its true form. It 
is very much present in us. When you crave for external happiness, you 
lose your innate bliss also. 


25 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


Today is the auspicious day of Sivarathri. What is Sivam? It means 
auspiciousness. God is the embodiment of Sathyam, Sivam, Sundaram 
(Truth, Auspiciousness, Beauty). All that you see, hear, and experience 
should be offered to God. 


Tridalam Trigunakaram Trinetramcha Triyayudham; 
Trijanma Papa Samharam Eka Bilvam Sivarpanam. 


Offer a trifoliate Bbleaf to Lord Siva, the three-eyed Lord, 
having trident in His hand, which destroys the sins of three 
births. 


People undertake various sadhanas (spiritual exercises) and different 
modes of worship on the basis of their own imagination. Whatever may be 
the sadhanas, one should not give up the resolve. One should have 
single-pointed attention. One should listen only to the principle of 
oneness. One should offer one's actions to God. Karmanyevadhikarasthe 
ma phaleshu kadachana (Action is thy duty, fruit is not thy concern) 


Whatever you do, let it be pleasing unto God. Sarva karma Bhagavad 
preethyartham (do all actions to please God). Then no sin will accrue to 
you. There is no easier path than this to experience the Atmic principle. 


Today, as different people follow different paths, troubles are on the rise. 
Such delusion is leading to confusion. As a result of this confusion, you 
lose the ‘fuse’ that links you and God. In fact, you are God. I am God. He 
is God. Everything is God. In order to understand this truth, you should 
rise from the level of the human to the Divine. You should know the 
principle of Sath, which is the underlying unity in diversity. You should not 
give scope to differences based on akara (form). 


You should experience ananda (bliss) by being in the company of God. 
God is your true property. When you experience ananda, you become God 
yourself. Give up differences. All are in God. Keep this unity in mind. 


Being students, you may pursue your studies. All your studies take place 
at the physical level. Along with your studies, contemplate on the 
principle of oneness at the mental level. Allah, Jesus, Rama, Krishna -- 
names are different, but God is one. Have unflinching faith in the unity of 
divinity. Undertake sadhana that will enable you to realise the changeless 
and eternal principle of Truth. 


If you attribute various names and forms to God, you will not be able to 
realise the Truth. Names and forms are subject to change. Who was 
Rama? He was the son of Dasaratha. Who was Krishna? He was the son of 
Yashoda. In this manner, you will remember only their physical 
relationships. 


26 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


When you worship God without attributing any particular name and form, 
the question of His physical relationship does not arise. There will be no 
differences whatsoever. Who is the mother of God? In fact, He is the 
mother of all. Today we find differences because we attribute various 
names and forms and physical relationships to God. You should get rid of 
such relationships. 


Isavasyam idam jagat (the entire world is permeated by God). Easwara 
sarva bhutanam (God is the Indweller of all beings). When you 
contemplate on these twin principles, you can visualise unity in humanity. 
There will be intimate relationship between man and man. When you 
think of Divinity, you will not have any differences or difficulties. 
Difficulties come and go like passing clouds. You don't need to worry 
about them. Keep your vision fixed on the sun. Sometimes, clouds cover 
the sun. Then you don't need to be worried about it. Have patience. When 
the clouds move away, the sun will be visible again. In the same manner, 
the clouds of worldly delusions come in the way of Atmic vision. In such 
situations, you should not let your mind waver. Have patience. The 
‘clouds’ will recede and the 'sun' will reappear. 


Embodiments of Divine Atma! 


You may get some thoughts, which are like clouds. Do not be carried 
away by them. Do not pay heed to all and sundry and ruin yourself. You 
should rise to the level of Divine and not degenerate to the level of 
demon. In order to rise to the level of divine, satsang is very essential. 
"One thought, one vision, and one action." These three must be unified. 
Sivarathri is celebrated to recognise the oneness of Divinity. 


When you do bhajans tonight, you will have only one thought. You will 
experience the bliss of bhajans. It is the nondual bliss. Why is it 
prescribed that you should do bhajans all through the night? Bhajan is 
done to control the mind and focus it on Divinity. Some people keep 
discussing worldly matters even while they are doing bhajan. Do not go 
anywhere near such people. 


Tyaja Durjana Samsargam; 
Bhaja Sadhu Samagamam; 
Kuru Punyam Ahorathram. 


Give up bad company; 
join good company; and 
perform meritorious deeds day and night. 


You should constantly think of the Atmic principle. Your parents may try 
to tell you about some worldly matters. They may lack discrimination. 
Why should you listen to such matters knowing fully well that they are 


2T 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


useless? Let them say anything. Do not waver from your chosen path. 
You should convince your mother saying, "Mother, you have your own 
likes and dislikes and I have my own. You are my mother and I am your 
son, yet our thoughts and feelings are different. Being your son, I will 
serve you and express my gratitude to you. But I cannot deviate from the 
path of truth." 


Tonight, Lingodbhavam will take place. I created this Linga in answer to 
his (B. N. Narasimhamurthi's) prayer. But another Linga will emerge from 
within. In this manner, I can create any number Lingas. Everything is in 
My hand. The Lingas that come from the hand, from the stomach, from 
the mouth --all are one. Wherever you see, there is the principle of Atma. 
Understand this unity. Along with your education, develop Atmic feeling. 
When you develop Atmic feeling, evil qualities like hatred, jealousy, etc., 
will not come near you. You will not be perturbed by pain and suffering. 
You will be in a state of non-dualism. That is true bliss. 


Focus your mind on God. Follow His command. Then your life will be 
redeemed. Now you can commence bhajans. 


Bhagawan concluded His Discourse with the bhajan, "Sathyam Jnanam 
Anantham Brahma’. 


Date: 01 March 2003 (evening), Occasion: Mahasivarathri, 
Place: Prasanthi Nilayam 


28 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


4. LET UNITY BE THE UNDERCURRENT 
EVERYWHERE 


Date: 02 March 2003 Occasion: Place: Prasanthi 
(morning) Mahasivarathri Nilayam 


None there is who is all knowing 

Nought are there of heads empty 

Some there are who are of something aware 
Alone is He, the omniscient 

Sambasiva. 


Embodiments of Love! 


The message of holy Sivarathri is to spread the ideal and sanctity of this 
most auspicious day to one and all. The principle of unity is slowly 
declining among the people of the world. There is strife and discord 
between even two brothers of the same small family. 


In the divine family of Lord Siva, there are only four members, namely, 
Lord Easwara, his consort Parvati, and the two sons, Subramanya and 
Vinayaka. This is an ideal family. There is no difference of opinion 
whatsoever either between husband and wife or the two brothers. There 
is perfect accord and harmony in their family. Mother Parvati and Lord 
Parameswara wanted to set an example to the whole world in the matter 
of a most harmonious, perfect and loving relationship between a wife and 
husband and between brothers. 


A family is the most important functional unit in the world. If the family is 
running on sound lines, the world will also run smoothly. If the unity 
among the family members suffers even to a small extent, the world will 
face the repercussions. Unity gives strength to the lives of the family 
members. Therefore, every family should strive for achieving unity and 
harmonious relationship among its members. Every family should strive 
to emulate the example of Lord Siva's family. Today, even if there are 
only two sons in a family, there is no harmony between them. Similar is 
the case of husband and wife. This is not the position in respect of Lord 
Siva's family. The vehicles they ride, the circumstances in which they 
function, the wealth they possess --in fact, in every aspect, the members 
of this divine family set an example to the whole world. 


29 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


For example, Lord Siva's vehicle is Nandi, the bull. Mother Parvati's 
vehicle is the Lion. The younger son, Subramanya's vehicle is the 
peacock, whereas the elder son Vinayaka's is the tiny mouse. They move 
about the whole world on such strange vehicles, which are antagonistic in 
nature, they but still lead a perfect and harmonious family life. 


You do not find such harmony in present day-families. Suppose the 
younger brother's wife wears some new ornaments; the elder brother's 
wife becomes jealous. Similarly, in several situations in day-to-day life, 
you will find internal bickerings in the family instead of peace and unity. 
Normally, a lion and a bull are not good friends. The lion looks at the bull 
as a prey and the bull fears the lion. But, in the case of Lord Siva's 
vehicle, i.e. the Bull, and Mother Parvati's vehicle, the Lion, there is 
perfect harmony and absence of fear. 


When do we have fear or anxiety? Only when there is some fault in us. 
When there are no faults of any kind in anybody, there is no scope for 
fear at all! Today, man is exposed to fear and anxiety even in small 
matters, since he is suffering from faults. These faults are responsible for 
fear, anxiety, restlessness, hatred, and anger. Hence, if we are to live in 
peace and harmony, we must strive to remove the faults in us. 


In fact, there is no sorrow in man. He is Anandaswarupa, the embodiment 
of divine bliss. In spite of that, if he suffers from sorrow, it is because of 
his own evil traits. Sorrow has not suddenly descended on him from 
somewhere. The sorrow is the reaction, reflection, and resound of the evil 
qualities in him. If someone is ridiculing you, take it that it is not the 
other person but your own evil feelings being returned to you in the shape 
of ridicule. 


Lord Siva has no special ornaments on His body. All his ornaments are the 
serpents that He wears round his neck, the matted locks, the crescent 
moon, the cool water of the Ganga and the vibhuti (holy ash) that he 
smears all over His body. This Divine form of Lord Siva is beautifully 
portrayed thus: 


Lo! Behold The Lord of the icy peak 

Crowned with crescent moon, 

Glistening matted locks, 

Bedrenched by heaven descending Ganga 

Flaming eye in the forehead, 

Venomous potion - poison - Halahala Purpling the beauteous 
neck 

Live bracelets of wriggling Serpents and 

a belt of Cobra holding up the Elephant hide, his sole 
garment. 

Pearly ash smearing the chest 


30 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


A blinding white Spot of vermilion on the Forehead beside the 
searing eye Ruddy lips smeared by Fresh chewed betel, 
Diamond studded earrings Of purest gold, dancing like 

Stars twinkling in the sky, 

Vision negating form 

The fair person of the Lord Radiating Effulgence Divine. 
(Telugu Poem) 


Lord Siva has donned this divine form in order to teach a renunciant 
outlook to the world, including his consort, Parvati. His another habit is to 
beg for alms. 


The opulent form essaying 
Total detachment, begging bowl 
In hand, seeking alms 

For a frugal meal 

At the heavenly abode, Kailasa. 


Parvati, however, did not develop any aversion or disgust toward her 
husband, Lord Siva, on account of His strange attire or habits. She did not 
run away from Him saying, "How can I lead a family life with such a 
person?" She faithfully followed Him, submitting herself to His wishes and 
happiness. Both of them lived in peace and harmony. 


Now about their sons. The vehicle of the younger son, Lord Subramanya, 
is the peacock, which is by nature an enemy of the serpents worn as 
ornaments by the father. The serpents begin hissing at the sight of a 
peacock. They hate each other. Similarly, the vehicle of the elder son, 
Lord Vinayaka, is the rat, which again is a natural prey of the serpent. 
They are bitter enemies. In spite of such divergent natures, all the 
members of the family of Lord Siva lived happily in perfect peace. Each 
member, while discharging their duty, provided happiness and joy to 
others. 


Even in the form of Lord Siva Himself, there are apparent contradictions. 
He has Ganga on His head and the crescent moon in His matted locks. 
These are signs of coolness. In contrast to these, He has literally fire in 
the third eye in His forehead. Thus, there is cool water on His head and 
fire below on His forehead. These two are conflicting forces. Yet they 
maintained perfect harmony and set an example to the world. Thus, there 
was not even slightest difference of opinion or discordant note in the 
universal family of Lord Siva. It is a perfectly ideal family, which the 
entire world should emulate. 


In sharp contrast to this situation, there is bitter hatred today between 
one person and another. Hatred is ruling all fields in the world. Even in 
the same family, there is discord between husband and wife, between 


31 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


parents and children, and between brothers. Lord Siva and Mother Parvati 
by their own example are exhorting the entire world to shed hatred and 
enmity. 


But who is listening to such teachings? Who is putting them in practice? 
People chant the name of God with great devotion but fail to emulate the 
example shown by God. What is the use of worshipping God when you do 
not follow His ideals? How can you obtain divine grace if you go against 
the teachings of God? On account of food and habits, several ill-feelings 
develop in man. But you should try to control them. You should not allow 
them to manifest as hatred toward others. You should never allow 
jealousy to grow in you. Today, every human being is afflicted with the 
disease of jealousy and hatred. In fact, the root cause of all evil qualities 
in man is jealousy. Jealousy leads to anger. Jealousy and hatred can 
destroy a human being totally. 


Man can really enjoy great happiness if he gets rid of jealousy and hatred. 
In fact, man himself is an embodiment of bliss. It is his inherent nature. 
Sorrow is not his nature. Man is an embodiment of love, peace, and bliss. 
Why then is he afflicted with sorrow? It is because of flouting the divine 
commands. This is the reaction of going against the divine Will. The 
reaction, reflection, and resound of this calamity is the root cause for all 
the sorrows of a human being. 


Here is a small example. You see a person approaching you and you think 
that he is your enemy. The moment this feeling of hatred develops in you, 
you start fighting with him. Instead, you try to greet him saying "Hello 
brother! How are you?" When you extend love to others, others also will 
extend you love. On the other hand, the moment you see a person, if you 
move away from him, he will do the same thing to you. As the action, so 
is the reaction. Therefore, we have to ensure that our actions are good. 


In fact, there are no bad people in this world. All are good. You say that 
those who oppose you are all bad people. If you do not exhibit bad 
qualities, how can the other man behave badly? Your own bad qualities 
reflect in others. Hence, every person must cultivate good feelings and 
good behaviour. One should conduct himself in such a way that one does 
not go against the divine commands. Only then will one have peace and 
security in your life. You may participate in a number of bhajans, worship 
God in several forms, and observe ever so many religious vows --yet, if 
you do not cultivate sacred feelings in your heart, what is the use? 


Man should cultivate the noble quality of a tender heart. Love and 
compassion should reflect in his heart. If there are no such feelings, he 
will become a demon, verily. That is why it is called hridaya. The 
etymology of the word is hri + daya = hridaya (storehouse of 
compassion). Among all the living beings, the human being is the only 


32 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


one endowed with the quality of daya (compassion). That is why he is 
said to hav a hridaya. An ideal human being is the one having a 
compassionate heart. 


Embodiments of Love! 


You have such a sacred and compassionate heart. Why then you should 
drown yourself in sorrow? This is all because of the reflection, reaction, 
and resound of your inner feelings. You will be going through a newspaper 
early in the morning. Wherever you see, you will find unrest, news items 
of someone killing another, hatred, jealousy, anger, etc. All this news 
leads you to a very unhappy and polluted atmosphere. 


When you get up from bed after a sound sleep in the night, you must 
have a peaceful mind. Only then there will be no scope for unrest in your 
life. Right from the early morning you must lead a life of peace and 
happiness. You may have sorrows and difficulties; but they are only 
passing clouds, which come and go. They should not really bother you. It 
is only when you take them to heart and cling to them that you suffer. If 
you ignore them, they will not bother you. 


You get a postal cover addressed to you. Normally, there will be a 'from' 
address and a 'to' address on any postal cover. Without these addresses, 
the cover will go to the dead-letter office. Man should, therefore, see both 
the addresses, i.e. from and to. You must first enquire into yourself 
"where do I come from?". In pursuance of this enquiry, you must discover 
and assure yourself that your source is God. Since you come from God, 
you will have noble feelings. Your 'from' address is God and your 'to' 
address is human nature. If you remember these two, your life will go on 
smoothly. Since your origin or 'from' address is Divinity, you should 
always obey the divine command. Among all the living beings in the 
creation, only the human being has been given this privilege. In fact, this 
is the ideal set before him by God. Further, it is only in the Bharatadesa 
that such noble ideas are imparted from generation to generation. In 
spite of all these ideals set before us, we are unable to live in peace, since 
we are not following them. 


You may follow any one or all the nine forms of devotion like sravanam 
(listening), kirtanam (singing), vishnusmaranam (contemplating on 
Vishnu), padasevanam (serving His lotus feet), vandanam (salutation), 
archanam (worship), dasyam (servitude), sneham (friendship), and 
Atmanivedanam (Self-surrender). More than following any or all the nine 
forms of devotion, it is the inner feeling or motive behind the forms of 
bhakti (devotion) that is important. Your inner feeling must always be 
pure. 


33 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


Of all the nine forms of devotion, sneha (friendship) is the most 
important. It is only when you cultivate this feeling of friendship with God 
that you can reach the last stage of Atmanivedanam (self-surrender). For 
this purpose, you must have a pure heart, which in turn is based on love 
and devotion. You must have pure and selfless love toward one and all. 


Such love is not a one-way traffic. Today, we are prepared to receive love 
from all people, we but are hesitant to share our love with others. It 
should be a give and take policy. Love begets Love. You must also be 
prepared to receive love from others. Love is a gift of God. In fact, you 
must rise to such a level that whatever is given by God, you must be 
prepared to receive wholeheartedly. At times, God also gives you a bitter 
pill like the doctor. This is for your own good. 


Suppose you have an ulcer in your stomach. The surgeon opens your 
stomach with a knife and removes the ulcer. Since he cut your stomach 
with a knife, do you charge him with hatred toward you? No, no. It is only 
in your interest that he has performed the operation. Similarly, at times, 
God also will put you to some difficulties. Even that is only in your 
interest; for your good only. Both happiness and sorrow are God's gifts. 
They are His divine grace. Nobody can comprehend His divine leelas. 


You must always live in unity. Whatever activity you undertake, unity 
should be the undercurrent. All people should live in peace and harmony. 
The previous morning, you sang some bhajans. How melodious and 
devotional they were! How joyous they were! It was only because all of 
you sang the bhajans in one voice. Particularly, the three boys, Prasanth, 
Kavi Kumar's son, and Ravi Kumar, sang the bhajans in perfect sruthi 
(tune), laya (modulation) and thala (rhythm). The boy who played the 
flute gave them a good support. They gave so much joy to the audience. 
Where can you get such joy and happiness? Where can you see such 
unity? 


Nowadays, wherever you go, you will hear a lot of noise and sound in the 
name of Sivarathri. You will not find anywhere in the world this type of 
divine atmosphere surcharged with devotion. Every activity undertaken in 
Prasanthi Nilayam is divine and in perfect peace and harmony. Everything 
is surcharged with love and devotion. God is love and love is God. God 
has to be attained only through love. Hence, all of you should become 
Premaswarupas (embodiments of divine love). You should live in perfect 
harmony wherever you are. Never give room for hatred. Even if you come 
across an opponent, greet him with love. He will automatically respond 
with love, since the whole world is filled with reaction, reflection and 
resound. Suppose there is unrest in you mind. It is not because of 
external factors. Your own deficiencies and faults are being reflected in 
the form of unrest. 


34 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


If you wish to attain happiness, live in happiness. The universal family of 
Lord Siva, Mother Parvati, Subramanya, and Vinayaka are the perfect 
example for this principle. Cultivate their example. Worship them. But a 
caution: you may worship a picture as God, but not God as a picture. 
Therefore, you worship the Easwara family by following their example. 


The message of this holy Sivarathri is to live in unity and harmony with 
everyone. Particularly, the brothers in a family should never fight; they 
must be united, like the Pandavas. Only by their unity could the Pandavas 
obtain the divine grace of Lord Krishna. Anything can be achieved with 
unity. Take for example, the five fingers in the hand. It is only when the 
five fingers join together that we can accomplish any task. The Kauravas 
were one hundred in number, but they were not united for a good cause. 
Ultimately, what fate had befallen them? Similarly, Vali and Sugriva in the 
Ramayana. They were in fact brothers. Due to some differences, they 
developed hatred against one another. In the end, Vali met his end in the 
hands of Rama. 


The ultimate goal of this Sivarathri is to develop unity among humanity, 
whatever be the obstacles, whatever be the difficulties and whatever be 
the provocations. You should never make use of harsh words while 

speaking to others. Always speak sweetly and softly, with a loving heart. 


Dear students and devotees! 


You have all assembled here with a pure heart on this auspicious day of 
Mahasivarathri. Wherever you are, you must always have a pure heart. 
When the heart is pure and sacred, you can undertake sacred activities. 
When the vessel is pure, the contents in the vessel can also be pure. Even 
if the vessel is made of gold, if there is poison in the vessel, the contents 
get poisoned. On the contrary, even if the vessel is made of earth, the 
gold that is kept in the vessel will remain pure. It is not the vessel, but 
the material that is important. We must always keep our heart as pure 
gold and fill it with sweet love. 


You are students of the Sathya Sai Institute of Higher Learning. You are 
growing under the loving care of Swami. Swami does not expect anything 
from you. Education in the Sathya Sai Institute is totally free. Whatever 
your requirements, I am providing them free of cost. Did you come across 
anywhere in the world such educational institutions? Today, you will find 
people booking seats in educational institutions even before the child is 
born. They pay a lump sum amount to the school in advance for 
reservation of seats in the 1st standard. It is only in the Sri Sathya Sai 
Institute of Higher Learning that you will not find such advance bookings. 
There is no advance for anything in Prasanthi Nilayam. Wherever you go, 
you must live up to the ideals of your education. Whatever you have 
learned here, share it with all. 


35 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


Embodiments of Love! 


Love is My only property. In fact, it should be the same with you as well. I 
do not seek anything from anybody. You live in love. Share your love with 
everybody. Only when you lead a life filled with love your life will become 
pure and sacred. In fact, every activity undertaken in Prasanthi Nilayam 
will be pure and peaceful. 


Thousands of people have gathered here on the holy occasion of 
Mahasivarathri. Did you here any noise? No. Not even one child cries. No 
one sneezes or coughs. Such a calm, serene, peaceful, and divine 
atmosphere is pervading this hall. If you are not able to get peace in such 
a divine atmosphere, where else you can? 


Never speak harshly to anybody. Several people today pose themselves 
as devotees but take to evil ways. This is not a mark of devotion. In fact, 
such behaviour goes against the concept of devotion. A dissonance 
between thought, word, and deed is the characteristic of an evil-minded 
person. That is why it is said, "Manasyanyath, vachasyanyath, 
karmanyanyath durathmanam (those whose thought, word, and deed are 
at variance are wicked)." You should not join the company of such people. 
On the other hand you should join the company of real devotees who live 
up to the principle of "Manasyekam, vachasyekam, karmanyekam 
mahatmanam (those who maintain perfect accord between thought, word, 
and deed are great)." 


The most important characteristic of a devotee is good behaviour. If he 
does not possess this characteristic, he is not a devotee at all, he is a 
great sinner. You are students of this great institution. Wherever you go, 
you must be recognised by your good behaviour. There are several past 
students of this Institute, living in foreign countries like America, Japan, 
Germany, etc. They are still recognised in those countries as students of 
the Sathya Sai Institute of Higher Learning. They bring credit to the 
Institution. 


You need not give anything to Sai. Lead a life of character and good 
behaviour. That is the only thing I want. That is the only thing that gives 
me joy. Not only the students, the devotees must also ensure good 
behaviour. They must feel that they are the members of the universal 
family of Lord Siva. Mother Parvati constitutes the body, whereas Lord 
Siva represents the heart. When the body and heart join together as a 
dwelling, human nature resides there. This is called Prakriti. The human 
body represents Pravritti, whereas the Atma residing in the body 
represents Nivritti. The unity of this Pravritti and Nivritti is human nature. 
Having been born in such a sacred human nature, people are forgetting 
their innate divinity. 


36 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


Lastly, I wish to advise you that you should never give scope for ego to 
dominate your actions. Wherever there is ego, there lies danger. 
Therefore, shed your ego and cultivate pure and selfless love toward one 
and all. There is nothing in this world that cannot be achieved with love. I 
conclude My discourse with the blessing that the divine vibrations of 
today's namasankirtanam spread to the whole world and grant good 
qualities, good practices, and good behaviour to all people. 


Bhagavan concluded His Divine Discourse with the bhajan "Prema Muditha 
Manase Kaho". 


Date: 02 March 2003 (morning), Occasion: Mahasivarathri, 
Place: Prasanthi Nilayam 


ay 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


5S. EXPERIENCE INNATE DIVINITY TO 
ATTAIN PEACE AND HAPPINESS 


Date: 16 March 2003 Occasion: Discourse Place: Brindavan 


There is none in this world who knows everything. 
Similarly, nowhere do you find a person who does not know anything. 
One who knows a little is also ignorant. 

It is only Sambasiva, who is all-knowing. 

(Telugu Poem) 


Embodiments of Love! 


Everyone aspires to get rid of sorrow and enjoy happiness. In order to 
rise to the level of Divine from the level of human, satsanga is very 
essential. Life becomes meaningless if one does not join satsanga. What 
is the meaning of satsanga? Many are under the mistaken notion 

that satsanga means joining the company of devotees. 'Sat' symbolises 
the principle of Truth, which is changeless in all the three periods of time. 
Man should constantly contemplate on such eternal principle. 


What is the purpose of human birth? It is not merely to eat, drink, and 
make merry. Paropakarartham idam sariram (human body is meant to 
serve others). Man should dedicate himself to the service of society. God 
has endowed man with all powers. Human body is bound by senses, 
which are responsible for both good and evil. Hence, it is the foremost 
duty of man to make proper use of the senses. Lord Krishna taught the 
same to Arjuna in the Bhagavad Gita. 


One who lacks sense control is worse than an animal. Even animals 
exercise some control over their senses. But man, in spite of being 
endowed with vijnana, sujnana, and prajnana, is not making any effort to 
control his senses. Kama, krodha, lobha, moha, mada, and matsarya 
(desire, anger, greed, infatuation, pride, and jealousy) are bestial 
tendencies. Today man is cultivating such animal tendencies and 
becoming an animal himself. Man is neither a mruga (animal) nor a 
mrunmaya Swarupa (made of inert matter). He is in fact chinmaya and 
chidananda swarupa (embodiment of consciousness and bliss). It is a 
matter of shame that such a human being is cultivating animal qualities. 
Man should control his senses in the first instance. 


Spiritual practices prescribed to control one's senses. Sravanam 
(listening), kirtanam (singing), Vishnusmaranam (contemplating on 
Vishnu), Padasevanam (serving His Lotus Feet), vandanam (salutation), 


38 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


archanam (worship), dasyam (servitude), sneham (friendship), and 
Atmanivedanam (Self-surrender). 


These are the royal paths to Divinity. Giving up such royal paths, man is 
conducting himself like an animal in a forest. Firstly, one should get rid of 
their animal qualities. Only then can one rise to the level of the divine. 


You see, hear, and experience many things in this world. They are 
nothing but the reflection, reaction, and resound of your inner being. All 
that you see in the outside world is actually a part of you. Consider this 
example. There is someone who hates you. Actually it is the hatred in you 
that has taken the form of hatred in him. In the same manner, adulation 
or denigration, good or evil are reflections of your own self. Whatever you 
see in the outside world, whatever you experience, be it pleasure or pain 
has in fact come from within you. 


What is meant by prapancha (world)? It is the combination of padartha 
(matter). Every object in this world is transitory. How can such ephemeral 
objects give us everlasting bliss? Truly speaking, man has no misery at 
all. You blame others for your suffering and criticise them. It is your own 
bad thoughts that make you suffer. This world is like an ocean consisting 
of the waves of samyoga and viyoga (union and separation). Everything 
has emerged from you. There is nothing superior to man in this world. 
Hence, it is said, Janthunam narajanma durlabham (out of all the living 
beings, human birth is the rarest). Man is the most sacred and highly 
reputed one among all beings in the world. But being immersed in 
delusion, he is unable to realise his true nature. There is neither good nor 
evil in this world. There are many things that we see, hear, and 
experience. We think that it is the eyes that see, ears that hear, and mind 
that experiences. In fact, it is not so. Everything is reflection, reaction, 
and resound. 


Embodiments of Love! 


You are engaged in service, singing bhajans and undertaking various 
spiritual practices. What benefit have you derived from these activities? 
When good feelings emerge from you, you get rich rewards. After sowing 
a neem seed, you cannot expect a mango fruit. As the seed, so is the 
tree. Likewise, as the feeling, so is the result. Good and evil are based on 
your feelings. Hence, develop noble thoughts and spread the message of 
love to the entire world. Cultivate the feeling that all are brothers and 
sisters. 


Whom you consider as others are not others in the strict sense of the 


term. They are your own. All are children of God. God is one. Society is 
the direct manifestation of God. What is the difference between jeevatwa 


39 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


(individual) and Daivatwa (God)? Individual is vyashti swarupa and God is 
Samashti swarupa. 


There can be no branch without tree. There can be no child without 
mother. Fish cannot survive without water. Similarly, individual cannot 
exist without God. Both have an intimate and inseparable relationship. On 
this basis, Lord Krishna declared in the Bhagavad Gita, Mamaivamsho 
jeevaloke jeevabhuta sanathana (the eternal Atma in all beings is a part 
of My Being). 


Embodiments of Love! 


In this world, we see and hear about the dualities of good and evil, merit 
and sin. What is the origin of all these? They originate from man's 
sankalpas and vikalpas (resolutions and negations). Good and evil are 
present in his mind, not in the world. When man cultivates sacred 
thoughts, he will find sacredness all around. 


Embodiments of Love! 


The entire nature is suffused with power of attraction. The world attracts 
one and all. This power of attraction originates from the changeless and 
eternal principle of Truth, which is the basis of creation. This is known as 
Transcendental Truth. It is present in trikalas, trilokas and trigunas (three 
periods of time, three worlds, and three attributes). It is only one and not 
two. Ekam sath viprah bahudha vadanti (truth is one, but the wise refer 
to it by various names). All that we see in this world is only this principle 
of truth. Pashyannapicha na pashyati moodho (he is a fool who sees, yet 
does not recognise the reality). What man sees in front of him is not the 
world, but verily God. But, out of his ignorance, he fails to understand this 
truth and tries to search for God in the external world. All that you find 
before you are verily the forms of God. Though you see God right before 
your eyes, you think you are yet to find Him. How foolish it is! When you 
develop the firm faith that all are the embodiments of God, you will 
certainly find Him in everyone. 


Sarvata panipadam tat sarvathokshi siromukham, Sarvata sruthimalloke 
sarvamavruthya tishthati (with hands, feet, eyes, head, mouth, and ears 
pervading everything, He permeates the entire universe). There is 
nothing in this world that is not the manifestation of God. 


What is the form of God? Daivam manusha rupena (God manifests in 
human form). But man is getting deluded by his physical form and 
considers himself to be a mere mortal. All that we see is the form of God. 
He is the embodiment of bliss. Nityanandam paramasukhadam kevalam 
jnana murtim (God is the embodiment of eternal bliss. He is wisdom 


40 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


absolute, the One without a second). The entire world is pervaded with 
bliss. There is no trace of sorrow anywhere. 


But you may not agree with Me. You say, "Swami, you do not see sorrow, 
but we see it everywhere." Whether you see or I see, there is only bliss 
everywhere. As you think of only sorrow, forgetting the bliss, you find 
only sorrow. But I don't find sorrow anywhere. I see only bliss, bliss, and 
bliss alone. When we are the embodiments of Divinity, how can we ever 
be afflicted with sorrow? You are afflicted with sorrow because you don't 
realise the temporary nature of the world. Whatever you see and 
experience is only the reflection of God. Do not criticise anyone, for 
criticising others amounts to criticising God, whom you worship. Easwara 
sarva bhutanam (God is the indweller of all beings). Isavasyam idam 
jagat (the entire universe is permeated with God). 


Embodiments of Love! 


You may be speculating about the events that are going to take place in 
the forthcoming New Year (Ugadi). You think that the New Year would 
bring you happiness or sorrow. The year may be new, but what does it 
matter if you do not give up your old and mean habits? You aspire for 
good results, but are you performing good deeds? You expect others to be 
good toward you, but are you good toward them? If you act against the 
dictates of your conscience, how can you expect to be happy? Your deeds 
should be in accordance with your aspirations. Good deeds will certainly 
yield good results. Today people are immersed in adambara (pomposity). 
How can such people attain ananda (bliss)? 


Embodiments of Love! 


Do not lead a pompous life. Adambara is the root cause of asanthi 
(restlessness). Give up adambara and strive to attain ananda. True bliss 
cannot be acquired from outside; it lies in your own heart. In fact, bliss 
pervades the entire world. Your mental perversions are responsible for 
seeing evil in it. Manah eva manushyanam karanam bandhamokshayo 
(mind alone is responsible for both bondage and liberation of man). 
Hence, purify your mind. Only then can you become a true human being. 
You cannot call yourself a human being if your mind is polluted. Perform 
meritorious deeds. Speak good words. Lead a sacred life. In this manner, 
you can find fulfilment in life. There is nothing evil in this world. Whatever 
evil you find is but a reflection of your own feelings. Everything around 
you is your own reflection. If you point at something and Say it is evil, it 
means that the evil in you is reflected outside. Never entertain evil 
thoughts. Fill your mind with nectarous thoughts. Then your life will be 
sweet. 


Al 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


Embodiments of Love! 


You do bhajans and think that you are doing it in order to please God. But 
God does not need anything. You do bhajans for your own happiness. 
Share your happiness with others. God is the embodiment of bliss. Hence, 
He does not require anything from you. When He is the embodiment of 
eternal happiness, what else is required for Him? He is not interested in 
worldly and ephemeral happiness. When you do bhajans, your heart 
becomes purified. The worship and the bhajans that you sing are meant 
for your own happiness and not for the happiness of God. 


Embodiments of Divine Atma! 


It is enough if man leads the life of a true Manava (human being); 
because there is Madhava (God) in him. Unfortunately, man today is 
leading the life of a danava (demon). He is filled with demonic tendencies 
from top to toe. Such being the case, how can he attain happiness? You 
should purify your heart, experience bliss therein, and share your 
happiness with those who come to you. Sometimes evil qualities like 
anger, greed, and jealousy may try to overpower you. They are like 
passing clouds. Do not get carried away by them. Hold on to the true and 
eternal feelings that originate in your heart. 


People chant Lalitha sahasranama, Vishnu sahasranama (names of 
Vishnu), etc. No benefit accrues from chanting any number of 
sahasranamas if one lacks purity of heart. You should fill your heart with 
the essence of all these sahasranamas. 


Truly speaking, heart is the centre of all virtues. But man is not able to 
realise its sacredness. To be born as a human being is a great blessing. 
One cannot describe in words the sacredness and the sweetness of 
human life. Bear this truth in your mind and sanctify your life. 
Satsangatwe nissangatwam (good company leads to detachment). You 
should join satsanga. It does not mean joining the company of those who 
perform noble deeds. 'Sat' is the changeless and eternal divinity. It is the 
embodiment of chidananda (everlasting bliss). To be in the company 

of Sat' is true satsanga, which will confer on you everlasting bliss. 


Embodiments of Love! 


You will certainly experience everlasting bliss when you develop love. 
Love is ananda (bliss) and ananda is Love. Your life will be redeemed only 
when you develop love and experience bliss. You can experience all types 
of happiness through love. It cannot be acquired from outside, nor can it 
be bought in the market. It originates from within. When you buy a 
particular object in the market, you will develop love toward it. But such 
love is temporary, imaginary, and artificial. It is not the love that 


42 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


originates in your heart. Love is changeless. Love is God and God is Love. 
You may celebrate any number of festivals, but they cannot confer bliss 
on you unless you develop love. The bliss that you derive from love is 
beyond all description. It is infinite. 


What is the difference between worldly love and divine love? The love you 
have toward your friends and relatives is termed as anuraga 
(attachment). This cannot be called love at all. Divine love is related to 
the heart. 


Embodiments of Love! 


No doubt, there is love in you. But you are not putting it to proper use. 
You have to experience the true and eternal love, which develops heart- 
to-heart relationship. Such divine love is all-powerful. It has no limitations 
whatsoever. It attracts one and all. 


Today I want to tell you something very significant. This body of Mine is 
filled with attraction power from top to toe. It is the divine magnetic 
power. From Sivarathri onward it has been increasing day by day, though 
it was present in Me always. Worldly magnets attract only iron filings 
whereas this divine magnet attracts the entire world. You are under the 
mistaken notion that Swami is having pain in His legs and therefore He is 
unable to walk comfortably. I have absolutely no pain whatsoever. If I put 
one foot forward it is being pulled by the other, since there is immense 
attraction power in My feet. As you are aware, even the earth is endowed 
with attraction power. It only attracts and does not cause any pain. 


Swami has no pain at all. This attraction power in Me is increasing day by 
day. Whatever I touch with My hand gets stuck to it. Such magnetic 
power is present in every man. God is present in the form of 
Hiranyagarbha in everyone. Hence, He is extolled as Hiranyagarbhaya 
Namah (salutations to the one with golden womb). Pure gold does not 
undergo any change. It attracts everyone. You should not be under the 
mistaken notion that only Swami has this attraction power and none else. 
In fact it is present in you too. If you put it to proper use, it develops 
more and more. 


I never had any pain at all. Iam walking around as usual. But sometimes 
it becomes difficult to lift the foot due to the earth's attraction power. 
Therefore, I am walking slowly. Unable to understand this truth, you are 
imagining that Swami has pain in His legs. Let Me reiterate that I have no 
pain whatsoever. I have no suffering, no worries, and no anxieties. I am 
always blissful. There is nobody in this world who can come in the way of 
My bliss. But because of your worldly feelings, you think otherwise. If 
there is pain, one should think of a remedy. But when there is no pain, 
where is the question of remedy? No pain and no remedy. 


43 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


In this world, every thing has to be under a certain limit. In the present 
situation, this body cannot travel much. The power is growing day by day. 
I try to lift My foot, but it is very difficult. Even if I use great force, it does 
not get separated from the earth. It can be separated only through My 
Sankalpa (Will). It is very difficult to understand the principle of Divinity. 
No one can understand the Divine Sankalpa. None can estimate the divine 
power. People try to understand divinity on the basis of their own feelings 
and in the process end up with wrong estimation. People throw stones at 
trees, which are full of fruits. Similarly, the noble and the pious are 
subjected to a lot of hardship in this world. Divinity cannot be understood. 


The stories of the Lord are most wonderful and sacred in all 
the three worlds. 

They are like sickles that cut the creepers of worldly bondage. 
(Telugu poem) 


Embodiments of Love! 


Follow the path of truth. That is the ultimate goal of your life. Human 
birth is very sacred. It is not meant merely to eat, drink, and enjoy 
worldly pleasures. You may discharge your worldly responsibilities. You 
may help others. You may look after your family. But this is not your goal 
of life. Love God. That is your ultimate goal. There is no property greater 
than love. Only love can redeem your life. So, develop love, bangaru! 


I address you as bangaru (gold) because you are the embodiments of 
Hiranyagarbha. There are a number of metals in your body without which 
the body cannot exist. You may seek clarification from a doctor or a 
scientist in this regard. The magnetic power that is present in the entire 
world is present in your body itself. 


Some people do not understand the power of divine magnet. They argue, 
"If there is attraction power in the ‘magnet’, why is it not able to attract 
us?" How can a magnet attract an iron piece, which is full of rust and 
dust? When the rust and dust are removed, the magnet will attract the 
iron piece at once. Likewise, you should clean you mind of impurities in 
order to be attracted by Divinity. You don't need to undergo any physical 
strain for this. No spiritual practices are required. It is enough if you 
cultivate love in your heart. Only through love can you attain the principle 
of Transcendental Truth. You might have read various books on 
Transcendental Truth. But nobody has really understood what it means. It 
is the changeless and all-pervasive Atmic principle. Such sacred love is 
available only with God. 


44 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


Embodiments of Love! 


You are going to witness the divine glory of Swami unfolding in the days 
to come. He will attract the whole world. There won't be place for people 
to stand even. You can see for yourself what a great change has occurred 
during the last one month! All are getting attracted to Swami. Love is 
very powerful. 


This is not a disease. This does not cause any suffering or unrest in Me. It 
cannot be cured with medicines. Love is the only remedy for this. There 
are many people who are closely associated with Swami for a number of 
years. Even they are unable to understand the truth. What is the use of 
leading such a life? 


First of all, you should try to understand Swami. Once you understand 
that this plate is made of silver, you can estimate its value. But nobody 
can estimate the value of Divinity. No medicines can have any effect on 
Divinity. Love is the only remedy. It should be associated with the eternal 
principle of truth. Such love will spread to one and all. You are born only 
for the sake of love. You cannot say that you don't need love. You have to 
attain Divinity through love. This is the purpose of human birth. 


If you do not realise this goal, what is the use of being born as a human 
being? Who is the Creator? Could you have taken birth of your own 
accord? No. It is the Will of God. He has given you the body. It should be 
sanctified in His service and adoration. You should set an ideal to the 
world. Work for the peace and happiness of all. Do unto others what you 
expect others to do unto you. If you do not want suffering, try to alleviate 
the suffering of others. Share your comforts and happiness with others. 
Pray for the happiness of all. 


Embodiments of Love! 


In a matter of a few days you will come to know. The divine glory will 
increase day by day, conferring on you joy and bliss. All the unrest will 
soon be eradicated from the face of earth. Today we find acts of violence 
everywhere. But whatever is happening, in a way, is for your own good. 
Everyone will develop sacred feelings. All will enjoy the divine bliss. The 
entire nation will enjoy peace and happiness soon. There will not be any 
difficulties or suffering. 


You are fear-stricken thinking that there is going to be suffering. In fact, 
there is nothing like sorrow or suffering. How can they ever afflict you? 
Always be happy and blissful. Conduct yourselves as the embodiments of 
the divine Atma and enjoy divine bliss. This is what I expect from you. 
Every individual should be happy. Every child should be happy. Let no one 


45 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


shed tears of sorrow. Difficulties may come, but they will ultimately lead 
to happiness. 


Very soon, everyone in this world will lead ideal lives. 


Love cannot be acquired by force, it should naturally originate from the 
Source. Force leads to fear. It will make love diminish. Let divine feelings 
spring forth from you naturally. Share your joy with others. Even to hold 
a small tumbler, there should be unity among the five fingers. A single 
finger cannot do anything. In the same manner, you can attain Divinity 
only through unity. God is Samashti Swarupa. Individual cannot achieve 
anything by himself. He has originated from God. So, he should become 
God. 


Embodiments of Divine Atma! 


Today I decided to address you all of a sudden. May you develop love and 
lead a happy life! May you attain divinity through love! There is divinity in 
every one of you. Make every effort to manifest and experience the same. 
Once you realise your innate divinity, you can see God everywhere. May 
you all attain peace and happiness, andwork for the welfare and progress 
of the country. With these words, I bring My Discourse to a close. 


Bhagawan concluded His Discourse with the bhajan, "Sathyam Jnanam 
Anantham Brahma’. 


Date: 16 March 2003, Occasion: Discourse, Place: Brindavan 


46 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


6. RISE ABOVE BODY CONSCIOUSNESS 


Date: 2 April 2003 Occasion: Ugadi Discourse Place: Brindavan 


Fear of sin has declined; wicked deeds have become the order 
of the day. 
Devotion to the Lord has become extinct. 
Evil actions, which cannot be described in words, are on the 
rise. 
Oh man! Understand that only chanting the Divine Name 
can confer peace and happiness on you. 
(Telugu Poem) 


Embodiments of Love! 


The duality of birth and death is experienced in prakriti (nature), which is 
the presiding deity of life principle. World attracts man and deludes him. 
padartha (matter) is the basis for prapancha (world). World is a 
combination of matter. The sum and substance is, it is the matter that 
attracts man. Matter is not permanent; it does not symbolise truth. How 
can the ephemeral objects confer on you the eternal peace? Yad drishyam 
thannasyam (all that is seen is bound to perish). Whatever is seen by the 
eye will undergo change with the passage of time. Such transient objects 
cannot give you everlasting happiness. 


‘Aham yetat na (I am not this).' It is the fundamental principle of wisdom. 
The principle of Parabrahma has no specific form. In Vedic parlance, 
‘Aham means Atma. 'Aham yetat na' means, I am not the body which is 
momentary and ephemeral. The letter 'I' 'Aham) symbolises the eternal 
Atmic principle. 


We see various objects in this world and are deluded that they are 
permanent. It is a grave mistake. Whatever is seen by the eyes is 
impermanent. Even our body is seen by the eyes; hence, it is also not 
permanent. It is a sign of ignorance to identify oneself with the body. For 
ages, man has been under the delusion that physical and ephemeral 
objects will give him happiness. True happiness results when man 
recognises the underlying eternal principle of Atma in this ephemeral 
world. 


47 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


Lord Krishna declared in the Bhagavadgita, Mamaivamsho Jeevaloke 
Jeevabhuta Sanathana (all beings are a part of My Being). Hence, every 
man is a spark of Divinity. Such being the case, how can man be called a 
mere mortal? Our ancients used to contemplate on God and worship Him 
with the total faith that He was all-pervasive. 


According to our ancient scriptures, gods are 3 crores in number. Who are 
they? Can there be so many gods? The truth is that the population of the 
world was 3 crores when those scriptures were written. This declaration 
was made considering each individual a divine being. The declaration 
Sahasra seersha Purusha (God has thousands of heads) was made prior 
to this when the population of the world was in the thousands. Today the 
world population is 580 crores. Every one of them is a manifestation of 
divinity. Every human being is a divine incarnation. Why is man wasting 
such a sacred and precious human birth? You should not think that God 
exists separately with a specific form. Ekam Sath Viprah Bahudha Vadanti 
(God is one, but the wise refer to Him by various names). 'Aham, the 
principle of Atma that is present in all of us, is God. So, every individual is 
God Himself. 


If you question where God is, some people say that He is present in their 
heart. It is not a proper answer. When you say the kerchief is in your 
hand, you are bigger than the kerchief. Likewise, when you say God is in 
you, it means you are superior to God! Hence, it is not proper to say that 
God is in you. The truth is, you are God. Everything is in you. 


Sarvatah panipadam Tat sarvathokshi siromukham, sarvatah 
sruthimalloke sarvamavruthya tishthati (with hands, feet, eyes, heads, 
mouth and ears pervading everything, He permeates the entire universe). 
In fact, the entire world is present in your heart. Hence, it is said, Daivam 
manusha rupena (God appears in the form of a human being). 


You would have seen many pictures of Divine personalities like Rama and 
Krishna. They are depicted only in the form of human beings. But man 
today has forgotten the innate divinity in humanity. He is in search of God 
thinking that He is at a higher level. That is why he is unable to realise 
the truth. Ekam Sath (Truth is one). The Vedas describe this as Ritam. It 
is the principle of oneness (Ekatma swarupa). It is changeless and 
transcends time, space, and circumstances. It is present in one and all. 
Man attributes various names and forms to such divinity and worships it 
in various ways. Divinity has no specific form. It is changeless and beyond 
all attributes. 


In fact, all forms are the forms of divinity. Such principle of unity in 


multiplicity is forgotten today. All the Upanishads emphasise the principle 
of unity. But because of worldly feelings, man views multiplicity in unity. 


48 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


He is not making any effort to visualise unity in diversity. Man should 
undertake such spiritual practice that will enable him to visualise unity. 


The fundamental basis for the apparent multiplicity is only one. You see a 
number of bulbs here. All are illumined by the same current. If you put off 
the main switch, none of the bulbs will glow. Likewise, the Atma is the 
undercurrent in all names and forms. Atma means the power of 
consciousness. It is the power of nityananda, Brahmananda, yogananda 
and advaitananda (eternal, supreme, spiritual, and non-dual bliss). Man is 
not making any effort to know the principle of non-dualism. He is carried 
away by multiplicity and thus is leading a life of ignorance. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Realise that the same Atma dwells in one and all. Do not entertain evil 
qualities like anger and hatred. Develop love and experience bliss. Share 
it with others. In fact, love is your swabhava (innate nature), bliss is 
your swabhava. But today people are deluded by worldly prabhava and 
thereby are forgetting their swabhava. This is the year of Swabhanu. Swa' 
means Atma. Hence, swabhava means Atmic feeling. You should develop 
such feeling. Swabhava also symbolises chaitanya shakti (the power of 
consciousness). It is present everywhere, in you, with you, around you, 
above you, and below you. When Atma is present all over, how can it be 
divided? Never fragment the principle of oneness. In fact, it is very easy 
to visualise oneness in diversity. Do not think that God is in you. You are 
in God and so too is everyone. 


Today, fear of sin has declined in man. 

That is why he is taking to evil ways 

without being bothered about the consequences. 
Due to the absence of fear of sin and love for God, 
humanness has declined in human beings. 

This is detrimental to universal peace. 

(Telugu Poem) 


Sincw man does not have fear of sin, he is unable to manifest his innate 
divinity. The same divinity is present in one and all. Truth is one and 
Truth is God. The whole world rests on Truth. 


Creation emerges from truth and merges into truth, 
Is there a place where truth does not exist? 
Visualise such pure and unsullied truth. (Telugu Poem) 


You don't need to search for the principle of Truth, It is all-pervasive. 
Wherever you see, there is truth. But you are not making efforts to 
visualise truth. If only you make a sincere attempt, you can visualise 
truth everywhere. Sathyam bruyath, priyam bruyath, na bruyath 


49 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


sathyamapriyam (speak truth, speak pleasantly, and do not speak 
unpalatable truth). Truth should be uttered in a pleasing manner. It 
should not hurt the feelings of others. People say God is all-pervasive. No 
doubt, He is present everywhere. But He manifests Himself wherever 
truth is spoken in a sweet and pleasant manner. Truth that is spoken in a 
harsh manner cannot be called truth at all. 


Every man and every creature is an embodiment of love. All the birds, 
animals, and insects aspire to attain happiness just as man does. They 
also enjoy happiness. But there is a difference between the happiness 
they enjoy and the happiness man enjoys. Birds, animals,nd insects are 
neither elated by happiness nor depressed by sorrow. They accept 
happiness and sorrow with equanimity. But man lacks such sense of 
equanimity. He feels elated when his desires are fulfilled and frustrated 
otherwise. Desire and anger are like pests that destroy the tree of human 
life. Today desire and anger have become rampant in man. One who is 
filled with anger will find differences and starts developing hatred. In the 
daily newspaper, you find many news items that speak volumes about the 
anger, hatred, and jealousy in man. These evil tendencies are the bitter 
enemies of man. People are worried about the harmful effects of certain 
planets. In fact, desire and anger are the two planets that cause the 
greatest harm to mankind. Yes, desires are essential for man. But 
excessive desires wreak danger. Na sreyo niyamam vina (without 
discipline, there can be no well being). Desires should be under limit. Man 
sometimes has love in him and at other times goes into a fit of anger. 
Such a tendency is the result of improper food and habits. Never translate 
your thought into action in haste. Take time and enquire whether what 
you want to do is right or wrong. 


Today the New Year has commenced. People celebrate the arrival of New 
Year with all festivity and gaiety. But their enthusiasm and happiness is 
only short lived. It is not the way to celebrate the arrival of New Year. 
Your happiness should remain forever. True happiness is not something 
that comes and goes like a passing cloud. At the time of birth, your heart 
is pure and you are full of bliss. You should retain such purity of heart for 
the rest of your life and enjoy everlasting happiness. 


When one emerges from the womb of one's mother, 
one does not find any garland round one's neck. 
There are no jewels made of pearls, 
nor are there glittering golden ornaments. 
There are no chains studded with precious stones 
like emerald and diamond. 
But there IS a chain round your neck. 
Brahma strings together the consequences of your past 
deeds, 
makes it into a garland, and 


50 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


puts it round your neck at the time of your birth. 
(Telugu Poem) 


There is bound to be a result for every action of yours, however small and 
insignificant it may be. Suppose that you are mending your clothes with 
the help of a small needle and thread. The needle may be small, but if it 
pricks your finger, the result is instantaneous in the form of bleeding. In 
this case, action and result take place almost simultaneously. The food 
you consume takes at least two hours to get digested. Here there is a gap 
of two hours between the action and result. The seed that you sow takes 
a minimum of one week to grow into a sapling. In the same manner, 
some actions yield result in a few months or a few years or a few births. 


Whoever your are, you have to face the consequences of your actions. 
However, you don't need to be depressed and dejected, thinking that you 
cannot escape from the results of your past evil deeds. You can certainly 
escape from them if you win the grace of God by developing love in your 
heart. All the results are based on your thoughts and actions. You have to 
undertake sacred activities in order to sanctify your body. There is no 
point in undertaking good deeds with evil intentions. The seed that you 
sow within will germinate into a ‘tree’ and yield ‘fruits’. Some people have 
evil motives within but put on a veil of goodness. Such pretentious 
attitudes will never yield positive results. First, you should sow the seeds 
of sacred thoughts within. 


You may be speculating as to what this New Year has in store for you. 
You have to undertake sacred actions if you want to enjoy peace and 
happiness. You should join satsanga. Satsanga means to join the 
company of 'Sath', which is changeless in all the three periods of 

time. Satsanga does not merely mean doing bhajans and listening to 
spiritual discourses. Bhadram pashyantu, bhadram srunvantu, and 
bhadram kurvantu (see good, hear good, and do good). These are the 
three important mantras that emperor Manu has given to mankind. The 
teachings of Manu form the basis for dharmasasthra. Man should strictly 
adhere to these three mantras in his daily life. Nothing else is required to 
redeem oneself. 


The Vedas say, Srunvantu viswe amrutasya puthraah (Oh listen! The son 
of immortality). You are not mere mortals; you are the children of 
immortality. You should conduct yourself in such a manner that would 
befit your stature as the children of immortality. 


Man's wicked thoughts are responsible for the agitation and unrest you 
find in the world today. In order to get rid of evil thoughts, you should run 
away from bad company in the first instance. You should join good 
company. Then you will see only goodness in everyone around you. If you 
come across a person who hates you, do not reciprocate the evil feeling. 


Pal 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


Tension will mount when you show anger and hatred toward each other. 
Instead you greet him with love. Then he too will reciprocate the feeling 
of love and become your friend. Speech plays a vital role in strengthening 
the bond of friendship. Hence, speak softly and sweetly. You can pacify 
hatred and anger that is prevailing in this world by your pleasant talk. 
Love begets love. 


Where there is confidence, there is love, 
Where there is love, there is peace, 
Where there is peace, there is truth, 
Where there is truth, there is God, 
Where there is God, there is bliss. 


In order to enjoy peace, you should give up hatred and develop self- 
confidence. You should consider that viswasa (faith) is your true swasa 
(life-breath). 


You are enjoying divine grace day in and day out. In what way are you 
showing gratitude to God for all that He has been doing for you? God does 
not expect anything from you. But you have to do your duty by 
expressing your gratitude. An ungrateful person is worse than a cruel 
animal. It is because of your parents that you have come up in life. Matru 
Devo bhava, pitru Devo bhava (revere your mother and father God). Your 
mother bore you in her womb for nine months, gave you birth, and 
brought you up facing several hardships. How grateful you must be 
toward your mother for all that she has done for you! In the same 
manner, your father sacrificed his own comforts and looked after you with 
love and care. In what way are you expressing your gratitude to your 
father? Your children will treat you in the same manner as you treat your 
parents. 


Some people have wicked feelings withi,n but talk in a pleasing manner in 
front of others. Such people are verily demons. Demons are known to 
become powerful at nights. Here, night symbolises wickedness and 
darkness of ignorance. Daylight symbolises sujnana and night stands for 
ajnana. When you are immersed in the darkness of ignorance, you will 
find only wickedness everywhere. Such a person cannot be called a 
human being, he is verily a demon. Jantunam nara janma durlabham (out 
of all living beings, human birth is the rarest). Having attained such a 
sacred human birth, it is rather unfortunate that man is behaving like a 
demon. Even animals express their love and gratitude toward their 
master, but man has sense of gratitude in him. Having been born as a 
human being, he should conduct himself as is expected of him and 
sanctify his life. 


By 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


Embodiments of Love! 


Love all. Let there not be even a trace of hatred in you. Join hands with 
your fellowmen in a spirit of tolerance and love. The Vedas have taught, 
Saha navavatu. Saha nau bhunaktu. Saha veeryam karavavahai. Tejaswi- 
navadhitamastu. Ma vidvishavahai (May we be protected and nourished 
together! May we perform heroic deeds! May we be filled with divine 
energy! May we never hate one another!). Such sacred teachings of 

the Vedas have been forgotten. On the other hand, man is developing evil 
tendencies. Such a behaviour is not befitting the stature of a man. 


Bliss is man's true nature. Hence, he should always have a cheerful 
countenance. May all of you lead a blissful life in this New Year! May you 
fill your life with love! May you develop unity and friendship! True bliss 
lies in unity. God is the embodiment of bliss. 


Nityanandam, Parama Sukhadam, Kevalam Jnanamurtim, 
Dwandwateetam, Gagana Sadrisham, Tattwamasyadi Lakshyam, Ekam, 
Nityam, Vimalam, Achalam, Sarvadhee Sakshibhutam, Bhavateetam, 
Trigunarahitam (God is the embodiment of eternal bliss, He is wisdom 
absolute, the One without a second, beyond the pair of opposites, 
expansive and pervasive like the sky, the goal indicated by the aphorism 
Tattwamasi, the eternal, pure, unchanging, the witness of all functions of 
the intellect, beyond all mental conditions and the three qualities of 
purity, passion, and dullness (sattwa, rajas, and thamas). 


In spite of being endowed with such sacred bliss, why should man give 
room to wickedness and misery. This is contrary to human nature. 
Consider everyone as the embodiment of divinity. Whomever you salute 
or ridicule, they will reach God. Offer your respects to everybody. Share 
your love with one and all. Never hate anybody. The hatred in you will 
come back to you as reflection and put you to suffering. 


Hence, embodiments of love, develop love in you. Experience love and 
share it with others. This is the most important message of this New Year, 
Swabhanu. You are not merely mortals. You are the sparks of divine. You 
should lead your life in such a manner. It is only when you understand 
your divine origin, will your thoughts, words, and deeds become sacred. 


Oh man! 

Examine and enquire for yourself 

what great happiness you have achieve 

by spending all the time from dawn to dusk 
in making efforts to fill your belly 

while forgetting God. 

(Telugu Poem) 


ms) 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


Get up from your bed with a peaceful mind. Think of God. There are some 
people who get up from bed with a disturbed and agitated mind. If the 
parents criticise each other as soon as they get up from bed, the children 
will go a step further and will start beating each other up when they wake 
up in the morning. The children will naturally try to emulate their parents. 
Hence, parents should set an example to their children. They should teach 
them by practice, not merely by precept. 


Under all circumstances, do not give room for anger or hatred. You may 
have to face some difficulties and sorrows, but never mind. Be calm and 
composed. What did I tell you in the beginning? 'Aham yetat na’. Realise 
that you are not the body. You are the embodiment of eternal Atma. 
When you understand this truth, you will not be affected by the physical 
suffering. Since you are aware, I am showing you this by example. I know 
that I am not the body. Hence, I do not care for any sufferings that afflict 
this body. The physical body of man is bound to be afflicted by disease 
and suffering at some point of time in his life. One should not be unduly 
worried about it. In fact, the body is born and brought up through various 
difficulties. It cannot escape difficulties. But you should not care for them. 
Difficulties and suffering are but natural to the human body. Bliss is 
natural to the Atma. Follow the nature of the Atma and not of the body. 
Give up body attachment. 


This body is a den of dirt and prone to diseases; 
it undergoes change from time to time. 
It cannot cross the ocean of samsara. 
Oh mind! Do not be under the delusion 

that body is permanent. 
Instead take refuge at the Divine Lotus Feet. 
(Telugu Poem) 


Why do you worry about such an ephemeral body? Instead, think of God. 
The physical suffering comes and goes like a passing cloud. That is the 
nature of human body (pravritti). The nature of Atma (nivritti) is to treat 
dualities of life with equanimity. Troubles of the body come and go. In 
spite of the pain, I am going around as usual. There is no change in My 
daily routine. I do not care for this pain. You will be put to suffering only 
when you identify yourself with the body. I am not the body. When you 
say this is my kerchief, you are different from it. Whatever may happen to 
the kerchief, you will not be affected. In the same manner, you should not 
be affected by the physical suffering. 


The body is made up of five elements and 

is bound to perish sooner or later, 

but the indweller has neither birth nor death. 

He has no attachment whatsoever. 

Truly speaking, the indweller is verily God Himself, 


54 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


who is in the form of the Atma. 
(Telugu Poem) 


The indweller is Atma, which is your true identity. Hence, do not be 
worried about your body. If someone were to criticise you, do not be 
agitated. If he criticises you loudly, it will vanish into thin air. If he 
criticises within himself, it will affect himself. In fact, neither praise nor 
censure will come to you. You should not be affected by either. In this 
manner, you should transcend the dualities of life. You will become a true 
human being only when your mind is fixed on the true and eternal Atma. 


Today marks the beginning of a very sacred year. Accordingly, you should 
develop sacred thoughts. Not only in this year, but throughout your life, 
you should cultivate sacred thoughts. The body is made of five elements, 
so it is bound to suffer. You should not be affected by it. This is your true 
sadhana. All other sadhanas will prove futile if you do not give up body 
attachment. Some people keep telling the beads in a mechanical way and 
say that they are doing sadhana. The rosary will be revolving in their 
hand and the mind will be roaming in the market. Can this be called japa 
(chanting)? While doing meditation, your body may be steady, but the 
mind will be wavering. What is the use of such a sadhana? A true spiritual 
aspirant is one who has a steady mind and an unwavering vision. 
Unsteady mind is the nature of a monkey. But today man is developing 
monkey-mind. He should fill his heart with kindness for he belongs to 
mankind. 


Bhagawan sang the bhajan, "Prema mudita manse kaho" and then 
continued the discourse. 


Embodiments of Love! 


When you sing bhajans, maintain the proper rhythm by clapping your 
hands. The clapping should be done according to the bhajan. Bhajan 
should be sung with proper tune and wholeheartedly. The three syllables 
in the name Bha-ra-ta stand for bhava (feeling), raga (tune) and tala 
(beat). It means Bharatiyas (Indians) are those who sing the glory of God 
with bhava, raga, and tala. Today there are many singers who, while 
singing Thyagaraja kritis, play tala on their lap. They should join both 
hands and clap. 


The five fingers of one hand symbolise karmendriyas (senses of action) 
and that of other hand stand for jnanendriyas (senses of perception). 
When you sing the glory of God, there should be harmony between these 
two. If they are not harmonised, even your feelings will not be steady. 


It was Guru Nanak who introduced the concept of community singing in 
Punjab. All should sing the divine glory in unison. This was the ideal 


Bye 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


propagated by our ancients. But today, people have brushed aside such 
ideal and are acting as per their whims and fancies. All our actions should 
be pleasing unto God. You may call Him Rama, Krishna, Govinda, but God 
is one. Develop the feeling of oneness and attain the vision of the divine 
Atma. 


Date: 2 April 2003, Occasion: Ugadi Discourse, Place: Brindavan 


56 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


7. RAMA NAVAMI DISCOURSE 


Date: 11 April 2003 Occasion: Rama Navami Place: Brindavan 


Birds and beasts which do not have any type of education, 
have learnt to lead a life of discipline. 

But alas! 

Man who is endowed with all intelligence 
does not lead a disciplined life. 

What else is to be conveyed, 
oh people of this august assembly! 

(Telugu Poem) 


The Lord shines effulgently in the universe, 
so also the universe shines in the Lord. 

The relationship between the Lord and the universe 
is intimate and inseparable. 

(Telugu Poem) 


The sacred epic Ramayana is verily the Veda descended from heaven to 
earth. The Veda is classified into four: Rig Veda, Yajur Veda, Sama Veda, 
and Atharvana Veda. The Rig Veda helps, sustains and protects the 
yajnas and yagas. In the Ramayana, Rama symbolises Rig Veda. 
Lakshmana signifies Yajur Veda, which contains mantras chanted during 
the performance of yajnas and yagas. When Rama was away in the 
forest, Bharata stayed in Nandigrama singing His divine Name day in and 
day out. Hence, he symbolises Sama Veda. Satrughna was the one who 
annihilated the satrus (enemies) and protected the pious. He was 
obedient to his brothers. He stands for Atharvana Veda. The essence 

of Atharvana Veda lies in destroying wickedness and fostering sacred 
feelings and activities. The Ramayana is verily the Veda. The Veda is not 
different from the Ramayana. True humanness lies in understanding this. 


Rama, Lakshmana, Bharata, and Satrughna are the four sons of 
Dasaratha. Merely knowing this will not suffice. One should enquire and 
understand the inner meaning. Who is Dasaratha? He represents the 
human body consisting of ten senses (five senses of perception and five 
senses of action). Strictly speaking, Rama, Lakshmana, Bharata, and 
Satrughna are not the sons of Dasaratha and his three wives. We should 
not think that they were born like mere mortals. They are the chaitanya 
Swarupas (embodiments of divine consciousness) who emerged from the 
sacrificial fire. They set an ideal to parents, brothers, and sisters in every 
family and to humanity at large. 


57 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


Today, due to the impact of Kali age, there is no unity and love among 
brothers in a family. There are conflicts among them leading to 
disturbances. On the contrary, Rama, Lakshmana, Bharata, and 
Satrughna had total unity among themselves. They delighted others by 
their unity. Even while playing games in their childhood, each aspired for 
the victory of the other. Once the four brothers as young lads were 
playing a game. Shortly thereafter, Bharata came to mother Kausalya, sat 
on her lap, and started weeping. She asked him, "Bharata, why are you 
feeling sad? Have you lost the game?" Bharata replied, "Mother, I would 
have been happy if that were to be the case, but when I was about to 
lose the game, Rama managed to lose the game and made me the 
winner. I am upset at the defeat of my elder brother." What an example 
of fraternal love! 


When Lakshmana fell unconscious in the battlefield, Rama was crestfallen. 
He considered Lakshmana as His very life. He lamented saying, "If I were 
to search in the world, I may get a mother like Kausalya and a wife like 
Sita but not a brother as noble as Lakshmana. What is the use of this life 
without Lakshmana?" The four brothers had such unity, harmony, and 
love among themselves. 


When Bharata returned from Kekaya kingdom, he came to know from 
sage Vasishtha that Rama had gone into exile and would not return for 
fourteen long years. He was disconsolate. He went to the sage, offered his 
respects and said, "Oh venerable preceptor, I do not want this kingdom, 
which has caused the exile of my brother Rama. Being the eldest son, 
only Rama has the right to rule over the Kingdom. Hence, at this very 
moment I shall go to the forest, fall at the feet of Rama and plead with 
Him to come and take over the reins of Ayodhya." In this manner, each of 
the four brothers was ready to make any sacrifice for the sake of the 
other. 


In order to uphold the plighted word of His father, Rama was ready to go 
into exile. He donned the clothes made of tree bark and went to the 
residence of mother Kausalya to seek her permission. Mother Kausalya, 
being unaware of the sudden turn of events, was eagerly awaiting Rama's 
arrival. She was ecstatic thinking of Rama's coronation and expected Him 
to come to her in royal garments. She was very much worried to see 
Rama and Sita in bark clothes. "Rama, is this the type of garment you 
should wear on the day of your coronation," she asked. 


Rama smilingly replied, "Mother, I have been coronated as the king of 
Aranya Rajya (kingdom of forest) by My father. I am going to the forest 
to protect sages and saints who are being put to suffering by the demons. 
Hence, kindly do not raise any objection to My sacred mission. I have to 
obey the command of My father." So saying, He prostrated before His 
mother and sought her permission to go to the forest. 


58 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


Hearing the words of Rama, mother Kausalya was overcome with sorrow. 
She pleaded with Him, "Son, You are talking of obeying only the 
command of father. What about the command of Your mother? I am the 
ardhangi (better half) of Your father. Hence, it is Your bounden duty to 
obey my command also. I will not come in the way of Your going to the 
forest, but let me also accompany You. I have borne You as a result of 
many rituals and severe austerities performed over a number of years. I 
cannot live without You even for a minute." 


Rama pacified her saying, "Mother, it is not proper on your part to leave 
your husband in this old age. He is getting burnt in the fire of My 
separation. At this juncture, you should comfort and console him with 
soothing words. That is your foremost duty. For a wife, husband is God. 
He is the only refuge for her." 


Sita, who was standing by, heard this conversation. She at once asked 
Him, "Rama, is not the dharma same for all women? Can there be 

one dharma for your mother and another for me? You have asked me to 
stay back and look after Your father and mother. Now, You are telling 
Your mother that serving the husband is the prime duty of a wife. Does it 
not hold good in my case?" 


Mother Kausalya was moved by Sita's argument. She told Rama, "Son, 
the same dharma holds good in the case of every woman. It is destined 
that I have to suffer in this manner. Why should You put Sita to suffering 
by leaving her behind in Ayodhya? She has given up everything and has 
decided to go with You to the forest. Do not disappoint her. Take her 
along with You. It is Your duty to take care of her." One can very well 
understand the nobility and broad-mindedness of mother Kausalya from 
this episode. 


The birthday of Rama is celebrated in order to remind us of the ideals for 
which He stood. We have to ponder over the ideals set before us by 
Rama, Lakshmana, Bharata, and Satrughna and also by Kausalya, 
Sumitra, and Kaikeyi. Sage Vasishtha declared, Ramo vigrahavan 
dharmah (Rama is the embodiment of Dharma). He described the Divine 
form of Rama saying, Pumsam Mohana Rupaya (one whose form 
enchants all). "Rama, the beauty and handsomeness that You are 
endowed with are not limited to Your physical form alone. Your infinite 
love and compassion give You this blissful form. Even men are attracted 
by the blissful form of Yours. You are the very personification of sat-chit- 
ananda (being-awareness-bliss)." Thus, Sage Vasishtha extolled the glory 
and majesty of Rama. It is your good fortune that you are able to listen to 
the sacred story of Rama and sing His glory. 


As I told you in the beginning, God shines effulgently in the universe, and 
so does the universe in God. The relationship between God and the 


59 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


universe is intimate and inseparable. The universe is full of living beings. 
Each being is the embodiment of Rama. Do not confine Rama to a 
particular name and form. All the beings are His forms. Rama means the 
One who delights. He is present in all. Easwara sarva bhutanam (God is 
the indweller of all beings). Isavasyam idam jagat (the entire world is 
permeated by God). The world is the very form of God. Sahasra seersha 
purusha sahasraksha sahasra pad (God has thousands of heads, eyes and 
feet). 


In those days, the population of the world was only in thousands. 
Considering each of them the form of God, it was declared, Sahasra 
seersha purusha. With the passage of time, the population swelled from 
thousands to lakhs and from lakhs to crores. Then it was said, God is 
mukkoti devata swarupa, meaning He is in the form of three crores of 
beings. Today the world population has increased to nearly 600 crores. All 
are the forms of God. Usually people confine Rama to a particular form 
with a bow and a quiver of arrows. In fact, every man is Rama swarupa 
(embodiment of Rama). That is why people are named after Rama, 
Lakshmana, Krishna, Govinda, etc. 


Not only the four brothers, even their consorts demonstrated great ideals. 
Sita and Urmila were the daughters of King Janaka. Mandavi and 
Srutakeerti were the daughters of his younger brother. They were women 
of sterling character and were endowed with supreme sense of 
detachment. They considered the happiness of others as their own. When 
Rama was leaving for the forest, Sita insisted that she should be allowed 
to accompany Him. She said, "Swami, You have come for the redemption 
of mankind. I too have a part to play in it. How can I remain here when 
You are going to the forest renouncing everything?" She removed all her 
ornaments, wore bark clothes, and followed Rama. 


Lakshmana's wife, Urmila was a very good painter. Being unaware of the 
happenings, she was painting the picture of Rama's coronation. As she 
was deeply engrossed in her work, Lakshmana entered the room all of a 
sudden and called her in a raised voice. She was startled and at once 
stood up. In the process, she accidentally spilled paint on the picture she 
was painting. She felt sad for having spoiled the picture. Then Lakshmana 
remarked, "The coronation of Rama, which is meant to bestow peace and 
prosperity to mankind, is stalled because of Kaikeyi, and the picture of 
coronation that you are painting is spoiled because of me." He informed 
her that he was accompanying Rama and Sita to the forest to serve them 
and said that he would return only after fourteen years. She was least 
perturbed with his decision. In fact, she was happy and entreated him to 
serve Sita and Rama with utmost devotion. Pain and pleasure, sorrow and 
happiness follow one another. One should treat them with equanimity. 


60 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


Pleasure and pain, good and bad co-exist, 
none can separate them. 

You cannot find pleasure or pain, good or bad 
to the exclusion of the other. 

Pleasures result when difficulties fructify. 

(Telugu Poem) 


Lakshmana took leave of his wife and went to mother Sumitra to seek her 
blessings. 'Su-mitra' means a good friend. Her character was worthy of 
her name. When Lakshmana told her of his decision to accompany Sita 
and Rama to the forest, she, being a noble mother, was very happy. She 
was not at all worried that either of her two sons would not rule over the 
kingdom. 


When her cup of pudding was taken away by an eagle, both Kausalya and 
Kaikeyi sympathised with her and shared their pudding with her. 
Lakshmana was born of the share of Kausalya's pudding and Satrughna of 
the share of Kaikeyi's. Hence, Lakshmana and Satrughna are the aspects 
of Rama and Bharata, respectively. Lakshmana served Rama, and 
Satrughna served Bharata. Sumitra thought that it was her good fortune 
that her sons were serving Rama and Bharata. She had such noble 
feelings. Where there is God, there is His devotee. Where God and the 
devotee come together, victory is assured. Sumitra told Lakshmana, 
"Son, to be in God's company is the greatest wealth." So, she gave her 
immediate consent to Lakshmana to accompany Rama and Sita. 


When Rama went to Kausalya to take leave of her, she lamented saying, 
"Son, you are leaving me in Ayodhya with all the royal comforts and going 
to aranya (forest) to lead a life of hardships." To this, Lakshmana, who 
was at Rama's side, said, "Mother, this Ayodhya without Rama and Sita is 
verily the forest. The forest with Rama and Sita is verily Ayodhya. Sita 
and Rama are my parents. I will serve them and spend my time 
blissfully." 


There was great unity and understanding not only among the four 
brothers but also among their consorts. They are ideals for every family. 
Is there a family where daughters-in-law live in amity? Is there a family 
where brothers live in harmony without indulging in property disputes? 
Nowhere do we find such an ideal family. This age of Kali (the age we are 
now in) has become the age of kalaha (conflict). In such a scenario, the 
Ramayana shines as the beacon-light to every family. 


How should brothers and sisters conduct themselves? In the Ramayana, 
we find the demonstration of such great ideals. Merely going through the 
sacred text of Ramayana is not enough; you have to emulate the ideals. 
The Ramayana transcends the barriers of time, space, caste, and religion. 
In all nations, at all times and under all circumstances, unity is very 


61 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


essential to find fulfilment in life. Even birds and animals have unity 
amongst themselves. They do not have the selfishness of hoarding things. 
Today we find wicked tendencies in man that are not found even in birds 
and animals. 


There is not a single instance of internal dispute in the family of 
Dasaratha. You may question, "Was not Kaikeyi responsible for a family 
dispute that led to the exile of Rama?" No, it was not a dispute at all. In 
fact, Kaikeyi had great affection for Rama. She loved Him more dearly 
than her own son, Bharata. But her mind was poisoned because of the 
bad company of Manthara. Hence, it is said, Tell me your company, and I 
shall tell you what you are. 


Even Manthara was one of good nature. She was only acting under the 
influence of an incident that happened in her previous birth. She was a 
deer then. One day she was playing with her husband in the forest. The 
king of Kekaya had come to the forest on hunting. He saw the deer 
playing with each other. In an attempt to capture them, he killed the 
husband deer with an arrow. The female deer was grief-stricken. She 
went to her mother and complained about the cruel act of the king. The 
mother consoled her saying, "My dear child, pain and pleasure, good and 
bad coexist in this world. We have to withstand the vicissitudes of life with 
equanimity. You may go to the king to seek justice." 


Then the female deer went to the king and poured out her anguish thus, 
"Oh king! We were leading our lives peacefully and blissfully. You have 
inflicted untold grief on me by killing my husband. You have ruined my 
life." The king ruefully said, "Nobody can escape the consequences of his 
actions. You are grieving over the death of your husband. I can also 
understand the agony of your mother having lost her son-in-law. As a 
result, one day I too will suffer from the loss of my son-in-law." The 
female deer took birth as Manthara and caused the death of Dasaratha 
who was the son-in-law of King Kekaya. 


This life is nothing but an ocean with the waves of union and separation. 
Everybody has to pass through the adversities of life. It is the nature of 
pravritti (outward path). There is another aspect to life, i.e. nivritti 
(inward path). A child goes to its mother and says, "I am hungry." The 
mother who follows the outward path says, "Child, go and eat food. You 
hunger will be satiated." This is the pravritti dharma. But the mother who 
treads the inward path does not merely say, "Go and eat food." She 
would advise the child as to what type of food to eat, when and how to 
should eat. When you are hungry, you should not eat whatever you like 
without enquiring whether it is good for health. The nivritti mother 
advices you to eat such food which will bestow good health on you. 


62 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


Even the Vedas have dealt with the principles of pravritti and nivritti. One 
may have desires, but they should be under limit. They should be based 
on truth and righteousness. Do not eat whatever you get. Do not speak 
whatever comes to your mind. You should speak only after proper 
enquiry. These are some of the lessons that the Ramayana teaches to 
mankind. That is why the Ramayana is compared to the Vedas. It teaches 
the pravritti and nivritti aspects of life in a beautiful manner. Pravritti is 
the swabhava (nature) of prakriti. Nivritti is the swarupa (form) of the 
Atma. Nivritti broadens our outlook, whereas pravritti does the opposite. 
Hence, we should base all our activities on nivritti. 


The Ramayana teaches the principles of dharma and the path of duty to 
every individual. Though ages and aeons have passed by, the Ramayana 
remains ever fresh guiding humanity on the path of truth and 
righteousness. Even today we think of the characters of Ramayana with 
respect and reverence. You can very well understand its greatness. There 
is no morality higher than what is depicted in the Ramayana. 

The Ramayana should be the subject of our parayana (worship). You 
should install the principle of Rama in your heart and experience bliss. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Practise the teachings of Ramayana in your daily life. Obey the command 
of Lord Rama. It is to understand and assimilate the principle 

of Ramayana that we are celebrating the festival of Rama Navami today. 
It is not enough if the celebration is confined to merely partaking of sweet 
pudding and other delicious items. 


Sage Valmiki declared that the Ramayana will be there so long as there 
are mountains and rivers on the face of the earth. You may wonder, what 
is the relationship between the Ramayana and the mountains and the 
rivers. The mountains symbolise men and the rivers women. As long as 
there are men and women in this world, the glory of Ramayana will 
continue to illumine the world. Women are compared to rivers because 
they are the symbols of sacrifice. They flow incessantly quenching the 
thirst of one and all. 


The Ramayana sets great ideals to men. People should contemplate on 
such sacred story and follow its ideals. The marriage of Rama and Sita 
was celebrated in Mithila with all festivity and gaiety. 


They sang songs inviting people to see the divine marriage of 
Rama and Sita. 

Come let us go and see the marriage of Rama and Sita, 

The sight shall confer great merit. 

Oh come one and all to see the sacred marriage, 

Rama, who is riding on an elephant, is shining effulgently. 


63 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


Mother Sita is by His side, 

The brothers are at their service. 

Sita and Rama will smilingly enquire of our well-being; 
What else can we aspire for! 

Come let us go anon 

to see the holy wedding of Rama and Sita. 

(Telugu Poem) 


People sang songs like this, rejoicing at the marriage of Rama and Sita. 
The people of Ayodhya as well as Mithila were greatly delighted. The 
entire city of Mithilapura rejoiced in great celebration. The divine marriage 
conferred immense joy on one and all. The story of Rama is mysterious, 
sacred, and blissful. 


Embodiments of Love! 

The story of Rama is not an ancient one. It is eternal and ever new. It is 
full of auspiciousness. May you fill your heart with the sacred ideals of 
the Ramayana! May you give up hatred and all differences! May you live 


in peace and harmony! When you contemplate on Rama incessantly, you 
derive great joy and delight. 


Bhagawan concluded His discourse with the bhajan, "Rama Rama Rama 
Sita ..." 


Date: 11 April 2003, Occasion: Rama Navami, Place: Brindavan 


64 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


8. CHANTING GOD'S NAME --THE ROYAL 
PATH TO LIBERATION 


Date: 14 April 2003 Occasion: Tamil New Year Place: Brindavan 


Forbearance is the real beauty in this sacred land of Bharat. 
Of all the vows, adherence to truth is the greatest vow. 

The nectarine feeling in this country is the feeling of 
motherhood. 

Self-respect is valued far more than the very life itself. 
People have forgotten the basic principles of this great culture 
and, 

in the name of freedom, are imitating Western culture today. 
Alas! What can I speak of the governance of this country? 
The Bharatiyas (Indians) are not aware of the greatness of 
their cultural heritage 

just as a mighty elephant is not aware of its own strength. 
(Telugu Poem) 


Embodiments of Love! 


Today everyone is rejoicing celebrating Tamil New Year's day. Swabhanu 
is the name of this year. 'Swa' means Atma. In the spiritual parlance, we 
have four stages towards liberation: Salokya, Sameepya, Sarupya, and 
Sayujya (mental proximity to the Divine, physical proximity to the Divine, 
identifying oneself with the Divine, becoming one with the Divine). The 
letter 'Sa' is associated with the Atmic feeling. With the onset of the New 
Year, 'Swabhanu', one should also develop new and divine feelings. 


Many New Years have gone by. But to what extent man has transformed 
himself? Man should tread a new and noble path and set an ideal to 
others. Only then would he have celebrated the arrival of New Year in the 
true sense. He should practise and propagate newer ideals in his daily life. 
Vedanta declares, Aham etat na (I am not this). Aham means 'T’, 

the Atmic principle and 'this' refers to body. Man should not give scope to 
ahamkara (ego) by identifying himself with the body. 'I' does not 
correspond to the body. 'I' corresponds to the eternal and immortal Atma, 
which is not tainted by ego, pomposity, and immorality. Only when man 
develops such Atma viswasa (Self-confidence) can he set an ideal to 
others. Man today does not understand the meaning of Self-confidence. 
First of all, man should have faith in himself. 


65 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


Where there is confidence, there is love; 
Where there is love, there is truth; 
Where there is truth, there is peace; 
Where there is peace, there is bliss; 
Where there is bliss, there is God. 


Truth is the direct manifestation of God. People attribute various names to 
God. Sahasra seersha purusha sahasraksha sahasra pad (God has 
thousands of heads, eyes and feet). Names are many, but God is one. Be 
it any State or country, God is one. Ekam sath viprah bahudha vadanti 
(truth is one, but the wise refer to it by various names). What is truth? It 
is not merely reporting what is seen, heard or experienced. It is the 
transcendental truth which is not bound by time, space and 
circumstances. Be it any nation, any time, any circumstances, Truth is 
Truth. 


The creation emerges from truth and merges into truth, 
Is there a place where truth does not exist? 

Visualise such pure and unsullied truth. 

(Telugu Poem) 


Truth cannot be different from nation to nation like American Truth, 
Russian Truth, Pakistani Truth, Indian Truth, etc. Truth is one and the 
same for all nations. Hence, we should recognise that Truth is God and 
worship Truth by strictly adhering to it. 


We find unrest and agitation in the world today because people have 
forgotten truth. Sathyam bruyath, priyam bruyath, na bruyath 
sathyamapriyam (speak truth, speak pleasantly, and do not speak 
unpalatable truth). Only truth and righteousness can confer peace and 
prosperity on the world today. Sathyam vada; dharmam chara (speak 
truth; practise righteousness). This is the most important principle of 
Indian culture. 


Once you develop truth and righteousness, peace and love will 
automatically follow. Righteousness is the head of Indian culture and, 
Truth its feet. But today people have severed the head and feet of Indian 
culture. They are clinging on to the trunk of artha and kama (wealth and 
desire). What is the use of a mere trunk without the head and the feet? 
People are striving to protect the country. If you protect and practise 
truth and righteousness, they will in turn protect the country. You don't 
need to make any special efforts to protect the country. It is enough if 
you protect truth and righteousness. The entire world is based on these 
two principles. 


66 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


Embodiments of Love! 


New Year does not bring new principles of truth and righteousness. They 
are changeless and eternal. When they are practised, the whole world will 
be taken care of. Hence, we have to always keep in mind these two 
principles. For man, truth and righteousness are his two eyes. In fact, 
they are his very life principles. He may undertake any activity, he may 
do any job or business, but he should make truth and righteousness the 
undercurrent of all his endeavours. 


Man has to take to a newer path. Years have rolled by, but man has not 
given up his old and mean feelings. He has to purify his heart. 
Humanness will blossom only when there is transformation of the heart. 
Merely putting on new clothes is not enough, man has to change his 
character and behaviour. His conduct should be based on truth and 
righteousness. He has to understand the principle of Transcendental 
Truth. It is present in everyone. In fact, man is not a mere mortal, he is 
God. The Vedas say, Raso Vai Sah (God pervades everything in the form 
of essence). God moves about in the form of rasa (essence) in every limb 
and every cell and protects the body. Hence, He is known as Angirasa. If 
God does not protect the body, who else can? Body is not permanent. 


This body is a den of dirt, and prone to diseases; 

it is subject to change from time to time; 

it cannot cross the ocean of samsara. 

It is nothing but a quiver of bones. 

Oh mind! 

Do not be under the delusion that body is permanent. 
Instead take refuge at the Divine Lotus Feet. (Telugu Poem) 


Body is like a water bubble. Mind is like a mad monkey. Do not follow the 
body; do not follow the mind. Follow the conscience. Conscience is your 
God. You are forgetting God, who is present in you in the form of 
conscience and who is protecting your body in the form of Angirasa. 


God is changeless, pure, and eternal. He has absolutely no trace of 
selfishness in Him. He is always concerned about the welfare of the 
devotees. Do not superimpose your selfishness on God and get deluded. 
When everything is in His hand, how can there be selfishness in Him? 
Whatever He does is for the welfare of all. Loka samasta sukhino 
bhavantu (May all the people of the world be happy)! This is what God 
aspires for. He is known as Aprameya, since He is beyond all measure. He 
is present in man's hridaya (heart) in the form of bliss. He shines as 
prema swarupa (embodiment of love). He practises dharma, being the 
embodiment of dharma. He leads from the front, setting an ideal for 
humanity and helping everyone. He says, "Oh man! Why fear when I am 
here. Follow Me." Why should one fear when God has given such an 


67 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


assurance? If you follow Him, He will certainly bestow on you pure and 
unsullied bliss. 


Saints and sages of yore performed intense penance in order to have the 
vision of God. Some of them died during their penance, but the others did 
not give up their resolve. They continued their penance with unflinching 
faith and determination. Ultimately, they had the divine vision. Then they 
declared to the world that they had seen God. Vedahametham purusham 
mahantham adityavarnam thamasa parasthath (I have visualised the 
Supreme Being, who shines with the effulgence of a billion suns and who 
is beyond thamas (the darkness of ignorance). They exhorted people to 
make efforts to see God and experience bliss. 


If you contemplate on God with pure and selfless love, you can also see 
Him. Today, many are in the quest of God. God is everywhere, but you 
should have the eyes to see Him. Today people are trying to see God with 
their charma chakshu (physical eye). That is why they are unable to see 
Him. One can see God only with jnana chakshu (the eye of wisdom). 


Sarvatah panipadam tat sarvathokshi siromukham, sarvatah 
sruthimalloke sarvamavruthya tishthati (with hands, feet, eyes, heads, 
mouth and ears pervading everything, He permeates the entire universe). 
Where is the need to search for God, who is everywhere? What we have 
to search for is not God but a true human being! But he is not to be seen 
anywhere. Nowadays, we find only akara manavas (human beings in 
form), not achara manavas (human beings in practice). 


Practice is very essential. Without acharana (practice), what is the use of 
merely having akara (form)? Do not repose your faith in the body and 
consider it to be permanent. It is merely an instrument given by God. 
Make proper use of this instrument by discharging your duties and serving 
society. Help the needy and the forlorn. Take good care of the destitute 
and the poor with love. Dedicate your life for the cause of sathya (truth) 
and dharma. That is how you have to celebrate the arrival of New Year. 
You should give up your old and mean thoughts, fill your heart with novel, 
fresh and noble feelings and lead a new life. 


But where is such a new life in the present-day world? Days have changed 
but feelings have not. Guddalu (clothes) are changed every day but 
gunamu (character) has not changed. Merely donning ochre robes will not 
make a sannyasi (renunciant). You should develop good qualities and 
become a sarvasanga parithyagi (totally devoid of attachment). Only then 
can you be called a true sannyasi. 


Na karmana na prajaya dhanena thyagenaike amrutatthwamanasuh 
(immortality is not attained through action, progeny or wealth; it is 
attained only by sacrifice). Who has this quality of sacrifice in the present- 


68 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


day world? One in a hundred or in a million is endowed with such a noble 
quality. Though God is present in everyone, He manifests Himself in a 
man of sacrifice. Sacrifice is of paramount importance to man. He should 
become a thyaga jeevi (one of sacrifice), not a bhoga jeevi (one who 
leads a life of pleasures). Thyaga leads to yoga, whereas bhoga gives rise 
to roga (disease). So, give up bhoga and take to the path of yoga. 


There are people who do Rama Chintana (contemplation of Rama) day in 
and day out. Every moment of their life and every cell of their body is 
filled with the name of Rama. Such a life is a life of fulfilment. Indeed 
their lives are sanctified. Man should contemplate on God, his only saviour 
incessantly. The world will never come to your rescue. The world has 
witnessed many changes in the fields of politics and philosophy. Old 
Siddhantas (Schools of Thought) have given way to new ones. Many 
political parties have come and gone. But in what way has the world 
benefited from all these changes? There is no progress whatsoever. The 
world is where it has been. Everyone is interested in only filling their 
belly. No one is making any effort to understand the principle of Divinity. 


You have to think of God every moment. If you win the grace of God, you 
can overcome any obstacle and acquire any type of wealth. Once Ramdas 
prayed, "Oh Lord! What did I do to deserve Your bounteous grace? I have 
not offered anything to You, yet You shower Your grace on me." Then the 
Lord replied, "My dear, the spirit of thyaga (sacrifice) that you have 
developed is the true yoga. I know the sense of sacrifice that is there in 
your mind, you may not be aware of it. Only God can understand the 
sacrifice you have made mentally. Others need not understand; they 
cannot understand any way. Only God can understand your thyaga, yoga, 
and prema (love)." 


Saint Thyagaraja composed a song in praise of Rama, the meaning of 
which is as follows: 


But for the power of Rama, could a mere monkey cross the 
mighty ocean? 

Would Lakshmi Devi, the goddess of wealth, become His 
consort? 

Would Lakshmana worship Him? 

Would the intelligent Bharata offer his salutations to Him? 
But for the mighty power of Rama, would all this happen? 
Indeed, Rama's power is beyond all description. 

(Telugu Poem) 


Nobody can estimate the infinite power of Rama. It can only be 
experienced in the heart. Love is the only yardstick to measure the power 
of Divinity. Hence, we have to develop love to experience Divinity. 
Hanuman could jump across the vast ocean because he chanted the 


69 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


Name of Rama always. With the power of Rama's Name, he could lift 
mighty mountains. 


How could the monkeys build a bridge across the ocean? In the 
beginning, the boulders were getting drowned in the ocean and the 
monkeys were frustrated. Then Hanuman thought of a plan. He inscribed 
the letter ‘Ra’ on one boulder and 'ma' on another and threw them in the 
ocean one after the other. They stuck together to make the Name 'Rama'’. 
With the help of many such boulders bearing the letters 'Ra' and 'ma', a 
bridge was constructed. The boulders became light and floated on water 
only due to the power of Rama's Name 


There is an intimate and inseparable relationship between the love of a 
devotee and the grace of God. Only love can win divine grace. You have 
to practise righteousness and tread the path of sacrifice to experience 
everlasting happiness. The name and principle of Rama will give you 
tremendous strength and power. The divine principle underlying the 
Avatars of Rama and Krishna can neither be explained in words nor 
understood with the help of worldly education. Only through love can one 
understand them. Fill your heart with love and chant the name of Rama 
forgetting yourself in bliss. Then Rama will certainly give you His divine 
darshan. 


Once there lived an ardent devotee of Rama in Chengalpat near Madras. 
He wanted to attend the marriage of Thyagaraja's daughter in 
Thiruvayyar. He wanted to present a picture of Rama to the bride. In 
those days, there were no buses, cars, or planes. Therefore, he walked all 
the way from Chengalpat to Thiruvayyar, carrying the picture of Rama. 


On seeing the picture, Thyagaraja was ecstatic and burst into a song, "Oh 
Rama! You walked all the way in order to protect me. You have taken so 
much trouble Oh Lord." In this manner, he went on extolling Rama's love 
and compassion. He experienced unity with Rama's Divinity. He 
considered Rama his dear old friend. You don't need to observe any 
formalities or use respectful words when you address your old friend. 
Thyagaraja addressed Rama with the same intimacy in the song, "Ra Ra 
ma inti daaka ..." (Oh Rama! Come to my house). 


There is another song that reflects the feeling of friendship: "Enta 
vedukondu Raghava E panthamelara Oh Raghava ?" (How long should I 
plead with You, Oh Raghava! Why are You so obstinate and not 
responding?) Thyagaraja felt, "It is my duty to pray till Your heart melts. 
But the warmth of my prayer does not seem to have touched Your heart. 
One day or the other, Your heart will surely melt. I will wait till such time. 
I am in no hurry." In this manner, he consoled himself. It was only then 
that Rama granted him His divine vision. No one can comprehend how 
and when God is going to shower His grace on a sadhaka (spiritual 


70 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


aspirant) and what type of boons He is going to grant him. He gives so 
many gifts and ultimately gives Himself and makes you ecstatic. Why 
then are you distancing yourself from such all-merciful Lord? 


You are aware that everyday you chant the following prayer before 
partaking your food: 


Brahmarpanam Brahma Havir 
Brahmagnou Brahmanahutam 
Brahmaiva Thena Ganthavyam 
Brahma Karma Samadhina. 


You say that the food is an offering to Brahman. Then where is Brahman? 
He is within. So, immediately God replies from within: 


Aham Vaishvanaro Bhutva 
Praninam Dehamasrita 
Pranapana Samayukta 
Pachamyannam Chaturvidham 


God says "My dear one, I am in you in the form of Vaishvanara. I receive 
and digest the four types of food that you partake of. You don't need to 
send any special invitation to Me nor extol Me. I am yours and you are 
Mine. I am with you, in you, above you, below you, around you." God has 
given you such a great assurance. He has promised that He will be always 
with you. But you are not able to understand this. 


Embodiments of Love! 


God is the ocean of love and compassion. He is sweetest and most 
enchanting. That is why Rama is described as Pumsam mohana rupaya 
(One who enchants even the males). He captivates and attracts everyone. 
There is divinity in every object in this world. But man is unable to 
understand this divine principle. In spite of all his education and listening 
to the discourses of saints and holy men, he is unable to comprehend the 
nature of the divine. There is only one way by which you can understand 
God. Love Him wholeheartedly. Do not hate anyone. If you come across a 
person who hates you, do not reciprocate the same feeling. Greet him 
saying, "Hello friend, how are you?" Then all the hatred in him will vanish. 
He too will develop love toward you. God is your true friend and is most 
intimately related to you. Love is the only path that can take you to God. 
When you develop love, God will give Himself up to you and will protect 
you always. 


71 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


Embodiments of Love! 


It is a grave mistake on your part to consider yourself a mere human 
being. Contemplate on the fundamental principle of wisdom, Aham etat 
na (I am not this (body)). I and you are one. When you understand and 
experience such intimate relationship with God, there will be no 
differences whatsoever. 


In this New Year, develop new and noble feelings; contemplate on God 
with full faith that He will grant you all comforts and happiness. Lead your 
life with love and enjoy peace and happiness. You should strive for the 
happiness of not merely yourself, your friends, and relatives,but for the 
welfare of all. Strive to make everyone happy with the constant prayer, 
Loka samasta sukhino bhavantu (May all the people of the world be 
happy)! Then you will certainly experience true peace and bliss. Those 
who help others will always be helped in turn; they will never be put to 
harm. 


Bhagavan sang the bhajan, "Rama Rama Rama Sita ..." and then 
continued the discourse. 


Embodiments of Love! 


When you chant the divine Name with love at least once, you will 
experience inexplicable and overwhelming bliss in your heart. The divine 
Name melts even a stone-hearted person. Even ice takes some time to 
melt, but God's heart melts instantaneously when you chant His Name 
with love. So, chant the Name of God. Even while you are traveling, you 
can chant His Name silently without attracting others’ attention. Sarvada 
sarva kaleshu sarvatra Rama chintanam (everywhere, at all times and 
under all circumstances, contemplate on the divine name of Rama). There 
is no greater sadhana (spiritual exercise) than this. The essence of 

all sadhanas is contained in this. In the Kali yuga, chanting of God's Name 
is the royal path to liberation. 


Harer Nama Harer Nama Harer Namaiva Kevalam, 
Kalau Nastyeva Nastyeva Nastyeva Gathiranyatha. 


Chanting of the divine Name is 
the only path to liberation in this age of Kali. 


Date: 14 April 2003, Occasion: Tamil New Year, Place: 
Brindavan 


72 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


9. PRACTISE AND PROPAGATE OUR 
SACRED CULTURE 


Date: 15 April 2003 Occasion: Vishu celebrations Place: Brindavan 


The sun appears serene and peaceful. 
The fields are ripe with golden crops. 
Marigold flowers are blossoming 
like garlands of pearls on the banks of rivers. 
The farmers are rejoicing and singing. 
The chillies have ripened and are looking red. 
The sweet festival of Sri Vishu has come, 
filling our homes with the newly harvested grain. 
(Telugu Poem) 


Today is the day of great happiness for the people of Kerala. The farmers 
reap the harvest, bring the grains to the home, and rejoice. Food is very 
essential for the nation. It is the farmers who feed to the nation and bring 
peace and prosperity to it. It is their good fortune to be able to render 
such joyful service to the nation. Only when the farmers who give us food 
are happy and contented can the nation be peaceful and prosperous. 
Right from dawn to dusk, they toil in the fields and render great service to 
the nation. 


Embodiments of Love! 


This land of Bharat is very sacred and meritorious. Since time 
immemorial, Bharat has been imparting spiritual education to all nations 
of the world and thus bestowing peace and happiness on all. This is the 
eternal glory of Bharat. The motto of the Bharatiyas (Indians) has been 
Loka samasta sukhino bhavantu (May all the people of the world be 
happy!) Sarvam khalvidam Brahma (verily all this is Brahman). As 
Brahma pervades the entire world, dharma should permeate all actions of 
man. Karma (action) will be sanctified only when it is based on dharma 
and Brahma. It is said, Karmanubandheeni manushya loke (human 
society is bound by action). Nobody should waste time. Right from the 
time he wakes up in the morning, man should utilise his time and energy 
for the welfare of society. This is his main duty. He should realise that his 
welfare lies in the welfare of society. I have seen that the people of Kerala 
are always engaged in some activity or the other. They work very hard. 
They are not interested in comforts and pleasures. They derive happiness 
in working hard and serving society. They strive for peace and security of 
one and all. That is their most sacred virtue. 


DD 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


Embodiments of Love! 


Kerala is the seat of education. It is the land which stands as testimony to 
the profound truths enunciated in the Vedas, Sastras, Puranas, and 
Itihasas. In such a land of peace and sacredness, today people are unable 
to experience the unsullied happiness that their ancestors were able to 
enjoy in the past. However, there is no cause for worry. A time will come, 
when Kerala will regain its past glory. Time plays an important role. We 
have to discharge the duties ordained on us by God and thus sanctify our 
time. Whatever actions we perform are the reflections of our inner 
feelings only. You should undertake such actions that will provide internal 
as well as external happiness. Nobody can remain without performing 
action. 


Man is born from action, is sustained by action, and ultimately 
merges in action. 

Action is the cause for pleasure and pain. 

Truly speaking, action is God for man. 

(Telugu Poem) 


Man's life is bound by kala, karma, karana, kartavya (time, action, cause, 
duty). Due to the effect of Kali age, man does not work hard. Both the 
educated and the uneducated have become lethargic. You have to 
sanctify your life by doing righteous actions. Action is the cause for 
everything. Action is life. It is very unfortunate that man has not 
understood the importance of action. He wants to lead an easy life. Even 
students want to pass the examinations without putting much effort. They 
want to secure jobs without working hard. After securing jobs, they want 
salaries without discharging their duties. This type of conduct is not good. 
It is said, kashte phali (hard work yields rich rewards). The rewards that 
one gets will be commensurate with the efforts one puts in. One should 
recognise this truth and work hard accordingly. Unfortunately, such a 
spirit of work is not seen these days. There are people who go to office 
only to give attendance. Each one has to question oneself whether one is 
discharging one's duty properly or not. It is most essential that man 
becomes duty conscious. 


Embodiments of Love! 


You have to bend your body and work. Discharge your duty with the 
sweat of your brow. Only then can you get the right reward. Today, 
people are suffering for want of food and drinking water. What is the 
reason? Man is not undertaking righteous actions. When man does his 
duty sincerely, there will be no shortage of food and drinking water. 
Without working hard, one cannot lead a happy life. Na sukhat labhyate 
sukham (one cannot derive happiness out of happiness). We can get 
happiness only when we work hard. For every action of ours, there is 


74 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


bound to be reaction. For every sound that we make there will be 
resound. When we undertake righteous action and utter sacred words, the 
same will come back to us in the form of reaction, reflection and resound. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Our actions should be such that they bring happiness to ourselves as well 
as others. First of all, we have to enquire what true happiness is and what 
sorrow is. People think that happiness lies in eating to the fill and having 
a sound sleep. That is no happiness at all. Happiness lies in working hard 
and serving society. We can experience peace and happiness only when 
we help the poor and needy. After our daily prayer, we utter the word 
peace thrice: santhi santhi santhihi. Where is peace? It is inside, not 
outside. Outside there are only pieces! You are the embodiment of peace, 
you are the embodiment of truth, you are the embodiment of love, you 
are the embodiment of God. How foolish it is to look for peace outside 
when it is present within! You have to put in proper effort to experience 
the peace within. You have to turn your vision inward. When two 
branches rub against each other repeatedly, fire is produced. Similarly, 
continuous hard work will produce jnanagni (fire of wisdom). 


Embodiments of Love! 


Today, nobody wants difficulties. Everybody aspires for happiness. Where 
is happiness? It is everywhere. We should earn the deservedness to 
experience it. Our Judge (who spoke earlier) mentioned in his speech that 
he was disappointed when Swami did not speak to him in spite of having 
worked hard. He did a lot of self-introspection. As a result, he got a good 
chance today. Without working hard, you cannot get any reward. But 
today, man is not prepared to work hard. 


During Upanishadic times, people would offer their salutations to the 
karma (action) before undertaking it --thasmai namah karmane 
(salutations to action). We have to offer our salutations to the karma in 
the first instance so that it gives us good result. 


In Bharat, some people follow this sacred tradition even today. A cricket 
player pays his respects to the ball before starting to bowl. A dancer 
salutes the anklets before tying them to her feet. Even an uneducated 
driver offers his obeisance to the steering wheel before driving the 
vehicle. But most of the educated people have forgotten such an ancient 
tradition and culture. That is why accidents are on the rise. There is a 
sense of fear and insecurity among people. 


First of all, we have to offer our respects and express our gratitude 
to karma before undertaking it. Every one has to understand his duty and 
perform it to the best of his ability. Before the commencement of any 


75 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


music programme, musicians pray to Vinayaka, the remover of obstacles. 
One who has no nayaka (master) above him is Vinayaka. He is the master 
of all. Hence, we have to offer our prayers to him before the 
commencement of any activity. Since ancient times, Bharatiyas (Indians) 
adhered to such sacred traditions implicitly. People decorate their houses 
with buntings of green leaves on festival days. Big pandals of mango 
leaves and plantain leaves are erected at the time of marriages. Green 
leaves are given place of prominence in such decorations. What is so 
special about them? Can't we have a shamiana instead? 


No, that is not in accordance with our ancient tradition. What is the logic 
behind this tradition? As you are aware, we inhale oxygen and exhale 
carbon dioxide, which pollutes the atmosphere. At the time of marriages, 
many people gather at one place. As a result, more and more carbon 
dioxide is released into the air and the atmosphere gets polluted. The 
green leaves of the pandal inhale the carbon dioxide and release oxygen 
and thus purify the atmosphere. In this manner, they bestow health and 
happiness on us. 


Thus, every tradition of Bharat has a profound inner meaning. Such 
sacred traditions are ignored today. Wherever a marriage is performed or 
a big meeting is held, people prefer decorative shamianas to pandals, 
plastic festoons to green leaf festoons. Can you get oxygen from plastic 
festoons? Can they absorb carbon dioxide? The shamianas and plastic 
festoons may be aesthetically pleasing but they serve no purpose in 
keeping the atmosphere pure. We should never forget our ancient 
traditions. 


In Kerala, even today ancient traditions are followed. On festival days, 
they place a lamp on rice, with beautiful decorations around. It is very 
auspicious for the house. Onam and Vishu are the sacred festivals that 
the Keralites celebrate. You must understand the tradition and 
significance associated with the celebration of Vishu. It is not merely 
meant to wish each other 'hello' and shake hands. Vishu is that day when 
your house has grains in plenty and the State attains prosperity. This is 
how the festival was celebrated in ancient times. Today Vishu celebration 
is confined to wishing each other. This is not the way to celebrate Vishu. 
You have to aspire and work for the happiness of others. True celebration 
of Vishu lies in each sharing the happiness of the other. Give and take. It 
is not 'one way traffic’. You have to give happiness to others. Only then 
will you have the right to receive it from others. 


Kerala has plantain trees and coconut groves in abundance. You find 
greenery all around. Keralites prepare various types of puddings with 
plantains. There is a special type of plantain called nendra pazham, which 
they distribute to others. 


76 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


The Gayatri Mantra begins with the syllables Om, Bhur, Bhuvah Suvaha. 
Om is the primordial sound, Pranava. Bhur represents bhuloka, the world 
of materials (materialisation). Bhuvah is related to the mind 

(vibration). Suvaha represents prajnana (radiation). When you 
understand these three principles, your life will be sanctified. But today 
man is not interested in such divine principles. He craves for worldly 
gains. How long can he enjoy physical pleasures? They are momentary. 
They do not give true happiness. This is what Adi Sankara said in his 
famous Bhaja Govindam song thus: 


Ma Kuru Dhana Jana Yauvana Garvam, 
Harathi Nimeshath Kalah Sarvam 


Do not be proud of your wealth, progeny, and youth; 
the tide of time may destroy them in a moment. 


Hence, you should not crave for worldly happiness. You should strive for 
eternal peace and everlasting happiness. You should not be caught up in 
the endless cycle of birth and death. You should transcend birth and 
death and attain immortality. 


Punarapi Jananam Punarapi Maranam 
Punarapi Janani Jathare Sayanam 

Iha Samsare Bahu Dustare 
Kripayapare Pahi Murare. 


Oh Lord! I am caught up in this cycle of birth and death. 

Time and again, I am experiencing the agony of staying in the 
mother's womb. 

It is very difficult to cross this ocean of worldly life. 

Please take me across this ocean and grant me liberation. 


Once a person was sitting under a tree on the bank of river Ganga and 
trying to master the nuances of Panini grammar. He was repeating 
Dukrun karane, Dukrun karane. Sankara was going to the river with his 
disciples for a sacred bath. He took pity on the person, went up to him 
and said, "My dear one, by learning the rules of grammar, you may 
become a great scholar. But it is not going to save you from death. 
Hence, chant the name of Govinda, who alone is your saviour." It was 
then that Adi Sankara sang the famous Bhaja Govindam song. 


Bhaja Govindam, Bhaja Govindam 
Govindam Bhaja Moodha Mathe 
Samprapthe Sannihithe Kale 

Nahi Nahi Rakshati Dukrun Karane. 


vei 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


Oh foolish man, chant the name of Govinda; 
he rules of grammar will not come to your rescue when the 
end approaches. 


Some of the other verses of this song were composed by the disciples of 
Sankara. It is said, Yatha raja, thatha praja (as the king, so are the 
subjects). The same can be said of guru-sishya (teacher-student) 
relationship. Yatha guru thatha sishya (as the preceptor, so are the 
disciples). The preceptors of those days were highly noble. They set great 
ideals, which their disciples emulated. We don't find such masters and 
disciples today. 


One should not crave for scholarship or name and fame. They come and 
go. When there is plenty of water in the pond, frogs make their way into 
it. When the water dries to a trickle, you do not find a single frog there. In 
the same manner, when your pocket is full, many people swarm around 
you. But when your pocket is empty, no one will look at your face. This is 
the way of the world. Do not get deluded by the loka (world). 
Contemplate on Lokesha (Lord of the world) incessantly. Sankara made a 
great contribution to the spiritual wealth of this country. We should 
express our gratitude to him by following his teachings. We should never 
forget our cultural heritage. Each State has its own traditions. They have 
to be followed in letter and spirit. Today, fashions have displaced 
traditions. Do not be carried away by fashions. Let the ancient traditions 
be imprinted on your heart. 


In villages, people sprinkle cow dung mixed with water in front of their 
homes. It is considered to be auspicious. What is the reason? Cow dung 
destroys disease-causing germs and thus helps maintain good health. It 
can cure many diseases. Today people of other countries have recognised 
this truth and are taking full advantage of it. But the Bharatiyas (Indians) 
are not making efforts in this direction. 


In earlier days, cow dung was used as a remedy for wounds. People used 
to bandage the wound with cow dung. In modern times, people have a 
wrong notion that the wound becomes septic if cow dung is bandaged 
over it. It may become gangrenous also, they argue. It is a baseless 
argument. If cow dung is applied, the wound will be healed in three days. 
Cow dung has such sacred power. Even cow urine has medicinal 
properties. It is mixed in water and sprinkled on people infected with the 
pox. But the modern trend is against such natural remedies, which are in 
fact, beneficial to one and all. 


The Bharatiyas have to revive such ancient traditions. Let people say 
what they want, we have to follow our sacred traditions. 


78 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


On the day of Vishu, people have a sacred bath and put on new clothes. 
Mere external cleanliness is not enough, you have to cleanse your mind 
and develop inner purity. Antarbahischa tatsarvam vyapya Narayana 
sthita (That all-pervasive God is present within and without). We have to 
offer obeisance to our elders and seek their blessings. We have to develop 
good relationship with all. Therein lies the true celebration of Vishu. 
Today, even among the Keralites, many do not know the true significance 
of Vishu. It is a symbol of our great cultural heritage. Today people are 
not aware of the greatness of Bharat. It is said, Yenna Bharate thanna 
Bharata (what is not found in Bharat is not found anywhere else). 
Bharatiyas are those who sing the glory of God with bhava, raga, and 
thala (feeling, tune, and rhythm). Music will be pleasing to the ears only 
when these three are in harmony. 


Right from young age, the children should be taught the greatness of our 
ancient culture. They should be moulded into ideal citizens. They should 
be made to practise our traditional values. For anything, practise is very 
important. The responsibility lies with the parents and teachers to make 
the children adhere to our ancient tradition. Then society will certainly 
progress and enjoy peace and prosperity. If you practise our ancient 
values, society will attain kshemam (welfare), otherwise, it will be 
afflicted with kshamam (famine). Do not think about the welfare of you 
and your family alone. Strive for the welfare of everyone. Loka samasta 
sukhino bhavantu (May all the people of the world be happy!) 


Students! 


Make efforts to understand the greatness of our ancient culture and 
traditions. Respect everyone. Do not be rude to elders and guests who 
visit your house. Whether your parents are at home or not, offer them a 
seat and give them a glass of cold water or buttermilk. Speak to them 
with love. However, such noble practices are not to be found among 
students of the present times. If somebody rings up asking for father, 
even if he is at home, the son keeps down the phone saying he is not 
there. Even over the phone, you should talk in a respectful manner. You 
can earn the respect of others only when you respect them. Respect does 
not mean merely saying, 'hello'. You should offer your namaskara with 
humility and reverence. Na-maskara means offering your respects without 
a trace of ahamkara and mamakara (ego and attachment). 


Matru Devo bhava, pitru Devo bhava, acharya Devo bhava, atithi Devo 
bhava (revere your mother, father, preceptor,and guest as God). Since 
our ancients adhered to such sacred principles, our nation earned the 
respect of the entire world. We should develop humility, love, and 
reverence toward elders like the ancient Bharatiyas. We should practise 
and propagate our sacred culture. That is the true sign of education. 


79 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


Bhagawan concluded His discourse with the bhajans, "Prema mudita 
manase kaho", "Govinda Krishna jai Gopala Krishna jai", and "Om Sivaya 
Om Sivaya". 


Date: 15 April 2003, Occasion: Vishu celebrations, Place: 
Brindavan 


80 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


10. LOVE AND RESPECT YOUR PARENTS 
AND SANCTIFY YOUR LIFE 


Date: 06 May 2003 Occasion: Easwaramma Day Place: Brindavan 


When man comes out of the mother's womb, he does not bring any 
money with him. 
Money does not follow him either when he departs from the world. 
Even a millionaire has to partake of salt and rice. 
He cannot swallow gold to satiate his hunger. 
One may feel proud of his wealth, but he cannot take even a single pie 
with him when he leaves the world. 
Just as man enjoys the honey collected by the bees, the wealth one 
amasses 
may ultimately fall in the hands of either donga (thief) or dora (king). 
(Telugu Poem) 


When man emerges from the womb of his mother, 
one does not find any garland round his neck. 

There are no jewels made of pearls 
nor are there glittering gold ornaments. 

There are no chains studded with precious stones 
like emeralds and diamonds. 

There is no garland of flowers either. 

But there is one garland round his neck. 

Brahma strings together the consequences of his 
past deeds into a heavy garland and 

puts it round his neck at the time of his birth. 

(Telugu Poem) 


Embodiments of Love! 


Every individual has a mother. One who does not please his mother and 
become the recipient of her love is not a true son. In today's world, 
mothers who bring up their children with proper love and care are very 
rare. It is said, Deho devalaya proktho jeevo devah sanathanah (the body 
is a temple and the indweller in the body is God). In every temple, we 
find a bell. But, the bell present in the temple of a human body is not 
visible outside. This bell is known as anahati. It is not a bell that one can 
ring. However, it rings continuously on its own day in and day out as long 
as life remains in the human body. This is nothing but the human heart. 
When the bell stops ringing, the body becomes lifeless. Then, we call the 


81 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


body a savam (corpse). When the bell is ringing, the body is considered 
to be sivam (auspicious). 


The entire universe is the temple of God. In this temple of the universe, 
one can continuously hear the sound of the bell Om. That is why God is 
described as Sabda Brahmamayi, Characharamayi, Jyotirmayi, Vangmayi, 
Nityanandamayi, Paratparamayi, Mayamayi, and Sreemayi (the 
embodiment of sound, movable and immovable, light, speech, eternal 
bliss, transcendental, delusion, and wealth). Today, instead of attuning 
ourselves to that sacred sound of Om, we are lending our ears to worldly 
talk and vain gossip. We are unable to listen to the divine voice of 
Akhanda Satchidananda Swarupa (God, the embodiment of existence, 
consciousness and bliss). 


Once upon a time in the temple of Visweswara in Kasi, the Pujari was 
offering Arati to the deity. Suddenly, a big gold plate fell from above. 

The Pujari was surprised and happily picked it up to have a closer look at 
it. There was an inscription on the plate, which read as follows: "It should 
be given to the greatest devotee. One who does not chant the Divine 
Name is not qualified to get it." Then the Pujari thought to himself, 
"everyday, Iam performing Sahasra Lingarchana and Abhishekam to the 
Lord. I am sanctifying my time by chanting the sacred mantras from the 
four Vedas. Can there be a greater devotee than me?" When such ego 
and pride clouded his mind, the gold plate 


From that day onward, whoever visited the temple was asked to touch the 
plate to find out if he deserved to receive the gold plate. But it so 
happened that the plate would turn into an earthen one whenever 
somebody touched it. It continued for a few days. 


There was a devotee who always chanted the Name of God, but did not 
perform any other sadhana (spiritual exercises) like japa (soft repetition 
of the name), thapa, dhyana (meditation), etc. He had no desires. He had 
achieved dama (sense control). One day he visited the temple. On being 
requested by the Pujari to touch the plate, he said, "Sir, I don't have any 
desires. Hence, I don't want to touch it." 


The Pujari requested him to touch the plate at least for his satisfaction. 
The devotee did not want to displease the Pujari and therefore he touched 
the plate. No sooner did he touch it than it started shining with added 
brilliance. People who were witness to this event surrounded him and 
started asking, "Oh noble soul! What is the method of worship you follow, 
what is the sadhana you perform?" Then he replied, "I have not 
performed any japa, thapa, yajna or yaga (sacrifices or rituals). I only 
serve the poor. They are very dear to God." 


82 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


Neither by penance nor by pilgrimage nor by study of 
scriptures nor by Japa can one cross the ocean of life. 

One can achieve it only by serving the pious. 

(Sanskrit Verse) 


From then onward, many rich people started visiting Kasi to see this 
devotee. Wherever there are rich people, it is but natural that the poor 
also gather begging for alms from the rich. This devotee was moved on 
seeing their pathetic condition and resolved to himself, "God loves the 
poor very much. That is why He has drawn so many of them to His abode. 
God will be pleased only when they are looked after well. That is what I 
love to do. I will be happy only when I am able to alleviate the suffering 
of these poor people and make them happy." From then on, he continued 
to serve the poor and the needy with greater devotion and enthusiasm. 
This was an eye-opener for the rich who had gathered there. 


Even a millionaire has to partake of salt and rice. He cannot swallow gold 
to satiate his hunger. One may feel proud of his wealth, but he cannot 
take even a single pie with him when he leaves the world. Such being the 
case, why should one struggle to amass wealth? Instead, it is better one 
strives to attain divine grace. When you contemplate on God all the time 
continuously with single-minded devotion, He will take care of all your 
needs. This was what the devotee taught to all those who had assembled 
there. 


The money we accumulate will not follow us. To whom will it go 
ultimately? Nobody knows. It is not possible to take even a paisa with us. 
You have to undertake righteous deeds and earn merit so as to deserve 
divine grace. When you are born out of your mother's womb, you do not 
find any garland round your neck. But there is one garland surely. 
Brahma strings together the consequences of all your past deeds, be they 
good or bad, into a heavy garland and puts it round your neck. Nobody 
can come into the world without that garland of karma. But man forgets 
this truth and always craves for pleasures and comforts. How long can the 
worldly pleasures last? 


Ma Kuru Dhana Jana Yauvana Garvam, 
Harathi Nimeshath Kalah Sarvam 


Do not be proud of your wealth, progeny and youth; 
the tide of time may destroy them in a moment. 


People feel proud of their youth and wealth. But they are momentary. 
Realising this truth, we have to accumulate the wealth of divine grace. 


After imparting such sacred teaching to the people around him, the 
devotee started coming out of the temple. As he stepped out, the gold 


83 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


plate also followed him. Along with the plate, all the coins started rolling 
behind him. Then the beggars started going behind him asking for the 
money. The devotee said, "My dear ones, what is the use of asking me 
God is the guardian of all. He is the richest of all. Hence, pray to Him." As 
he was moving away, many coins started falling from the gold plate. The 
beggars collected those coins. 


The devotee went into a state of bliss and closed his eyes. He had the 
vision of Lord Visweswara. He prayed, "Oh Lord Visweswara, You are the 
master of the whole universe. Can't You take care of these poor people? 
Please shower Your grace on them." 


To pray for the welfare of all with selfless love is the noblest prayer. The 
devotee had no trace of selfishness in him. He prayed for others with 
selfless love. Hence, God was pleased with him. You should always pray in 
a selfless manner. Only such a prayer will melt God's heart. There is no 
point in praying to God with worldly objectives. God, who is the 
embodiment of love resides in our hridaya (heart). Hridaya is known as 
anahati. It is the bell that rings continuously. God residing in our heart 
keeps it ringing. We should listen to the sound of that bell. 


Our scriptures have prescribed nine paths of devotion 


Sravanam (listening), 

Kirtanam (singing), 

Vishnusmaranam (contemplating on Vishnu), 
Padasevanam (serving His Lotus Feet), 
Vandanam (salutation), 

Archanam (worship), 

Dasyam (servitude), 

Sneham (friendship), 

Atmanivedanam (self-surrender). 


Self-surrender is the true offering that you have to make to God. He is 
not interested in the worldly offerings you make. What you have to offer 
to God is the same heart that He has given you. 


O God, I offer the heart which You have given me. 
What else can I offer at Your Lotus Feet? 

Please accept my salutations. 

(Telugu Poem) 


God is not interested in the wealth you have earned or accumulated. He 
has no dearth of wealth. He is Vishnu Swarupa. When goddess of wealth 
Lakshmi herself resides on His chest, what is it that you can offer Him? 
The Pakshi Vahana (Lord Vishnu who has Garuda as His vehicle) has 
goddess Lakshmi on His chest. Why should He ask for bhiksha (alms) 


84 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


from others? Hence, you don't need to give anything to God. The sacred 
heart that He has given you should be given back to Him. 


Due to the effect of the Kali Age, people are not prepared to offer their 
heart to God which He has given them. They are offering the wealth they 
have accumulated. How can you make such a low and mean offering? You 
should offer your heart to God. That is called Anahata Dharma. This is the 
true treasure that we have to safeguard always. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Due to the effect of Kali Age, devotion and detachment have also become 
artificial. People are trying to please others, but not God. You have to 
undertake activities that are pleasing to God. If you go by your own likes 
and dislikes, how can God be pleased with you? What God likes the most 
is Anahata Prema. Your hridaya (heart) should overflow with love, 
sacrifice, and bliss. You may make any number of offerings, but if you do 
not offer your hridaya to God, He will not accept them. He may pretend to 
have accepted those offerings, but He will throw them away. You should 
offer Him that which pleases Him. That is hridaya, which is called Anahati. 
It is the centre of love and bliss. In fact, it is the basis of everything. If 
you do not offer such a sacred heart to God, what is the use of other 
offerings? God is not interested in such artificial offerings. If you come 
across poor people, give them what they require. If they are shivering in 
the cold, give them a blanket. You should give them what they need, but 
not what would you like to give them. 


In those days (Swami's school days), when we returned from the 
Bukkapatnam school in the evenings, mother Easwaramma would lovingly 
enquire as to what happened in the school that day. She had no formal 
education at all. One day the children told her, "Mother, today a teacher 
by name Kondappa made our Sathya stand upon the bench." They started 
criticising him. 


Mother Easwaramma intervened and said, "Children, you should not talk 
ill of your teacher. No teacher would punish his student without a proper 
reason. Our Sathya might have committed some mistake." Then she 
asked Me, "Sathya, what is the mistake You committed?" 


I told her the facts as they happened. Kondappa ordered, "Whoever has 
written the notes should place it on his table. Others should stand upon 
the bench." I had not written the notes. That was My mistake. Hence, I 
stood upon the bench. I also said something which was more than 
necessary. I said, "Sir, can all those boys who have taken down the notes 
answer your questions? Though I have not written the notes, I can 
answer any question that you may ask." 


85 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


Kondappa thought that I was egotistic and ordered Me to stand upon the 
bench for three periods. I obeyed him and stood upon the bench. 
Meanwhile, the other teacher, Mahboob Khan, came to the class. He was 
a Mohammaden and a noble person. He was pained to see Me standing on 
the bench. He asked, "Kondappa, why have you made this boy stand 
upon the bench?" 


"He has not taken down the notes, hence the punishment", said 
Kondappa. 


Mahboob Khan defended Me saying, "So what if He has not taken down 
the notes? He can answer all your questions, and that is enough. Ask Him 
to sit down." 


But Kondappa insisted that I should be punished as I had disobeyed his 
command. The bell rang and Kondappa had to go to another class. But he 
was unable to get up from the chair. Initially he thought that his dhoti had 
got entangled to a nail in the chair. But that was not the case. He was 
stuck to the chair! When he tried to get up from the chair, the chair also 
came along with him. 


Then Mahboob Khan said, "Kondappa, He is not an ordinary boy. He is 
one of great divine powers. You have punished Him without a proper 
reason. At least now, ask Him to sit down." 


Kondappa realised his mistake and told Me to sit down. Immediately, he 
could get up from the chair. 


When all this was narrated to mother Easwaramma, she said, "Dear 
Sathya, you should not punish your own guru (teacher)." 


I said, "I did not punish him; in fact, he punished himself." 


She imparted a sacred teaching to the children, saying, "My dear ones, 
you are going to school to study. Whatever you learn, put it to proper 
use. Only then will you be called truly educated and earn the appellation 
Sakshara. If you do not make proper use of your education, you become 
a rakshasa (demon). Make efforts to earn the title of Sakshara." 


Then she told Me, "Sathya! At any time and under any circumstances, do 
not cultivate hatred toward anybody. Love all and You will be loved by 
all." 


In fact, there is no trace of hatred or enmity in Me at any time. I love all. 
That is why everyone loves Me. If we do not love others, how can we 
expect others to love us? Give love and receive love. It is not a one-way 
traffic. You should give and take. 


86 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


In this manner, mother Easwaramma taught the children many sacred 
ideals. One need not have any formal education in order to impart such 
sacred teachings. There are many who are highly educated, but what is 
the use? They do not put their knowledge to proper use. Having received 
many sacred teachings, you should practise at least one of them. You 
perform worship and sing bhajans with devotion. It is enough if you 
practise and experience at least one word of the bhajans you sing. For 
example, you extol God as 'Premaswarupa' (embodiment of love). 
Accordingly, you should develop love and share it with others. Only then 
can you understand and experience divinity. 


Mother Easwaramma used to impart many noble teachings to the 
devotees when they gathered around her. I had given her a small room in 
Prasanthi Nilayam. Many ladies would go there and plead with her, 
"Mother, we have been here for a long time. Please tell Swami to grant us 
an interview." She would tell them, "My dear, Swami may look small to 
our eyes, but He does not listen to anyone. He will not act on 
recommendations. He will give you what you deserve. You should try to 
understand the divine principle of Swami." In this manner, she would give 
proper guidance to the devotees. 


One day she told Me, "Sathya! Your name and fame have spread far and 
wide. The whole world is coming to You. Please bestow peace on the 
world with Your Sankalpa (Will)." 


I told her, "It is not that I have to make a Sankalpa for world peace. Each 
one has to attain peace by himself, because man by nature is the 
embodiment of peace. He is the embodiment of truth. He is the 
embodiment of love." You have to manifest your love. You have to 
experience peace within. You have to follow the path of truth. Sathyam 
Vada, Dharmam Chara (speak truth and practise righteousness). You can 
achieve anything when you follow this principle. 


Since ancient times, there have been many noble mothers who have 
guided their children on the right path. The future of the nation rests in 
the hands of mothers. That is why one calls one's own country as 
motherland. Bharat (India) is the birthplace of many noble mothers. Our 
ancient culture has accorded first place to the mother. Father comes only 
next. Even on invitation cards we write Smt. and Sri. The husband may 
be highly educated and occupying a position of authority. He may be the 
president of the nation. Yet, we cannot write Sri and Srimati while 
sending an invitation. Srimati has to come first. Since ancient times, 
women are treated with great reverence and respect in Bharat. This land 
of Bharat is highly sacred. But unfortunately, people have lost love for 
their motherland. 


87 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


He is a true human being who loves his mother and becomes the recipient 
of his mother's love. One who cannot earn his mother's love is verily a 
demon. Hence, respect and revere you mother. Experience and enjoy 
your mother's love. Dedicate your life for the happiness of the mother. 
You may acquire any number of degrees; you may undertake any number 
of sacred activities; but all of them will prove futile if you do not please 
your mother. There is none superior to the mother in this world. The Veda 
has accorded the place of highest prominence to the mother when it 
declared, Matru Devo Bhava, Pitru Devo Bhava, Acharya Devo Bhava, 
Atithi Devo Bhava (revere your mother, father, preceptor, and guest as 
God). There may be a son in this world who does not love his mother, but 
there cannot be a mother who does not love her son. There may be 
differences of opinion between them, but the motherly love will never 
diminish. 


Embodiments of Love! 


It is your foremost duty to love your mother. As soon as you wake up in 
the morning, the first thing you should do is to touch your mother's feet 
and offer your salutations. Such a noble practice will protect you always 
and bestow on you all types of wealth. 


Students, Boys and Girls! 


You are going to be fathers and mothers in future. You will be loved and 
respected by your children only when you love and respect your parents 
now. You are bound to face the reaction, resound, and reflection of your 
actions. When you respect your parents, there will be rich rewards for you 
in the future. 


Today we are celebrating Easwaramma Day. I want to tell you an incident 
that speaks of her immense compassion and love for children. In those 
days, students from various States and countries attended Summer 
Classes. Gokak, who used to conduct the classes, was a strict 
disciplinarian. He was a man of great character and sacrifice. He was a 
great academician too. He was conducting the classes in an exemplary 
manner. One day, the students were having lunch in the dining hall. One 
of the boys got up and went outside before others could finish their 
meals. Gokak, who watched this through the window, called him and 
chided him for his act of indiscipline. "When your fellow students are 
having their food, you should not get up in the middle even though you 
have completed your meals. It amounts to insulting them." Saying so, 
Gokak suspended him from the classes. The boy was in tears, but Gokak 
was not moved. 


The boy came to mother Easwaramma's room, fell at her feet and started 
crying. He told her about the harsh punishment meted out to him by 


88 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


Gokak. He pleaded with her to come to his rescue. Easwaramma consoled 
him and sent him away. She was sitting on the steps where Gokak would 
pass by. After a while Gokak came there. She offered her Namaskar to 
him and he reciprocated the same most reverentially. Then she said, 
"When I did Namaskar to you, you reciprocated the same. In the same 
manner, if you punish others, you will be punished in return. The boy out 
of his innocence has done a mistake. Please forgive him and allow him to 
attend the classes." 


Then Gokak replied, "Mother, if I forgive him, it would set a bad 
precedent for others. Anyway, I will forgive him only for your sake." In 
this manner, she would go out of her way to help and provide comfort 
and solace to others. 


You are bound to face the consequences of your actions. If you talk to 
others in a harsh manner, it will come back to you as resound. If you hit 
others, it will come back to you as reflection. Hence, do not hurt others. 
Do good, be good, see good, and speak good. Then, you will be blessed 
with rich rewards. Though mother Easwaramma had no formal education, 
she conducted herself in an exemplary manner. She was one of profound 
wisdom. The teaching that mother Easwaramma imparted remained 
etched in the heart of Gokak. Later on when he came as Vice Chancellor 
to Puttaparthi, he used to recollect her words of wisdom. He would 
remember her everyday. He would say, "I see Easwaramma in my dream 
quite often. I follow her advice implicitly." 


We should not criticise others. We should not hurt others or make fun of 
them. We should love all. This is what mother Easwaramma taught 
everybody. Do your duty sincerely. Then, you will certainly progress in 
life. Whoever he may be, follow the sacred teachings of our elders. People 
attribute certain teachings to Rama, Krishna, and so on and so forth. It 
does not matter whether it is Rama or Krishna; enquire what, why, when, 
where, and under what circumstances they had given those teachings. 
You should remember the context in which those teachings were imparted 
and act accordingly. When you obey the command of elders and divine 
personalities, you will certainly attain exalted position in life. 


Many students do not pay heed to the words of their mother. It is a grave 
mistake. Mothers speak from their heart wishing the welfare of their 
children. You should understand their feelings and give due respect to 
their words. 


Embodiments of Love! Boys and Girls 
Obey the commands of your parents. You will certainly be blessed with all 
types of education and strength. You do not need to make any special 


efforts to acquire them. Discharge your duty sincerely. Never disregard 


89 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


the words of your parents. Follow them with love and sanctify your life. 
Wishing that you give happiness to your parents and thereby set an ideal 
to your children, I bless you all and bring My discourse to a close. 


(Bhagawan concluded His Discourse with the bhajan "Sathyam Jnanam 
Anantham Brahma"). 


Date: 06 May 2003, Occasion: Easwaramma Day, Place: 
Brindavan 


90 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


11. SPIRIT OF SACRIFICE IS THE 
HALLMARK OF A TRUE DOCTOR 


Date: 05 July 2003 Occasion: Doctors' Day Place: Brindavan 


If you look to Me, I will look to you. 


Forbearance is the real beauty in this sacred land 
of Bharat (India). Of all the rituals, adherence to 
truth is the greatest penance. The nectarous 
feeling in this country is the feeling of love toward 
one's mother. Character is valued far higher than 
the very life itself. People have forgotten the basic 
principles of this great culture and are imitating 
Western culture. Alas! The Bharatiyas (Indians) 
are not aware of the greatness of their cultural 
heritage just as a mighty elephant is not aware of 
its own strength. (Telugu poem) 


Embodiments of Love! 


Man is born in action, is sustained by action and ultimately 
merges in action. 

Action is the cause of pleasure and pain. 

Truly speaking, action is God for man. (Telugu Poem) 


Man by and large considers himself to be healthy and tries to lead a 
happy life. But in fact there are 326 diseases that haunt man day in and 
day out. Excessive vaata, pittha, and sleshma (wind, bile, and phlegm) 
are responsible for various diseases. Vaata gives rise to 80 types of 
diseases, pittha to 82 types, and sleshma to 164 types. Such being the 
case, how can man enjoy a healthy life? Only when he develops Atmic 
Consciousness and distances himself from the adverse effects 

of vaata, pittha, and sleshma can he be healthy. 


For the past one month, you could not see Swami. What is the reason for 
this? It is because of the indisposition of this body. I have neither taken 
upon Myself the illness of anybody nor has it emerged from this body. 
Today, I am revealing the truth to you. 


The body is made up of five elements and 
is bound to perish sooner or later, 
but the indweller has neither birth nor death. 


91 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


He has no attachment whatsoever. 
Truly speaking, the indweller is verily God Himself, 
who is in the form of the Atma. (Telugu Poem) 


Man is always concerned about his health. He has become a victim of 
various ailments as he is steeped in body consciousness rather than Atmic 
principle. It is very essential for man to realise that diseases underscore 
the need for getting rid of body consciousness. 


You are all aware of the fact that Swami fractured His hip, and it was in 
three pieces. The ball in the hip was in two pieces. The pain was so 
excruciating that it cannot be described in words. It was impossible to 
move this way or that way. It pierced the body as if it were an electric 
shock. But I was unaffected by it. I underwent all this suffering only to 
demonstrate that one should not be attached to the body. Instead, one 
should develop divine consciousness. I am not this body. Body 
consciousness leads to untold suffering. One has to get rid of body 
attachment in order to enjoy peace and happiness. What is this body 
composed of? 


This body is a den of dirt and prone to diseases; 

it is subject to change from time to time; 

it cannot cross the ocean of Samsara. 

It is nothing but a structure of bones. 

O mind, do not be under the delusion that body is permanent. 
Instead, take refuge at the Divine Lotus Feet. (Telugu Poem) 


Dehabhimana (body consciousness) will disappear once you develop 
Daivabhimana (Divine Consciousness). The first step on the spiritual path 
is to keep body consciousness under check. You are subjected to misery 
because you are immersed in body consciousness. Body consciousness 
and Atmic consciousness are inversely proportional. Nobody can escape 
the consequences of karma (action). Karma is the cause for birth and 
death. 


The Bhagavad Gita declares: 


Karmanyevadhikaarasthe Maaphaleshu Kadhachana. 
Man has right over action but not over the fruits of action. 


Karmanubandheeni Manushya Loke. 
Human society is bound by action. 


Man should develop Atmic consciousness and plunge into the field of 
action without aspiring for the rewards. Dharmaraja, eldest among the 
Pandavas, was the very embodiment of righteousness. Yet, he had to 
undergo the ordeals in the court of King Virata as a result of karma. 


92 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


Were not the mighty Pandavas compelled to go into exile and 
lead a life full of troubles? 

Did not emperor Harischandra, having lost his kingdom, 
become caretaker of a graveyard? 


Everyone is bound to face the consequences of their action. However, 
man does have the capacity to escape from the consequences of karma. 
He has become weak since he is unable to harness his innate potential 
due to body attachment. Having assumed a human body, one cannot 
escape from suffering. Body is momentary, like a water bubble. 


I was all smiles when I was being taken to hospital. Many doctors 
surrounded Me at the hospital. They were anxious. I told them not to 
worry. "This body is not Mine. It is yours. You can do whatever you deem 
fit to this body. I have no pain whatsoever.", I assured them. I came back 
after three hours. I was full of smiles. A true spiritual aspirant is one who 
undergoes difficulties with a positive frame of mind. Do not care for the 
suffering of the body. Suffering is quite natural to human body. One has 
to face suffering with Atma balam (will power). 


Today, being Doctors' Day, doctors have to set an ideal by infusing 
courage and conviction in patients. Doctors, after putting in lot of efforts, 
have been able to find remedies for various ailments. But there seems to 
be no end to diseases. There are many doctors all over the world, but the 
number of patients and ailments are on the rise. If there are two doctors 
for a family, there are four patients! Patients outnumber doctors. Man's 
lifestyle and habits are responsible for this spurt in diseases. 


After the surgery, I was able to walk within a short span of three days. 
The reason being I have no body attachment. I see all of you with Atmic 
consciousness and hence am blissful. I teach everyone, "My dear! don't 
fall a prey to body attachment; develop Atmic consciousness and lead a 
blissful life". Your Aananda (bliss) is My aahaara (food) and aarogya 
(health). You call a person healthy when all their limbs are functioning 
properly. All the organs of My body are functioning effectively. 


Physical afflictions are temporary, like passing clouds. 


Life is a Challenge, Meet It; 
Life is Love, Enjoy It; 
Life is a Game, Play It. 


You have to play the game of life in the right spirit. I have been doing the 
same. I have absolutely no pain. Generally, the pain arising out of hip 
fracture is unbearable. But I am unaffected by injury to any organ of the 
body, let alone the hip. Suffering arises when you identify yourself with 
the body. I have no pains since I have no body attachment. I take delight 


93 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


in your love. Your prayers are responsible for My speedy recovery. In all 
the corners of the world devotees have been praying intensely. Through 
prayer you can achieve the impossible. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Gradually give up body attachment. Develop Atmic consciousness. Atma 
alone is true and eternal. Atma is our life. Everything else is a passing 
cloud. Today, we are celebrating Doctors' Day. This is the day when 
doctors rededicate themselves to the alleviation of suffering. There are 
very few doctors who discharge their duties with a spirit of sacrifice, 
keeping the welfare of patients as their sole objective. 


Dr. Sundareshan took great pains to ensure the well-being of Swami. He 
was monitoring Swami's progress every moment. I was telling repeatedly, 
"Sundareshan, I am all right, do not worry." But he would not be 
satisfied. He would keep on enquiring about My welfare; whether I had 
pain in any part of the body. He is equally concerned about the welfare of 
other patients. When one of our college students met with a motorcycle 
accident, Dr. Sundareshan used to monitor his progress day in and day 
out. He used to make frequent visits to Puttaparthi without taking any 
rest just to treat that patient. If all doctors in the world were to be like 
Dr. Sundareshan, there would not be any disease at all. Today diseases 
are on the rise because doctors have become money-minded. 


One day, nine years ago, after having a head bath, I wanted to dry My 
hair. One of the American doctors had lovingly presented a hair-drier to 
Me. When I was trying to use the same, the power supply was cut off. It 
was restored when I was having a close look at the drier. Consequently, a 
sudden gust of hot air ripped through My eye damaging the retina. I was 
not the least perturbed. One eye is sufficient to see this wide world. 


Sahasra Seersha Purusha, 
Sahasraksha Sahasra Pad. 
God has a thousand heads, eyes, and feet. 


Dr. Hemanth Murthy (ophthalmic surgeon) pleaded with Me to undergo an 
eye operation as well, along with the hip surgery. The damaged retina, 
which was removed from My eye, was as dark as charcoal. Since then I 
am able to see clearly with both My eyes. With such doctors around, any 
surgery can be performed successfully. Eye surgeons like Dr. Hemanth 
Murthy and orthopaedic surgeons like Dr.GSundareshan are few in number 
in this world. Such doctors should be given all encouragement and 
support. Even the government is unable to provide the necessary 
infrastructure. Consequently the doctors are handicapped and are unable 
to give their best. Doctors' Day is being observed to encourage and 
motivate these doctors. However skilled a doctor may be, he cannot 


94 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


discharge his duties diligently unless he is provided with proper 
equipment. Swami's intention is to support and encourage such doctors 
by providing the necessary facilities. 


Health and education are the two most important aspects of life. One can 
put knowledge into practice only when one has good health. 


Embodiments of Love! 


In today's world, many people are suffering for want of proper medical 
facilities. It is your bounden duty to help the suffering humanity. Only 
then will the country prosper. Money comes and goes; Morality comes and 
grows. Today many doctors are commercializing the field of medicine. 
Such doctors are sinners of the worst kind. He is a true doctor who 
aspires for the well-being of the patient. We have to encourage such 
noble doctors. 


Embodiments of Love! 


One has to take good care of one's health with proper food and habits. 
There are many poor people in our country who lack the basic necessities 
of food, raiment, and shelter. Who will take care of them when they are 
afflicted with diseases? Our hospitals are doing yeoman service to 
suffering humanity. Do not think that I am lavishing praises on our own 
hospitals. You can see it for yourself when you visit these hospitals. If you 
go to our General Hospitals and Super-Speciality hospitals, you will find a 
number of poor people being treated for various ailments totally free of 
cost. Elsewhere, the Super-Speciality hospitals are established with 
commercial motives. They collect fees even to check the temperature of a 
patient. How can the poor afford such costly treatment? Doctors should 
render free service to patients to the extent possible. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Doctors should serve the poor with spirit of sacrifice. There is no greater 
service than this. God is the sole refuge of the destitute and the forlorn. 
As man is the embodiment of God, it is his primary duty to help the 
destitute and the forlorn. Medicine should not be commercialised. It is 
meant to promote heart to heart and love to love relationship between 
doctor and patient. A true doctor is one who realises this truth and 
conducts himself accordingly. One with commercial outlook is not a doctor 
at all. In fact, he is a patient himself! Spirit of sacrifice is the hallmark of 
a true doctor. 


The doctors who are working in our hospitals are endowed with that spirit 
of sacrifice. Dr. Savitri and others are working tirelessly day in and day 
out in our General Hospital. I often tell them, "take proper care of your 


95 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


health in the first instance. Only then can you serve the patients more 
effectively." How can you look after the patients if your health is spoiled? 
Our Principal in his speech mentioned the axiom: Vaidyo Narayano Harihi 
(doctor is verily God). Being the very embodiment of Lord Narayana, the 
doctor should serve everyone. God is ever engaged in service. 


Paropakaraya Punyaya 

Papaya Parapeedanam 

One attains merit by serving others and commits sin by 
hurting them. 


One need not be a doctor in order to serve others. One should help one's 
fellow beings to the best of one's ability. We have established hospitals at 
various places like Puttaparthi, Bangalore, Alike, Muddenahalli, etc. I feel 
very happy to see the doctors working there with great dedication. We 
have opened a hospital in Alike quite recently, which is catering to the 
needs of many poor patients. I am thrilled whenever I see their happy 
faces. Their happiness gives me immense strength. 


Only through service, can one become the recipient of divine Grace. Life is 
meaningless if one does not participate in service activities. The best way 
to love God is to serve God. You should aspire for the welfare of all and 
follow the path of Love and Service. Only then will your life find fulfilment. 


There is a General Hospital at Puttaparthi. There is one more at 
Whitefield. Amazing cures are taking place in these hospitals. It is the 
happiness of the patients that gives Me happiness and health. If you 
aspire for the health and happiness of Swami, look after the patients well. 
The patients’ welfare must be your topmost priority. Serve them with 
dedication. Service to patients is service to God. There is no service 
higher than this. 


Celebration of doctors' day will be meaningful only if service activities are 
undertaken with dedication and not merely by donning grand attire. As 
you are aware, Dr. Savitri and Dr. Santha are doing yeoman service in 
our General Hospital here. Several other doctors also come from city 
regularly and render voluntary service. 

[The programme concluded with singing of the National Anthem. ] 


Date: 05 July 2003, Occasion: Doctors' Day, Place: Brindavan 


96 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


12. CAST OFF BODY ATTACHMENT ‘TO 
DEVELOP ATMIC CONSCIOUSNESS 


Date: 13 July 2003 Occasion: Guru Purnima Place: Prasanthi Nilayam 


Embodiments of Love! 


The entire universe has been created out of the Will of God. God creates 
the universe and sustains it. The universe ultimately merges in God, the 
source of its origin. The universe, which has originated from Divine Will, is 
known as Viswam. The correct meaning of Viswam is that which is self- 
expansive and full of bliss. God has created the universe with a purpose, 
but man is acting contrary to it. Viswam is not merely a manifestation of 
physical matter. It is a direct manifestation of God. It is the very 
embodiment of the Cosmic Personality, with all His limbs. The Viswa 
symbolises the expansive nature of God, which can be understood only 
through viveka (discrimination). God is beyond time and cause. The 
physical world functions by so-called reason, but the Divine Will is not 
bound by reason. God is the primal cause behind the universe. The 
universe is the reflection of God. Viswam and Vishnu are not different 
from each other. The letter 'V' in the name Vishnu stands for Viveka and 
Vistara (expansiveness). Hence, Viswam is the very form of Vishnu. The 
entire creation constitutes various limbs of God. 


Every object in the creation has five aspects, namely, sath, chit, ananda, 
rupa, and nama (existence, consciousness, bliss, form, and name). The 
first three are eternal principles, whereas name and form are ephemeral. 
Sath, chit, and ananda are the basis for name and form. All human 
activities are based on name and form. It is God who decides who has to 
do what. Some people are rajasic (passionate, active) in nature and some 
others are thamasic (slothful, dull). Evil qualities like hatred and jealousy 
are predominant in such people. 


People attribute various names and forms to God on the basis of their 
own feelings. They forget the three main principles of sath, chit, 

and ananda and assume name and form to be the sole reality. In reality, 
name and form are not permanent. But people are overwhelmed by name 
and form and ignore the eternal principles of sath, chit, and ananda. 
Consequently, they are deluded and tend to forget the mighty power of 
God behind the name and form. He is called Padmanabha (One who has a 
lotus emerging from His navel). Here, the lotus represents the Divine 
Sankalpa (Will). He is also called Hiranyagarbha, since He has a golden 
womb. He is known as Vaastha, since He is present in the form of 'T' in all 
beings. The principle of 'I' is all-pervasive. 


a 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


God has no specific name. All names are attributed by man to God. Each 
name, like Padmanabha, Hiranyagarbha, and Hiranmaya, has a profound 
inner meaning. Spirituality is meant to explain the principle of Divinity 
and the inner meaning of the names attributed to Him. One who follows 
the spiritual path should make efforts to understand and experience the 
principle of Divinity and propagate the same. But, man today has not 
really understood what spirituality means. He is under the mistaken 
notion that spirituality means merely offering worship and prayers to God 
and performing rituals. People should be taught the inner significance of 
spirituality and various names and forms attributed to Divinity. 


In 1968, the First World Conference of Sathya Sai Seva Organisations was 
held in Bombay (now Mumbai). It was the time when the foundation 
stone of Dharmakshetra was laid. Indulal Shah was mainly responsible for 
the construction of Dharmakshetra. He has been working tirelessly for the 
propagation of Swami's message. His wife Sarla Shah has been a source 
of strength to him. She played an active role in the development of bal 
vikas and mahila vibhag. In this manner, both husband and wife have 
contributed to a great extent for the furtherance of Sai movement in the 
entire world. Even at this advanced age, they are exerting a lot in the 
service of Sai Organisation. 


It is not possible for all to understand the nature of Divinity. This world 
looks like a picture painted on a wall that has no support. One has to 
make efforts to understand the principles of adhara (basis) and adheya 
(object). Do not waste your time in merely performing rituals. True 
spirituality lies in realising the truth that man is but a spark of Divinity. 
This is what is declared in the Bhagavad Gita: Mamaivamsho Jivaloke 
Jivabhuta Sanathana (all beings are a part of My eternal Being). 
Vaasudeva-sarvamidam (the whole world is permeated by God, 
Vaasudeva). You have to experience this truth and propagate to the 
world. 


Many Sai centres are established all over the world. Each centre has a 
history of its own. Dharmakshetra is no exception to this. Only Swami 
knows the innumerable difficulties that Indulal Shah faced during the 
construction of Dnarmakshetra. In those days, there were no approach 
roads to the place where Dharmakshetra stands now. He had to walk 
through thorny bushes to select a suitable site for the construction of 
Dharmakshetra. He showed Me the place for approval. It is situated on 
the Mahakali Caves road. He worked hard for its construction. Many 
people helped him in the fulfilment of this task. 


It is not possible to undertake a work of this magnitude without the help 
of others. When you undertake a good work there are bound to be certain 
obstacles in the beginning. But you should not lose heart. When the ocean 
of milk was churned by devas (gods) and danavas (demons), it was a 


98 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


deadly poison that emerged first. But that did not deter them. They 
continued their efforts with unflinching determination, and ultimately 
obtained the divine ambrosia. Our heart can be compared to the ocean of 
milk and the sadhana (spiritual practices) to the process of churning. 
Initially, there are bound to be obstacles when you undertake sadhana. 
We should not be deflected by these obstacles but should continue our 
efforts with full faith. Only then can we attain an exalted and blissful 
state. Many individuals in the past had to put up with a lot of difficulties 
while constructing pilgrimage centres. Bhadrachalam is one such 
pilgrimage centre. Adi Sankara, unmindful of the physical strain, walked 
all the way from the deep south to the north to establish pilgrimage 
centres at Badrinath, Amarnath, and Kedarnath. 


No matter who one is, one has necessarily to enlist the cooperation of 
others to accomplish stupendous tasks. Where there is unity, there is 
bliss. In this age of Kali, people have that spirit of unity no longer. There 
is neither unity nor purity. Hence, enmity has found a place in the human 
heart giving rise to troubles and turmoil. In fact, unity is the need of the 
hour. The true strength of humanity lies in unity. As the thought, so is the 
action. As the action, so is the result. Today, man is unable to reach the 
goal of his life because he does not entertain sacred thoughts. In the first 
instance, he should develop sacred thoughts. 


There are many who have deluded themselves that they love God. But 
they are full of body consciousness and crave for money and material 
things. Such love cannot be true love at all. It is artificial love. Many 
people write to Me, "Swami we love You. Please keep us near and dear to 
You." In this context, let Me emphatically tell you that Sai cannot be 
attained so easily. You may say that you love Me. But how can I believe 
you? Is there a spirit of sacrifice in your love? There is no consistency in 
your words and deeds. You make a promise one day and go back on it the 
very next day. How can one believe the love of such impostors? 


True and eternal love originates from the heart. Real love is a heart to 
heart relationship. It is associated with the Atmic principle, which is 
present in everyone. Atma is the source of consciousness. Atma and 
Brahma are one and the same. The love that originates from the heart 
confers on you the eternal, immortal and non-dual bliss. 


But where is such love nowadays? You are heroes in speech but zeros in 
practice. Today, the world is being duped by such people. Those who have 
true love in their heart will not indulge in tall talk. They demonstrate their 
love in action. Today people speak a lot without translating their speech 
into action. Such people are verily thieves. How can you attain the goal of 
life if you believe in such unscrupulous people and rely on them? 


99 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


Your heart should melt and flow toward God. Only then can you attain His 
grace. People may talk as they please; do not be carried away by them. 
Unmindful of hardships and difficulties, hold on to the principle of divinity 
and reach the goal of life. Today, people lack the will and determination to 
reach the goal of life. How can those who do not understand the goal of 
life, attain it? True love cannot be fragmented. One cannot have love for 
God as well as for ephemeral objects and relationships. The love which is 
fragmented is artificial only. You have only one heart. You cannot break it 
into pieces and distribute to various people. It is not like a laddoo or 
sugar cane, which can be broken into pieces and distributed. It is the 
eternal truth. It is nectarous and full of bliss. Ignoring the immortal bliss 
within, people tread the worldly path thinking that bliss lies therein. It is 
only a figment of their imagination. He is a true devotee who makes 
efforts to attain God with full faith and determination without caring for 
trials and tribulations. 


Having resolved what ought to be resolved, hold on to it till 

you have succeeded. 

Having desired what ought to be desired, hold on to it till your 

desire is fulfilled. 

Having asked what ought to be asked, do not leave the hold 

till you get it. 

Having thought what ought to be thought, hold on to it till you 

have succeeded. 

With heart mellowed, the Lord must yield to your wishes. 

With no thought of yourself, ask Him with all your heart. 

Persevere, be tenacious, and never give up, for it is the 
quality of a devotee never to retreat, abandoning the 

resolve. 

(Telugu Poem) 


Devotees of modern times are trying to hoodwink even God with sweet 
talk and artificial love. Such people can never attain God. You should have 
unwavering faith. Even in times of dangers and difficulties, your faith 
should remain steady. God can be experienced only in times of difficulties. 
Kashte phali (hard work yields rich rewards). It is also said, Na sukhat 
labhyate sukham (one cannot derive happiness out of happiness). 
Consider difficulties as God's gifts and accept them in the right spirit. 


Sarla Amma and Indulal Shah had to face innumerable difficulties those 
days. They overcame all those with courage and fortitude. They reside in 
Bombay (now Mumbai) which is not an ordinary place. It is like a 'bomb'. 
Whatever you do, be it good or bad, you have to face difficulties. Being in 
such a place, they did good work. In fact, Indulal Shah was troubled by 
many. But he continued his work with unwavering devotion and achieved 
success. You need to have God's grace to accomplish anything. You 
cannot but seek the help and cooperation of others to fulfil a mighty task. 


100 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


Those who are engaged in God's work must be prepared to face any 
obstacle. Indulal Shah's life bears ample testimony to this. He has been 
serving Sai for the last forty years with strong faith and determination. He 
went round the world propagating the message of Sai. Whenever people 
approached him with doubts, he would give most appropriate answers 
and clear their doubts. One should be prepared to take up any challenge, 
be it worldly or spiritual. They have spent a great amount of their physical 
energy working tirelessly for the Organisation. 


I want to share a small incident with you. Last month, Sri Shah had come 
to Brindavan to see Me. He saw Me resting on the bed and felt very sad. 
He did not tell it outwardly, but he was praying within that Swami should 
get well soon. He did not have proper food and sleep during the last one 
month because he was constantly worried about Swami's well-being. 
Consequently, his body became weak. Otherwise, he always maintains 
good health. He has a number of plans for the future of the Organisation. 
He is praying that Swami should give the necessary strength to 
implement those plans. Both Sarla Amma and Indulal Shah were very 
anxious about Swami's health and were all the time thinking of Swami. 
They do not go by what others say. They depend on their own conviction. 


Nobody needs to be worried or anxious about Swami's well-being. No 
danger can ever befall Swami. Swami comes out of all difficulties and 
troubles unscathed. He will achieve all success. There may be some 
changes at the physical level. They are only temporary and not 
permanent. Hence, Swami wants all of you to be courageous. Now I have 
recovered and am standing before you. 


What medicine did I use? The intense prayers of the devotees are My 
medicine. During the last one month, be it in Madras (now Chennai), 
Hyderabad, Bangalore, or Mumbai, devotees have intensified their prayers 
and spiritual activities. Each and every house conducted bhajans and 
Namasmarana. Some devotees undertook penance and performed Yajnas. 
In this manner, a number of spiritual activities were undertaken praying 
for the well-being of Swami. It is as a result of such fervent prayers that I 
am able to stand before you and address you. Neither did I want this 
suffering nor did I desire its cure. You wanted this body to be cured of the 
pain, and you achieved it through your prayers. This body is not Mine. It 
is yours. Hence, it is your responsibility to look after this body. I am not 
the deha (body); I am the Dehi (Indweller). 


The body is made up of five elements and is bound to perish 
sooner or later, 

but the Indweller has neither birth nor death. 
The Indweller has no attachment whatsoever and is the 
eternal witness. 
Truly speaking, the Indweller, who is in the form of the Atma, 


101 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


is verily God Himself. 
(Telugu Poem) 


The Atma has neither birth nor death. It has no pain or suffering. You 
may not believe it, but the doctors have seen the extent of injury to My 
hip. For anybody else, it would have taken at least two to three years to 
walk normally. The ball in the hip joint broke into pieces. There were no 
muscles for support. My bones are as strong as diamonds. It was not 
possible to join them together. Hence, they put a rod and performed the 
surgery. After undergoing such a complicated surgery, it takes a number 
of years to walk normally. Without caring for all this, I started walking. 
Doctors made every effort to protect this body. They did their duty. But I 
did not think of this body at all. I demonstrate the ideal that one should 
not have body attachment. Not only now, for the last two years, I have 
been repeatedly exhorting you to give up body attachment. Gradually 
reduce your dehabhimana (body consciousness) and develop 
Atmabhimana (Atmic consciousness). You are not the body; you are the 
embodiments of the Atma. The physical body comes and goes. The body 
only has suffering, not the Atma. 


When I fractured My hip, it was not possible to even move My leg. The 
slightest movement caused excruciating pain like that of an electric shock. 
I told the doctors, "This is not My body. This is yours. You may do 
whatever you deem fit." One who has given up body consciousness will 
have no suffering at all. 


Satyajit was with Swami all the time. He has a strong determination and 
has taken a vow to be with Swami always. When I was being taken to the 
hospital in a van, he sat right near My head. When I was taken into the 
operation theatre, he followed. Usually, when surgery is done, nobody is 
allowed into the operation theatre. But Satyajit did not want to leave 
Swami. He wanted to see what the doctors would do to Swami's body. 
Hence, he wore the surgeon's dress and entered the operation theatre. I 
told Satyajit, "You will not be able to bear the sight of blood. Hence, you 
remain outside." But he lovingly insisted that he might be allowed to stay 
inside. He was with Me at the time of operation. He saw the doctor 
making a hole in the bone with a hammer. After the operation was over, 
he asked, "Swami, how could you bear such pain and suffering?" I told, 
"The love of devotees like you is My strength." The power of love is the 
ultimate. You can overcome any pain or danger with the power of love. 


You should have strong and unwavering faith without even a trace of 
doubt. Your thoughts, words, and deeds must be in harmony with each 
other. Many devotees who have such strong and steady faith became 
recipients of Swami's grace. During the last month, bhajans were held in 
every village. Their only prayer was that Swami should recover quickly 
and grant them darshan. Swami's well-being was uppermost in 


102 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


everybody's mind. I received lakhs of telegrams from devotees wishing 
for My speedy recovery. Many devotees were very anxious and were 
praying within. Their anxiety turned into penance. The power of their 
penance bestowed good health on Swami. It is because of their love and 
devotion that Swami is hale and healthy now. I have never used My 
divine power to cure Myself. If I were to use it, I would have been cured 
of the suffering in a trice. I don't have the selfish feeling that I should get 
cured. There is not even a trace of selfishness in Me. Everyone should be 
happy. This is My only desire. 


Everybody should experience happiness. This is the essence of the culture 
of Bhar (India). This is the Age of Kali. In this age, people will have 
several doubts, particularly the younger generation who are highly 
educated --post-graduates and double graduates. It is but natural that 
under the influence of the Kali Age and with their modern educational 
background, the younger generation will not be able to develop firm faith 
in Divinity. 


During midnight, at the odd hour of 1 o' clock or 2 o'clock when I get up 
from the bed and look around, I find these two boys Satyajit and Dilip 
sitting one near My head and the other at My feet, safely guarding this 
body. One of the boys, Dilip is working in the Super Speciality Hospital 
here. He had a fracture recently in his leg and it was still in a plaster cast. 
In spite of that, he came over to Bangalore, the morning he heard of 
Swami's indisposition, to serve Swami. Both these boys were attending to 
the needs of Swami with great devotion. I can emphatically say that none 
can equal them in their love and devotion to Swami. People may pay lip 
service, uttering the word ‘love’, 'love' mechanically; but no one can do 
such a great service as these two boys have done. 


Even at an odd hour, if I just utter the word 'Satya’ in a feeble voice, the 
boy would immediately get up and attend to My needs. He was so alert 
and attentive. They used to attend to all My needs, including feeding Me. 
In fact, they completely forgot their own personal needs while serving 
Swami. All this is due to the great merit accumulated by their parents. It 
is only because of their parents' devotion to God and the merit 
accumulated by them that these boys are able to cultivate such noble 
feelings of devotion and service. Therefore, the parents should first 
become devotees of God. 


I used to tell these boys often that I was feeling better and that they 
could go and take food. But they would not leave Me. Whenever they 
received any phone call from devotees making anxious enquiries about 
Swami's condition, they simply used to reply that Swami was fine. Never 
did they give any details. They used to answer the queries of devotees 
with great love and tact. How did they acquire such great love and tact? 
Not because of higher education or age. It is only because of their intense 


103 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


devotion and faith in Swami. That is the real quality. Basing on such a 
noble quality, they did great service to Swami. There are several people 
ready to undertake Swami's service, provided they got an opportunity. 
But, none could get such an opportunity. They got this unique opportunity 
and they made the best use of it. What greater sadhana (spiritual 
discipline) could there be than serving Swami? What greater fulfilment 
could there be than Swami acknowledging their love? You will not find 
people doing such great service for a full month continuously, day and 
night, at such a young age. Several people may talk of love and service, 
but you will not find such loving and devoted boys. I have seen great 
faith, devotion and steadfastness in these boys. That is why they are able 
to win the heart of Swami. With faith and devotion, one can achieve great 
tasks, even lifting a mountain. 


Take the example of Hanuman. When Lakshmana fainted in the 
battlefield, Rama was in great distress. Then Hanuman was sent to bring 
the Sanjeevani herb to revive Lakshmana. Hanuman did not know where 
exactly the herb was. Therefore, he lifted the whole mountain on which 
the herb existed and placed it before Rama. Similarly, a devotee of God 
must be prepared to undertake any service, however mighty the task may 
be. Generally, people will have a tendency to run away from difficulties 
and rush forward to enjoy happiness. That should not be. One must be 
prepared for anything. The human body is susceptible to several diseases 
and difficulties. You should not get depressed by them. You must develop 
firm faith in Divinity. That viswasa (faith) must be your swasa (breath). 


Today, I am able to stand before you and give a discourse, only because 
of the great service rendered by these two boys. 


I must tell you one more thing. Millions of people all over the world during 
the period of Swami's indisposition have ceaselessly prayed for Swami's 
speedy recovery. Several people have undertaken several vratas 
(religious vows). Countless telegrams and telephonic enquiries have been 
received about Swami's health. Particularly, Geetha Reddy, chairperson of 
the Andhra Pradesh Congress (Mahila Vibhag) stayed for one full month in 
Brindavan praying for Swami's welfare and hoping to have His darshan 
somehow. Because nobody was allowed at that time into Swami's 
residence, she could not get an opportunity to have His darshan. 
Nevertheless she stayed back with a firm determination, even though she 
had pressing engagements in Hyderabad. She was almost shuttling 
between Bangalore and Hyderabad daily by aeroplane during that period. 
She did not even care for the huge expenditure involved and the 
difficulties at home. What she wanted and craved for was Swami's speedy 
recovery. She considered Swami as her very life. That is real love and 
devotion, which can please Swami. Devotion and surrender to God can 
cure any amount of suffering. 


104 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


Another small incident I wish to reveal to you. There was a patient in the 
U.S.A. She was extremely afraid of the disease diagnosed by the doctors. 
The diagnosis revealed that she had cancerous growth in the heart region. 
She and her husband came to Bangalore praying for Swami's grace. I 
assured them that I would cancel the cancer and that they should not 
have any fear in the matter. She took treatment for one week and the 
cancer disappeared! A little malignant portion was left and I instructed the 
doctors to remove it by surgery. The doctors performed the surgery as 
instructed by Me. On the very next day she started walking! She is now 
quite normal and healthy. 


There are several such cases. The chanting of the Divine Name can cure 
even the most incurable disease. That is exactly what she has done. The 
lady is in the habit of chanting the Divine Name "Sairam", "Sairam" 
continuously. There are several such people who chant the Divine Name. I 
have cured several people of the most dreaded and incurable diseases. 
There are also a number of people whom I have helped in ever-so-many 
ways. All of them have now prayed for My recovery. It is only their 
prayers that helped My speedy recovery. 


Not only this, I lost vision in my left eye some 9 years ago. All these 
years I was seeing with one eye only. Now the doctors in our hospital, 
and also Narasimha Murthy (Warden of Sri Sathya Sai College Hostel, 
Brindavan), prayed that I should undergo an operation for the left eye, 
along with the operation for the hip bone. I told them that since I was 
able to manage with one eye, so there was no necessity for operation to 
the second eye. But they prayed and prevailed upon Me to undergo the 
eye operation. 


When I wanted to come down to the Sai Kulwant Hall in Prasanthi 
Nilayam at 7.00 a.m., to give darshan to the devotees, Satyajit prayed 
that I must slightly postpone My darshan to 7.30 a.m., keeping in view 
the physical strain I would have to undergo in early morning darshan. 
Thus, he is anxious about My welfare every moment. Not only he; there 
are several such devotees with noble thoughts. That is why, Saint 
Thyagaraja sang his immortal Kirtan, "Endaro Mahanubhaavulu (Many are 
the great souls)". In fact, it is only because of such noble souls that the 
country of Bharat (India) has been able to exist peacefully. Bharatadesa is 
not just a mass of earth. Bharat is verily the heart of the entire world. If 
Bharat is safe and secure, the entire world will be safe. Unfortunately, the 
people of Bharat do not realise this truth. Wherever you see, selfishness 
is rampant. Therefore, cast away your selfish motive and engage yourself 
in activities that help others. Pray for the welfare of elders. Pray for the 
welfare of all. That is the real meaning of the prayer, Lokah samastah 
sukhino bhavantu. Pray for the welfare of the entire world, 
wholeheartedly. You will definitely prosper. I think I have taken a lot of 
time and caused inconvenience to you. 


105 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


Taking the example of these two, Sarla Amma and Indulal Shah, I wish 

you should inculcate a spirit of service in everybody. I also wish that the 
bal vikas and Mahila Vibhag should progress well. I wish both of them a 

long, healthy and happy life. 


Bhagawan concluded His discourse with the bhajan, "Hari Bhajan Bina 
Sukha Santhi Nahin". 


Date: 13 July 2003, Occasion: Guru Purnima, Place: Prasanthi 
Nilayam 


106 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


13. GOD’S BIRTHPLACE IS A PURE HEART 


Date: 19 Aug Occasion: Krishna Place: Prasanthi 
2003 Janmashtamia Nilayam 


All the names and forms are but the manifestations of the 
Supreme Being who is Existence, Knowledge, Bliss Absolute, and 
non-dual. He is the embodiment of Sathyam, Sivam, Sundaram 
(Truth, Auspiciousness, Beauty). 

(Sanskrit Verse) 


Embodiments of Love! 


Krishnajanmashtami is celebrated to commemorate the birthday of Lord 
Krishna. Man's Hridaya (heart) is the birthplace of Krishna. To worry over 
why Krishna and Rama were born on such inauspicious Thithis (8th and 
9th phases of the waning and waxing moon) is foolish. It is only when the 
Hridaya becomes cool, pure and peaceful like the Himachala (the 
Himalayan mountains), that is the true birthday of Krishna. God makes 
such a heart His dwelling place which is pure, sacred and peaceful. 


From the worldly point of view, Krishna was born on Ashtami in the 
midnight. People consider Ashtami to be inauspicious. How can the 
birthday of a Divine incarnation be inauspicious? In fact, all days are 
auspicious and are meant to confer welfare and prosperity. God 
incarnates to bestow auspiciousness on all. Hence, His birthday should be 
treated as highly sacred. 


Krishna was born in a prison. All the guards of the prison, who were 
supposed to be on high alert as per Kamsa's instructions, were 
overpowered by sleep. Only Devaki and Vasudeva were awake at the time 
of Krishna's advent. Fearing danger to the newborn child in the hands of 
wicked Kamsa, Vasudeva decided to take the child away to a safe 
destination. He gently wrapped the child in a cloth, placed it in a basket, 
lifted it up on his head and came out of the prison. The doors of the 
prison opened of their own accord. As there was a heavy downpour, 
Vasudeva prayed that the child be protected. By the Divine Will of 
Krishna, a huge serpent appeared there and started following Vasudeva 
with its hood raised over the Divine child, thereby protecting it from the 
downpour. By the time Vasudeva reached Yashoda's house on the 
opposite bank of river Yamuna, it was very late in the night. Just then she 
had given birth to a female child. Everyone including her husband was 
fast asleep. Vasudeva quietly placed the divine child Krishna by the side 
of Yashoda and picked up the female child born to her and quickly 
returned to the prison. 


The stories of the Lord are most wonderful and sacred in all the 
three worlds. They are like sickles that cut the creepers of worldly 
bondage. They are most ennobling and elevating. They confer 
bliss on the sages and seers doing penance in forests. 


107 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


(Telugu Poem) 


None can comprehend the ways of God. Even Vasudeva was not fully 
aware of what he was doing. He took the child Krishna to Yashoda's house 
and brought the female child with him. He did all this as if he was in a 
trance. Radha, a small girl then, was a witness to the entire episode. It 
got imprinted on her heart. People think Radha was younger to Krishna 
and talk in derogatory terms about the relationship she had with Him. In 
fact, she was much older than Krishna, 26 months to be precise. Her 
feeling towards Krishna was very sacred and became stronger day by 


day. 


Vasudeva became his normal self after he went back to the prison. As he 
entered the prison, the doors closed behind him and locked automatically. 
No sooner did he place the female child by the side of Devaki than the bell 
rang. The guard of the prison at once got up and informed Kamsa about 
the birth of the child. Kamsa promptly arrived at the prison with all his 
paraphernalia. As was his wont, he lifted the child with his left hand and 
threw it into the sky. He held a sword in his right hand and was ready to 
behead the child as it fell down. But the child vanished as it went up and 
in its place, a goddess appeared and warned Kamsa that his nemesis 
Krishna was born and that He would kill him. She was very powerful and 
none could do any harm to her. After warning Kamsa about his impending 
peril, she too vanished. Devaki was perplexed beyond words about the 
happenings. She understood that the entire episode was Krishna's Will. 
Kamsa became restless and agitated as he came to know that Krishna 
was being brought up elsewhere. Day and night, he was thinking of ways 
and means to capture Krishna and kill Him. 


Krishna was growing up under the loving care of Yashoda and the story is 
known to everyone here. Krishna demonstrated His Divine powers in 
innumerable ways. Kamsa was at a loss how to capture Krishna. He 
issued an order that all the newborn babies of Repalle be killed. Initially, 
he wanted only the male babies to be killed. Later on, he changed his 
mind and wanted even the female babies to be killed. He resorted to such 
heinous acts only out of fear. As days progressed, the stories of child 
Krishna's divine pranks spread far and wide. God's deeds are wonderful 
and mysterious. All the while, the messengers of Kamsa were in intensive 
search for Krishna. Ultimately, they spotted Him in Repalle and informed 
Kamsa. 


It is said, Vinashakale Vipareeta Buddhi (discrimination fails to work when 
one is destined to be destroyed). Kamsa started sending many powerful 
demons to Repalle to kill Krishna. But Krishna, with His mighty power, 
destroyed all of them. Kamsa's end approached fast. He devised a 
nefarious scheme to lure Krishna and Balarama to Mathura and kill them. 
Kamsa sent his messengers to Repalle to bring Krishna and Balarama to 
Mathura to attend some Yajna which he was performing. He deputed 
Akrura, who adored Krishna and Balarama to persuade and bring Krishna 
and Balarama to Mathura. 


As the brothers entered the city, the citizens of Mathura were mesmerised 
by the charming forms of Krishna and Balarama. They were already 
suffering from deep frustration and anguish over the atrocities committed 
by Kamsa and they prayed to Krishna to come to their rescue. As Krishna 
and Balarama were proceeding towards Kamsa's palace, they came across 
a lady who used to supply garlands to Kamsa everyday. Krishna took two 


108 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


garlands from her. He and Balarama garlanded each other. Then they 
encountered the royal washerman, took Kamsa's silk garments and 
dressed themselves in regal style. Later they met a hunchback lady 
Kubja, who was carrying scents and perfumes for Kamsa. She had an ugly 
appearance with a crooked body. She knew that Krishna was God. Seeing 
the two brothers, she was overjoyed and she sprinkled the perfumes on 
them. She said, "Krishna, today my life has found fulfilment. I must have 
performed great penance in the past, to have deserved this opportunity to 
serve You."’ She then prayed to Krishna to straighten her body. Krishna 
planted His foot on her feet, caught hold of her chin and lifted it up. Lo 
and behold! Her hunchback was gone. She assumed the form of a 
beautiful lady. In this manner, Krishna demonstrated His divine powers by 
Belong many stupendous feats and in the process relieved many from 
their curses. 


On coming to know that Krishna and Balarama were wearing his royal 
garments, Kamsa was furious. In the meanwhile, Kubja approached 
Kamsa and said, "Oh master, none can comprehend the divine play of 
Krishna and His mysterious powers. Don't make any attempt to 
understand his powers. It is better that you ignore the matter." Kamsa 
wondered, "How could she speak to me with such impertinence! Surely 
Krishna has instigated her." At that moment Kamsa's attention was 
diverted by someone and Kubja, seizing the opportunity, quietly left the 
scene. 


Krishna and Balarama entered Kamsa's court like two lion cubs. They 
defeated the court wrestlers. Thereafter, Krishna, in a trice, leapt on the 
platform where Kamsa was seated, pinned him down and rained severe 
blows on him. Balarama, who was equally strong, joined him. Together 
they crushed Kamsa to pulp. Seeing the gruesome killing of Kamsa, the 
assembly was fear-stricken. They were amazed how such a young boy as 
Krishna could vanquish the mighty Kamsa. There was a platoon of 
soldiers specially deployed by Kamsa to kill Balarama and Krishna. They 
too could not withstand the onslaught of Krishna. Ultimately, they fell at 
His feet and prayed for mercy. 


Krishna and Balarama left for Repalle unnoticed by others. The 
inhabitants of Repalle were anxiously awaiting their return. They were 
highly depressed as they could not see any sign of their arrival in the 
vicinity. Mother Yashoda was very nervous thinking of the well-being of 
her sons. The Gopikas too were drowned in sorrow and started abusing 
Kamsa, presuming that he must have harmed Krishna and Balarama. All 
the men and women of Repalle were praying to Krishna all the time 
chanting His Name. All of a sudden, Krishna and Balarama appeared in 
their midst to their astonishment and joy. Krishna spoke to them soothing 
words and pacified them. 


Kamsa had two wives. After his death, they went to stay with Jarasandha, 
their father. Jarasandha was very furious with Krishna and wanted to 
avenge the killing of his son-in-law. Many of his relatives had also 
developed hatred towards Krishna. This news reached Yashoda and Nanda 
as also Devaki and Vasudeva. They were concerned about Krishna's 
safety. However, Devaki was one of courage and also a great devotee. 
That is why she could withstand all the suffering caused by her brother 
Kamsa with equanimity. She was sure that none could harm Krishna. She 
had total faith in Krishna's Divinity. As the enemies could not dare to 
challenge Krishna, they tried to harass the residents of Repalle. Krishna at 


109 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


once came to their rescue and drove the enemies away. 


Days rolled by and it was time for Krishna's marriage. Rukmini, princess 
of Vidarbha loved Krishna and wanted to marry Him. But her brother 
Rukmi wanted to give her in marriage to his friend Sisupala and was 
making arrangements for the same. Krishna was well aware of all this. He 
had a masterplan of His own. Devaki and Vasudeva, after they were freed 
from prison, were staying in the house of Nanda and Yashoda. Meanwhile, 
Rukmini had sent a message to Krishna through a brahmin in which she 
wrote, "Krishna, I can no longer bear the pangs of separation from You. 
My father has decided to perform my marriage with Sisupala, against my 
wish. The marriage is scheduled to take place tomorrow. If You do not 
come before that and take me away from here, I will put an end to my 
ife." 


As per Rukmini's wish, Krishna devised a strategy to bring her to their 
house. In those days, it was customary for the bride to offer special 
worship to the village goddess prior to her marriage. As per the tradition, 
Rukmini was proceeding to the temple to offer special prayers. Rukmi, the 
evil-minded brother of Rukmini had made elaborate security 
arrangements fearing an attack from Krishna. He had joined hands with 
Sisupala and Dantavakra, who were bitter enemies of Krishna. 


Rukmini was walking slowly towards the temple. She was deeply dejected 
thinking that Krishna had not come to her rescue. She was unaware that 
Krishna had indeed come to rescue her and was waiting at the entrance of 
the temple without being noticed by others. As she reached the entrance, 
Krishna deftly put her in His chariot and drove away. A fierce battle 
ensued between Krishna and Rukmi and his associates. Krishna defeated 
them all. He took Rukmini along with Him and married her. Krishna had 
incarnated to punish the wicked and protect the pious. Sisupala hated 
Krishna from the core of his heart because He had taken away Rukmini 
whom he was supposed to marry. 


Krishna had to encounter many odds and hardships all through His life. 
That is why people consider Ashtami, His birthday as a day that brings 
difficulties. Right from the time He was born, Krishna faced difficulties at 
the hands of Kamsa. During his infancy, people of other villages also had 
to undergo sufferings inflicted by Kamsa. He had to face the challenges 
posed by wicked people like Sisupala and Dantavakra. Even His marriage 
with Rukmini resulted in battle. However, He vanquished all His 
adversaries and emerged victorious. 


Krishna spared Sisupala's life for a long time in spite of his hostility. When 
Dharmaraja performed Rajasuya Yajna, he gave Agratambulam (first 
offering) to Krishna. Watching this, Sisupala flew into a fit of rage and 
hurled abuses at Krishna. He described Him as a mere cowherd boy and 
said that He did not deserve the honour. 


"When elders like Bhishma are seated in this assembly, how could you 
choose a cowherd boy for this great honour", he questioned Dharmaraja. 
He was ready to fight with Krishna. He said to Him, 


Do you think that you deserve this honour because you stole the 
saris of the Gopikas when they were having a bath? Or do you 
think that you deserve this because you spent all your time in the 
company of cowherdesses? Stop this self-aggrandisement and 


110 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


shut up! 
(Telugu Poem) 


It was then that Krishna killed Sisupala. Many are under the mistaken 
notion that Krishna used His divine weapon, the Sudarshana Chakra (disc) 
to behead him. In fact, Krishna just threw the plate, in which He received 
the first offering at Sisupala. In this age of Kali, people talk of Vishnu 
Chakra and Sudarshana Chakra as the weapons of Krishna. But whatever 
Krishna used served as Chakra with His Divine Will. 


In this manner, Krishna had to wage a number of wars during His lifetime. 
That is why elders say that the birthday of Krishna, Ashtami, is associated 
with difficulties. When Krishna was born, the day was Ashtami and the 
star was Rohini. It is a common belief that whoever is born with such a 
combination of day and star, will face hardships throughout his life. There 
is another belief that such a person will be the emancipator of the nation. 
Krishna destroyed the wicked and protected the righteous. He established 
Dharma. Hence, do not consider the time of Krishna's advent to be 
inauspicious. It is a noble and a sacred day. 


Later, as time passed by, it was Arjuna who brought the shocking news 
that Krishna shed His mortal coil. Mother Kunti had become very old. She 
had lost the power of vision and her limbs had become very weak. She 
was a great devotee and considered Krishna as her very life. She was 
eagerly waiting for Arjuna to come and tell her about Krishna's well- 
being. Arjuna came to her calling, "Mother, Mother" in an agitated voice. 
She at once asked him, "Son, where is Krishna? How is He?" Arjuna was 
crestfallen. He said, "Mother, what can I say? Krishna, who is our friend, 
relative, guide, guardian and God, is no more." Hearing this tragic news, 
Kunti at once left her mortal body. She was such a great devotee. After 
Krishna's departure, the entire Yadava clan perished as a result of severe 
in-fighting that followed. It was the consequence of a curse pronounced 
earlier on Yadavas by a sage. 


The Pandavas decided to renounce the world and retire into the forests. It 
was a strange situation. On the one hand the coronation of Parikshit had 
to take place; on the other the last rites of Kunti had to be performed. 
Making her head rest on his lap, Dharmaraja issued instructions to Bhima 
to make arrangements for the coronation. He told Arjuna to make the 
necessary preparation for Kunti's funeral. At the same time, he instructed 
Nakula and Sahadeva to make arrangements for them to go to the forest. 
All the three events took place on the same day. Only those with 
unwavering faith in God can perform such tasks simultaneously with 
equanimity. Everything happens according to His Will. 


Right from the beginning till the end, the tasks performed by Krishna 
were wonderful, sacred, mysterious and beyond human comprehension. 
Therefore, it is not proper to consider the birthday of Krishna to be 
inauspicious. It is a highly sacred day and is to be celebrated with 
unbounded joy. 


Here is another point that needs mention. When this body was born, 

there was a lot of chaos and confusion among people of this village and 

also in the neighbouring villages. The epidemics of Cholera and Plague 

were rampant everywhere. People were afraid to visit each other's house 

af even drink a glass of water outside. Such was the situation in those 
ays. 


111 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


GrihamAmmayi(Mother Easwaramma) would not visit others' houses. 
Kondama Raju, grandfather of this body, was also one of strict discipline 
and principles. He would never accept anything from others. In those 
days, I was staying with Kondama Raju. He did not permit other children, 
including Parvatamma and Venkamma (Swami's sisters) to come near Me, 
lest I should be infected with the epidemic. But I used to slip out of the 
house without his knowledge. On coming to know of this, he would gently 
chide Me saying, "Sathya, why don't you listen to Me? You should not go 
here and there." He instructed the villagers to bring Me home at once if 
they spotted Me outside. This way, he would try to restrain My 
movements. But can anyone restrain Me? I used to move around in the 
village without being noticed. There were occasions when people of ten 
different houses would invite Me for food. I would visit all those ten 
houses, dine with them and satisfy them. Sometimes, Karanam 
Subbamma would call Me from the window and pass on food packets. She 
was a great devotee. 


Kondama Raju did not relish My visits to others' houses. He was anxious 
about My safety and well-being. In those days, Reddy and Karanam were 
the two heads of the village. Subbamma was the name of Karanam's wife 
and Reddy's wife was Subbulamma. She was feeling jealous that I was 
making frequent visits to Karanam Subbamma's house. Hence, she 
decided to poison Me. One day she came to Me and invited Me to her 
house, saying, "Babu, today you must come to our house for snacks. I will 
make delicious vadas for You. Come alone, do not tell others about this." 
When I visited her house, she served Me poisoned vadas. I knew her evil 
intentions, yet I ate the vadas without hesitation. My body at once turned 
blue. People who saw Me, ran to Karanam Subbamma and Easwaramma 
and informed them about this. In those days, there was bitter rivalry 
between Reddy Subbulamma and Karanam Subbamma. Not only here, in 
most of the villages, such animosity existed between Reddys and 
Karanams. People came down heavily on Reddy Subbulamma for her evil 
act. 


Kondama Raju lived in a tribal locality. When he came to know of the 
incident, he became furious. He summoned the tribals and goaded them 
to teach a lesson to Reddy Subbulamma. I told Kondama Raju, 
"Grandfather, being elders of the village, you should not resort to such 
harmful acts." If you do not stop the tribals from attacking her, I will go 
and stay with her forever. Both Kondama Raju and Karanam Subbamma 
acted on My advice and stopped those tribals from going to Reddy 
Subbulamma's house. In this manner, I removed hatred from the minds 
of people and strove for unity in the village. 


There was never any fear in all my actions. I would eat whatever others 
offered Me without any hesitation. Once the thatched hut I was staying in, 
was Set on fire by some miscreants. You may be knowing that there was 
a hut in the place where the Kalyana Mandapam stands now. As the hut 
was being consigned to flames, there was a heavy downpour of rain, only 
on the hut and nowhere else. People realised My Divinity. Right from that 
day, people of Putta-parthi,kKammavaripalli, Jankampalli, etc., started 
coming to Me with veneration. They were conducting Bhajans in the 
surrounding villages. 


I want to tell you something that happened in the recent past. When I 
was at Bangalore, there was a wide propaganda that I had a fall and had 


112 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


sustained a fracture. People of all villages including Puttaparthi conducted 
regular Bhajans praying for My well-being. In many villages 
Sathyanarayana Vratam was performed. In this manner, they became 
recipients of Swami's love. During this period, there was none who did not 
think of Swami. The glory of Swami has spread far and wide. Whenever I 
travel from Bangalore by road, at every village enroute people stop My 
car and offer Arati. On the previous occasion, the road at Chikballapur 
was blocked by eager devotees, doing Bhajans, waving Arati. They hailed 
My arrival full-throated, "Sathya Sai Babajiki Jai". People at Kappalabanda 
and Mamillakunta also expressed their love and devotion for Swami in a 
similar manner. 


The doctor had said that a rest of one year was required for the hip to 
heal completely. I told that it would not take one year. "The loving 
prayers of devotees would cure Me in no time", I assured them. I told the 
doctors that I did not need any medicine or further treatment. The prayer 
of the devotees is the panacea for this body. Their prayers have given Me 
immense bliss. In spite of the fracture, I was smiling always. When I was 
taken to the hospital, everyone was in tears, but I was smiling all the 
time. The doctors who operated on Me were astonished to see Me smiling. 
Usually the pain that results from a hip fracture is like that of an electric 
shock. But I was least affected by it. Even now I have no pain 
whatsoever. Devotees are My property and I am the property of 
devotees. I have no fear or anxiety. Even in such a situation, I can 
happily go round the country. Hereafter, I will travel around far and wide 
more frequently. You don't need to worry about Swami's well-being. I am 
always happy and blissful. May you all be happy and prosperous always! 


Bhagavan concluded His Discourse with the Bhajan, eens Govindam, 
Bhaja Govindam, Govindam Bhaja Moodha Mathe 


Date: 19 Aug 2003, Occasion: Krishna Janmashtamia, Place: 
Prasanthi Nilayam 


113 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


14. GIVE UP DEHABHIMANA, DEVELOP 
ATMABHIMAN 


Date: 05 Oct 2003 Occasion: Vijayadashami Place: Prasanthi Nilayam 


The Vaishnavites say that Lord Vishnu is the greatest while Saivites 
declare that Lord Siva is the greatest of all. People may speak on the 
basis of their feelings, but in truth there is only GOD and the rest are 
names. 

(Telugu Poem) 


You will not be respected if your thoughts and words are at variance. You 
may speak sweet words, but if your mind is filled with evil thoughts, how 
can you earn the respect of others? One can be called a human being, 
only when one's thoughts, words and deeds are in total harmony. 


Embodiments of Love! 


The Navaratri festival is celebrated all over India, but nobody seems to 
make any effort to comprehend the inner significance of this festival. The 
Hridaya (heart) is the abode of the Atma. No being can exist without the 
principle of Atma. God, who resides in all as the principle of Atma, has no 
specific name and form. But, People attribute various names and forms to 
Him. The Gaanapatyas (worshippers of Ganapati) consider Lord Ganapati 
as great; the Saivites consider there is none superior to Lord Siva. The 
devotees of Sai consider Him to be the greatest. Some devotees Say all 
are one. 


In fact, all names and forms belong to the same God. He responds to the 
prayers of devotees in whatever form they worship Him. Hence, each one 
considers the form he worships to be superior to the other forms. It is a 
sign of ignorance to consider one form superior to the other. What is 
important is that your prayers should not be confined to mere words. 
They should be translated into action. It is easy to speak but not so easy 
to practice. True prayer is that which is translated into action. 


During the Navaratri celebrations, the Divine Mother is extolled in various 
names and forms. All names and forms are based on your feelings. God 
has no differences whatsoever. No one can comprehend the nature of 
Divinity. Actually, the principle of love that exists in all beings is the 
principle of Divinity. Love has no specific form. Divinity transcends name 
and form. Love is God. Live in love. Truth is God. Truth is all-pervasive. 


The creation emerges from truth and merges into truth, 
Is there a place where truth does not exist? 

Visualise such pure and unsullied truth. 

(Telugu Poem) 


There are no different truths for different countries such as American 
truth, Russian truth, Indian truth, Japanese truth, etc. Truth is one and 
the same for all. It is uniformly present in everyone. True celebration of 


114 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


Navaratri festival lies in contemplating on Sathyaswarupa (the 
embodiment of truth). Respect one and all, for, the divine Atma is present 
in all. To respect all is true worship. If you want to be respected, you 
should respect others in the first instance. Give respect and take respect. 
Understand the principle of oneness, that is Divinity. The Vedas declare, 
Ekam Sath Viprah Bahudha Vadanti (truth is one, but the wise refer to it 
by various names). You may call Him by any name and form, but God is 
one. This principle of unity should be firmly installed in your heart. 


God is present in everyone in the form of love. Wherever you go, He is 
with you. He is the eternal witness. Share your love with others and 
receive their love in turn. Love is your greatest virtue. Love confers the 
ultimate joy and bliss. God resides in the heart filled with love. Hence, it 
is essential that you fill your heart with love. Where there is love, there is 
God. You don't need to search for Him. He is always in you, with you, 
around you, above you and below you. Adhere to the principle of love. 
Never hate anyone. Hatred is your worst enemy. Once you develop love 
in you, hatred will naturally vanish. If you were to come across your bitter 
rival, greet him with love. He too will reciprocate the same feeling. How 
can you expect love from others when you do not have any love for 
them? It is love and love alone that I practice and propagate. Try to 
understand the power of love. It is your greatest wealth. None can 
estimate its value. What does God expect from you? It is only your love. 
Love is the tax that you have to pay to God for all that He has given you. 


During the Navaratri worship, you have to express your love to the Divine 
Mother in nine different ways. Sravanam (listening), Kirtanam (singing), 
Vishnusmaranam (contemplating on Vishnu), Padasevanam (serving His 
Lotus Feet), Vandanam (salutation), Archanam (worship), Dasyam 
(servitude), Sneham (friendship), Atmanivedanam (self-surrender). God 
wants your love and nothing else. Your love should not branch out in 
different directions. It should flow directly towards God. If you love 
others, you will be loved in turn. If you utter harsh words, they will come 
back to you as resound. Fill your heart with love and compassion. Hridaya 
is that which is filled with Daya (compassion). Compassion is the hallmark 
of a true devotee. One who lacks compassion cannot be called a human 
being. When you practice truth and righteousness, you will be successful 
in all your endeavors. That is why the Vedas teach, Sathyam Vada, 
Dharmam Chara (speak truth, practice righteousness). Your heart should 
melt with compassion when you see the poor and needy. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Having spent this Navaratri in the worship of Divine Mother, your heart 
should be filled with love and compassion. The heart bereft of love and 
compassion is verily a cemetery. Right from dawn to dusk, love should be 
the undercurrent of all your activities. The moment you get up from bed, 
resolve that you would tread the path of love. Only then can you have the 
vision of God, who is the very embodiment of love. True spiritual practice 
lies in connecting love to love. Love can transform even a hard stone into 
butter. Swami always teaches the principle of love. It is enough if You 
call 'Baba' with love from the depth of your heart. He will come to 
your rescue. Consider love as your life breath. If there is no love in your 
prayer, it will prove futile. Love should be 'heartful' and not artificial. Be 
friendly with all and have a smiling countenance always. What is the use 


BES 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


of talking sweetly if your heart is filled with bitterness? Only love can fill 
your heart with nectarous feelings. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Your entire life is based on love. Without love, you cannot exist even for a 
moment. Hence, develop love considering it as the very form of God. 
Today marks the culmination of Navaratri festival. Worship of Divine 
Mother is meant to destroy evil qualities and foster virtues in you. The 
more you distance yourself from evil, the nearer you will be to the 
principle of love. You don't need to make any efforts to acquire love. The 
moment you eschew evil, love will automatically enter your heart. 


Students! 


There is love inherent in all of you. But, you are diverting it on worldly 
matters. True love is related to the Atmic principle. Worldly love is bound 
to change with the passage of time, whereas spiritual love is permanent. 
Even your breathing process speaks of the presence of love in you. When 
you inhale, you make the sound 'So' and When you exhale 'Ham'; 
together 'Soham' means, 'I am That’. The principle of 'I' is uniformly 
present in all. This can be experienced by following the nine paths of 
devotion. Never give scope for differences. Understand the unity, "I and 
You are one". Your love gets fragmented when you fail to visualize unity 
in diversity. There is only one heart, which is changeless. 


Your words may vary, but your heart remains steady. The Gopikas used 
to pray, 


O God, I offer you the heart which You have given me. 
What else can I offer at Your Lotus Feet? 

I pray to You I to accept it. 

(Telugu Poem) 


Heart is not your property; it belongs to God. There is nothing in this 
world that you can call as your own. You may consider the worldly wealth 
and materials as your property. But, they are not permanent. 


Lord Krishna declared, Anitvyam Asukham Lokam Imam Prapya Bhajasva 
Maam (as the world is temporary and full of misery, contemplate on Me 
constantly). Divine love alone is true and changeless. The mariner's 
compass always points towards northern direction; likewise your love 
should always be directed towards God. You cannot claim to belong to the 
mankind unless there is kindness in you. Your life should be suffused with 
love and kindness. You should dedicate your life to love. You may wonder 
as to how to pray to God. In fact, you don't need to pray to God. You 
should let your love flow incessantly towards God. Then you will 
understand the unity, "I and You are one." There is no second entity. 


Embodiments of Divine Atma! 


You see the body but you don't understand the feelings associated with it. 
poe body is made up of five elements and five senses. But you are not the 
ody. 


116 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


The body is made up of five elements and is bound to perish sooner or 
later but the Indweller has neither birth nor death. The Indweller has no 
attachment whatsoever and is the eternal witness. In fact, the Indweller 
who is in the form of Atma is verily God Himself. 

(Telugu Poem) 


You say it is my head, my heart, etc., then who are you? When you 
engage in self enquiry in this manner, you will realize that YOU are 
different from the body. God pervades each anga (limb) of your body in 
the form of essence. Hence, He is extolled as Angirasaya Namah 
(salutations to the one who is in the form of essence in all my limbs). It is 
a mistake to confine God to a particular form. So long as you limit God to 
a form, you cannot attain Him. You should realize that God is attribute- 
less, formless and He is the very essence of life. Physical form is bound to 
change. A child becomes a boy, boy becomes a man who in turn becomes 
a grandfather. In this manner, your physical form undergoes constant 
change. But you will remain the same. You are the embodiment of God. 
eck you understand this truth, you will not be affected by physical 
changes. 


Many of you are anxious thinking that Swami is not keeping good health 
over the last few days. In fact, My health is very good. Real health is not 
related to the body. As you equate Swami with this physical frame, it 
appears as though Swami is not well. Yad Bhavam Tad Bhavati (as is the 
feeling, so is the result). Do not identify Me with this physical body. I am 
not Dehaswarupa (body), I am Dehi (the indweller). There is no difference 
between you and Me. I have all powers in Me. But you are deluded seeing 
My physical form. Whatever I am doing is only to satisfy the doctors and 
other devotees. As a matter of fact, there is no trace of ill-health in Me. I 
am always healthy. Not only today, till 96 years I will be like this. I 
can do whatever I want. But those who go by the physical form think that 
Swami is ageing. Youth and old age are related to the body and not to 
Me. I am always the same. I can do anything. However, this body is 
yours. This has come for your sake. You can change it the way you like. If 
you think that Swami is strong and healthy, yes so He is. There is no 
weakness in Me. My angas (limbs) may appear to be weak. But I am not 
Angaswarupa, I am Atmaswarupa. Wherever you may go, worship God as 
Atmaswarupa. Do not identify Him with an Akara (form). Give up body 
consciousness and develop Atmic awareness. Only when you lead a 
spiritual life, will you be able to visualize the Atmaswarupa. If you identify 
Me with the body, I cannot walk even two steps. Do not think about the 
seth Have faith that Iam the Atmaswarupa. Then I will always remain 
ealthy. 


Realize the Atma as your very life. Everyone of you is endowed with 
divine energy. But you are misusing it. Your youth is in your hands. Your 
very life is in your hands. You are not the body; you are the life principle. 
Body is meant to serve as an instrument in your quest for truth. The 
same Atma is present in all. Here you see a silver tumbler with water. The 
tumbler is the basis for water, silver is the basis for tumbler and Divinity 
is the basis for silver. Divinity is not made up of material. Hence, give up 
the materialistic standpoint. Realize that your Swami is not constrained by 
Akara, He is full of Ananda (bliss). When you develop such faith, you too 
will experience Ananda. Many devotees were worried, "Why has our 
Swami not given a single discourse during the last one week though many 
others have spoken?" Of course, whatever I speak is love in verbal form. 


Ly 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


But remember whenever I come amidst you, the love, the bliss and the 
strength that manifest in Me cannot be described in words. In fact, I don't 
require food or drink. Bliss is My food. Develop such faith. 


Sage Viswamitra. was taking Rama and Lakshmana along with him for the 
protection of the Yajna he had undertaken. When they reached the banks 
of Sarayu, he told them, "My dear ones, you are coming with me for the 
protection of Yajna. In order to do so, you have to remain without food 
and water and wage a fierce battle with the demons, for extended periods 
without respite. Hence, I will teach you two Mantras, which will make you 
free from hunger and sleep." This is the power of Maya. When King 
Dasaratha, fearing danger from the demons, was reluctant to send his 
sons with Viswamitra, the sage counseled him, saying, "Oh king, do not 
get deluded by seeing the physical forms of your sons. They are not 
ordinary mortals. They are verily divine." But when they reached the 
banks of Sarayu, the sage was overcome with Maya and taught them the 
Mantras as if they were ordinary humans. He told them, "Do not identify 
yourself with the physical body. You are the embodiments of the Atma. 
You are Chaitanyaswarupas. You are endowed with divine power. Always 
bear this in mind. You will be free from hunger and sleep." 


After the protection of the Yajna, Rama went to Mithila with the sage. 
They walked a long distance for sixteen days. Yet, Rama was always 
cheerful and full of bliss. In fact, bliss was His form. Hence develop bliss 
more and more. Do not confine God to a physical form. I am not this 
body. Body is made up of food materials. 


This body is a den of dirt, and prone to diseases; it is subject to change 
from time to time; it cannot cross the ocean of Samsara. It is nothing but 
a structure Of bones. Oh mind! Do not be under the delusion that body is 
permanent. Instead take refuge at the Divine Lotus Feet. 

(Telugu Poem) 


It is a grave mistake to identify yourself with the body. Give up body 
attachment and develop Atmic consciousness. Only then will you 
understand and experience your true form, i.e., Atma. Otherwise, even 
the smallest physical ailments like stomachache, headache etc., will make 
you feel anxious. Physical ailments are like passing clouds. So long as you 
are deluded by body consciousness, you will be affected by them. Once 
you give up body attachment, you are no more bound by the body and its 
limitations. When you sit in meditation, you forget your body. Meditation 
means giving up Dehabhimana (body attachment) and developing Atmic 
awareness. Everyone While referring to one's self uses the term "I", ne 
principle of Atma. Hence, you are not related to the body. It is one 
instrument. "I" is your true identity. You may add any number of " gee 
it will always remain "I". Such principle of unity is present in all. It is the 
same for you and Me. It has no difference whatsoever. If you do not give 
up Dehabhimana, all your education will prove futile. Understand that you 
are not the body. You are I. Never forget this truth. The physical form is 
bound to change. 


Embodiments of Love! 


True Navaratri celebration lies in giving up Dehabhimana and developing 
Atmabhimana. You can see for yourself what an exalted position you will 
attain once you give up body attachment. You may be weak physically 


118 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


and mentally. But when you develop Atmabhimana, all your weaknesses 
will vanish in a trice. Establish yourself in the firm faith, "Tam God". 


(Bhagawan concluded His discourse with the Bhajan, "Hari Bhajan Bina 
Sukha Santhi Nahi... ") 


Date: 05 Oct 2003, Occasion: Vijayadashami, Place: Prasanthi 
Nilayam 


119 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


15. DEVELOP SPIRIT OF BROTHERHOOD 


Date: 17 Oct 2003 Occasion: - Place: Prasanthi Nilayam 


This land of Bharat has given birth to many noble women like 
Savitri who brought her dead husband back to life; Chandramati 
who extinguished wild fire with the power of truth; Sita who 
proved her chastity by coming out of the blazing fire unscathed 
and Damayanti who reduced an evil-minded hunter to ashes with 
the power of her chastity. This land of piety and nobility attained 
plenty and prosperity and became the teacher of all nations of the 
world because of such women of chastity 


(Telugu Poem) 


Human life is meant to demonstrate an ideal to the world. Man is 
endowed with infinite powers. But, he leads a life of ignorance, being 
unaware of his innate powers. Though everyone is endowed with divine 
powers, only a few are able to manifest them. In others, these powers 
remain hidden. Everyone should make efforts to realise their inherent 
divinity. Man appears and behaves as if he is an ordinary human in spite 
of being one with infinite divine powers. Janakiramaiah (Swami's younger 
brother) is one such divine power. He was younger to this body by 2 2 
years. However, he was an expert in the field of politics. He would mince 
no words in expressing his opinion. At times, I used to caution him, 
"Ramaiah, you do not know the abilities of others. Do not use harsh 
words. Talk with restraint." He might have used harsh words when the 
situation demanded, but he was always tender-hearted. 


When Lakshmana fainted in the battlefield, Rama lamented thus, "If I 
were to search in the world, I may get another wife like Sita, a mother 
like Kausalya, but not a brother like Lakshmana." In this manner, Rama 
was deeply touched by the fraternal love of Lakshmana and extolled his 
qualities. There are many such families in the world where the parents, 
brothers and sisters have demonstrated great ideals. You don't need to 
doubt whether such ideal brothers exist even today. They do exist. There 
may be temporary differences of opinion, but they always have love for 
each other. 


Every man must necessarily make efforts to realise the principle of Atma, 
which is present in all. The sweetness of Atmic experience is unparalleled. 
In the spiritual field, what one has to attain is the experience of Atmic 
bliss. He, who realises the inherent divinity in humanity is a true human 
being. The Atma has no specific form. It is full of love and bliss. This has 
to be realised and experienced by every individual. One may know the 
nature of an individual, but it is not possible to understand and estimate 


120 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


the nature of the Atma. In order to understand the principle of Atma, you 
have to emulate the ideals demonstrated by Rama and His brothers. 


One day as the brothers were playing a game, Bharata came running, sat 
on the lap of Mother Kausalya and complained, "Mother, whenever I am 
about to lose the game, Rama manages to lose and makes me the 
winner." Lakshmana, Bharata and Satrughna would tell their mothers that 
it was their great good fortune that they had Rama as their elder brother. 
They would praise Rama saying, He was full of love and nowhere they 
could find a brother like Him. They always wanted to be in the company 
of Rama and serve Him. There was such unity and love among them. 
They enjoyed intimate and inseparable relationship. Even today, there are 
many such brothers in the world. But, the situation of the world is such 
that people are not encouraged to practise brotherhood of man. Our 
institutions should demonstrate the ideal of brotherhood and show the 
way to the rest of the world. You call each other brothers and sisters. 
Mere verbal expression will not suffice; it should be reflected in your 
conduct. While in exile, Rama would not bear separation from Lakshmana 
even for a moment. He would anxiously ask Sita about Lakshman's 
whereabouts whenever he was not found by His side. In this manner, 
Rama taught the ideal of brotherhood by His example. 


Today, students are acquiring education with the sole purpose of 
occupying high positions in society. They are not prepared to share their 
love with their fellowmen and demonstrate the ideal of brotherhood. The 
need of the hour is to practise the ideal of brotherhood. Brothers should 
lead their lives in an ideal manner. Bodies may be different, but their life 
principle must be one and the same. There is no dearth of such ideal 
brothers in this land of Bharat. But, there are some who are not able to 
translate their sacred feelings into action and set an ideal to others. It is 
only when we share our love with fellowmen, can we experience Divinity. 


What is the hallmark of a true student? Manasyekam Vachasyekam 
Karmanyekam Mahatmanam (those whose thoughts, words and deeds are 
in perfect harmony are noble ones.) It is said: The proper study of 
mankind is man. But, today we do not find true qualities of mankind. 
People may show respect towards each other outwardly, but they do not 
experience true love, unity and happiness inwardly. They say they that 
belong to mankind, but in reality they have monkey mind. 


What is true humanness? You should treat your fellowmen as your own 
brothers. You deserve to be called a human being only when you cultivate 
the spirit of unity. Where there is no unity, there you find enmity and 
hatred. Consequently, the principle of love is lost altogether. Man's 
foremost duty is to share his love with others. Only then can he realise 
the dictum: Brotherhood of man and fatherhood of God. But, 
unfortunately, such idealism is not found today. You may not believe in 
the fatherhood of God, but you must have faith in the brotherhood of 
man; practise it and experience bliss therefrom. Our country, Bharat will 
regain its pristine glory only when we achieve such unity. There should be 


121 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


unity and love not only among brothers but also between the husband 
and wife. 


Today, you have heard that a doctor from Singapore (Dr. Pillai) wants to 
establish an institution in memory of his late wife. Pillai has been a 
devotee of Swami for the last 20 years. His wife was also a highly 
virtuous lady. She always had a smiling countenance and would always 
speak softly and sweetly. There are many such noble women in this 
country. It is because of such women that the country is full of 
auspiciousness, plenty and prosperity. There are many such devotees who 
express their love in an unostentatious manner. 


The country of Bharat is highly sacred. But people are flocking to foreign 
countries with the false hope that they would find happiness there. The 
happiness that you do not find here cannot be found anywhere in the 
world. It is said, Yanna Bharate Thanna Bharata (that which is not found 
in Bharat is not present anywhere else). That is why, Bharat has been 
able to live in peace and amity with the rest of the world for the past 
thousands of years. The Bharatiyas share their love with others and 
maintain brotherly relationship. In fact, they have lived up to the ideal of 
Brotherhood of man and Fatherhood of God. In spite of many foreign 
invasions, the love and unity of Bharatiyas has not diminished a bit. At 
times, you may find infighting, but this is only a passing cloud. There is, 
however, the sweet fragrance of love in everybody's heart. 


There is no point in talking sweetly if there is no sweetness in your heart. 
Sweetness in speech and bitterness in heart is not the quality of a human 
being. There should be sweetness in your thought, word and deed. This is 
the true sign of a human being. You should fill your life with love. There is 
nothing superior to love in this world. Man is considered to be most 
sacred because he has the unique quality of love in him. But you are not 
able to realise the value of human birth. God incarnates in human form in 
order to spread the message of love. Once you have love in your heart, 
you can conquer the whole world. There is love in you, but you are not 
able to express it in the proper way. 


Students! 

You read a number of books. You also study history. But, do you go 
through the history of Rama? Have you understood the strong bond of 
love that existed between Rama, Lakshmana, Bharata and Satrughna? 
First and foremost, you should develop the spirit of brotherhood. Even 
when you come across your bitter rival, address him as brother and talk 
to him with love. When you address him as brother, his heart will melt 
and hatred will disappear at once. You can conquer the whole world with 
the weapon of love. There is nothing that you cannot achieve with the 
power of love. Love is the supreme power. True human value lies in 
sharing and experiencing the supreme love. But, today man wastes this 
noble quality of love in worldly pursuits. This has become his taste. He 
does not realise that love is Divine. The Gopikas had realised this truth. 
That is why they prayed to Lord Krishna thus: 


122 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


Oh Krishna, play your sweet flute and sow the seeds of love in the 
desert of our loveless hearts. 
Let the rain of love fall on earth and make the rivers of love flow. 


(Telugu Song) 


The power of love is unmatched. When you fill your heart with love, all 
people will become your brothers and sisters. You will not have enemies 
at all! 


Embodiments of Love! 

Truly speaking, you are the very embodiments of love. Let the stream of 
love flow from one heart to another. Consider love as your life. This is 
your foremost duty. You may search anywhere in the world, you cannot 
find anything greater than love. Here is an example. So many of you have 
gathered here today! What is the reason? It is Swami's love that has 
attracted all of you. Love is the divine magnetic power present in man. In 
all the sacred epics like the Ramayana, the Mahabharata and the 
Bhagavata, you find love as the undercurrent. Once you cultivate love, 
you do not need to acquire any other property. You can attain God only 
through love. He cannot be attained by any other means. Love is the 
magnetic power that can transform even your bitter enemy into a dearest 
friend. 


Students! 

Develop love. This is more important than your worldly education. Love is 
life. Not merely that. Love is light. It illumines your path and helps you 
reach the goal. Your journey of life will be safe and secure when you carry 
the light of love with you. You will never find darkness. Fill your heart with 
love. Love is God. Live in love. This is what you have to learn today. 
Today, people merely utter the words "love is God", but they do not 
actually live in love. This should not be the case. Your life should be 
suffused with love. 


Embodiments of Love! 

You have heard the talks given by C. Sreenivas, the present and the 
former Vice-Chancellors. They spoke with love in their hearts and 
emphasised on the need to cultivate love. They are, in fact, ringing the 
bells of love in your heart, but you don't seem to pay attention to them. 
Once you hear the bells of love, you cannot waste even a moment. You 
will dedicate your whole life to the cause of love and ultimately merge in 
love. 


Students! 

You may acquire various types of knowledge and travel across the globe. 
But, in spite of all your worldly achievements, you may not able to 
understand the principle of love. Once you have the taste of love, you will 
see the world in its real form. Therefore, become truly embodiments of 
love. Let love flow incessantly from your heart. Immerse yourself in the 
flow of love. Out of love, emerge truth and righteousness. Sathyam Vada, 


123 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


Dharmam Chara (speak truth, practise righteousness). Truth and 
righteousness are the two pillars on which the mansion of human life 
rests. It is love that gives rise to these two principles. There is no 
knowledge greater than the knowledge of love. You may read a number of 
Pustakas (books), but love cannot be acquired from such books. What is 
the use of reading Pustakas when your Mastaka (head) is filled with 'dirt'? 
It is because of such ‘dirt', you become an animal losing the sense of 
discrimination. 


Adore love. Live in love. There is no greater education than this. Traverse 
the path of love. Partake of the food of love. It is not enough if you 
merely partake of love, you should also assimilate and digest it. Only then 
the essence of love will spread to every cell of your body giving you 
immense strength and wisdom. 


Students! 

Today's education is leading to agitation. True education lies in 
assimilating and digesting the principle of love. You are the embodiments 
of love. You are filled with love. You may not know this, but I can see love 
in you from top to toe. In future, the principles of Ramayana will be 
manifested in a glorious manner. The Ramayana will fill your lives with 
love and make you forget yourselves. Let your love be directed towards 
Rama. Rama + Ayana is Ramayana. 


Students! 

I hope I am not causing any inconvenience to you by speaking at length. 
In fact, it should not be a trouble at all for you. You cannot find the love 
that Swami showers on you, anywhere else. Day after day, I will fill your 
hearts with more and more love. I have no other work. My only job is to 
fill your hearts with love. 

(The programme ended with Bhajans by students) 


Date: 17 Oct 2003, Place: Prasanthi Nilayam 


124 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


16. THE CULTURE OF BHARAT 


Date: 20 Oct 2003 Occasion: - Place: Prasanthi Nilayam 


Verily like a massive tusker 

Knows not its own might 

The sons of Bharat are quite unaware of the greatness of their 
culture, 

Tolerance and compassion its beauteous form, 
Truth above all other rituals strict, 

Mother's love and reverence, the very elixir eternal, 
Character, true, greater than mere living of comfort, 
Unmindful of ones own heritage, 

The Bharatiya runs after fashions occidental, 

Sad is the sight, sadder the plight. 


(Telugu Poem) 


Embodiments of Love! 

It is enough if there are one or two organisations like this; Bharat can be 
restored to its pristine glory. The service activities have brought about a 
great transformation in the hearts of youth. If such sacred activities are 
undertaken in every village and in every street, the ancient culture of 
Bharat can certainly be revived. Today, there are very few people who 
practise and propagate the sacred values of our culture. The Bharatiyas 
have completely forgotten their rich cultural heritage and are imitating 
the Western Culture, losing their sanctity. Though the culture of Bharat is 
ancient, it is ageless and as relevant in the contemporary scene and, 
hence, it should be practised and propagated in every village. 


A few elders of the Organisation have approached Me for guidance in 
carrying out the service activities. Tomorrow I will speak to the organisers 
from Hyderabad and the youth, and give them the necessary guidelines. 
You are well aware how the values have degenerated in the city of 
Hyderabad which was once known as Simhapuri. People have lost faith in 
our ancient values and are ruining their lives by aping the Western 
Culture. 


Embodiments of Love! 

Words of appreciation or any type of compliments are inadequate to 
describe in full the great ideal demonstrated by you. I shall provide buses 
in which you can travel to various villages and perform service activities. 
Today, the world is witnessing a strange scenario. People preach 
spirituality on the one hand and act quite otherwise on the other. This has 
become common especially in the big cities. People in cities, however well 
educated they are, have completely forgotten our ancient traditions and 
are behaving in a perverse manner in the name of modernism. The 


125 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


enthusiasm, dynamism and the ancient traditional values that are found 
in you, the youth in particular, are not found anywhere else. It is only 
those who know the greatness of our ancient culture will be able to 
understand and appreciate the sacred feelings of your hearts. It is most 
essential that you propagate our ancient culture in every village and in 
every hamlet. Though the people of villages are interested in 
disseminating our ancient culture, they are unable to do so for want of 
resources. Hence, I will give all necessary support and encouragement for 
the furtherance of this sacred cause. Such ideal students who participate 
in this sacred activity of Grama Seva will be given admission in our 
educational institutions. Do not think that you are outsiders. All this is 
yours. I am yours and these institutions belong to you. You have every 
right to be here. I am always ready to provide any help that you may 
require. 


Tomorrow, I will address all of you separately and give you guidelines for 
your future activities. Never give room for disappointment. March ahead 
with all hope and enthusiasm. Tomorrow, with full of happiness in your 
heart, wait for Swami to address you. I may come any moment. Never 
give up chanting the Name of God. The Divine Name is like a boat that 
can take you across the ocean of life. I will give the necessary strength to 
your units. Be prepared to undertake rural service activities with great 
enthusiasm. Today, right at this moment, you must take a firm resolve to 
develop and expand your activities. 


Embodiments of Love! 

Today, while watching your excellent programme depicting the rural 
development activities, I lost Myself in joy. Tomorrow, I will spend more 
time with you and bestow immense happiness on all of you. 


Bhagawan sang the Bhajan, "Prema Mudita Manase Kaho..." and 
continued the Discourse. 


Embodiments of Love! 

Never get yourselves entangled in politics. Keep yourselves away from all 
political activities. Continue your sacred social work and sanctify your 
time by chanting the Divine Name. Follow your chosen path with 
determination and achieve success. Today selfishness is rampant in the 
field of politics. You should lead a life of selfless service contemplating on 
God all the time and thus redeem yourselves. Tomorrow morning, I will 
come and address you at length. 


Date: 20 Oct 2003, Place: Prasanthi Nilayam 


126 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


17. THE ATMA TATTWA IS ONE IN ALL 


Date: 21 Oct 2003 Occasion: - Place: Prasanthi Nilayam 


Oh foolish man! Why do you go in search of God here and there 
when He is very much within you? Turn your vision inward and 
you will find Him there. 


(Telugu Poem) 


Embodiments of Love! 

You are under the mistaken notion that God is separate from you. In 
order to have the vision of God, you follow various paths such as Japa, 
Dhyana, Bhajans, etc. So long as you think God is present elsewhere, you 
cannot find Him. He is present in you. Make efforts to realise the 
indwelling divinity. 


On 20th October 1940, while going to school after returning from Hampi, 
Baba's collar pin was lost and could not be found. The collar pin 
symbolised worldly desires. That pin was presented to Me by Narayana 
Raju, the then Municipal Chairman of Bellary. 


The Municipal Chairman took us to the Virupaksha temple in Hampi. After 
reaching the temple, Seshama Raju (elder brother of Swami) told Me to 
keep a watch over their belongings as they went inside to have Darshan 
of the deity. I readily agreed and remained outside. They went inside the 
temple. To their utter astonishment, they found Me standing inside the 
sanctum sanctorum in the place of Lord Virupaksha. Seshama Raju could 
not believe his eyes. Seshama Raju said to himself: "Why has He come 
here when I told Him specifically to remain outside and take care of our 
belongings?" He thought it was improper on My part to have entered the 
sanctum sanctorum. He at once came out of the temple only to find Me 
there! He again went inside and found Me there also! Still he was having 
doubts. He told his wife, "You go outside and keep a watch over Sathya. 
Do not allow Him to go anywhere. Meanwhile, I will go inside and see 
whether He is still there." She did accordingly. He again saw a smiling 
Sathya standing in the sanctum sanctorum. He wondered whether it was 
a dream, a mere hallucination or reality. 


In those days, wearing a collar pin was considered to be a fashion. 
Narayana Raju presented Me a collar pin with a prayer that I should 
remember him always. After we returned from Hampi to Uravakonda, the 
collar pin dropped on the way as I was proceeding to the school holding 
books in one hand. It could not be found. But I was least affected by its 
loss. Yet, I pretended as though I was anxiously searching for it. Some 
boys who were coming behind Me enquired, "Raju, what are You 


127 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


searching for?" I told them that I lost the collar pin. They too started 
searching all over the place. I laughed and remarked, "You are going to 
school to study. Why are you bothered about the collar pin? Don't worry 
about it." They said, "It looked so good when You were wearing it." One 
of those boys ran to Seshama Raju's house. At that time, Seshama Raju 
and Narayana Raju were discussing as to what could be inferred of My 
mysterious behaviour. When the boy reported the matter to them, they at 
once rushed to Me. Narayana Raju very lovingly put his hand around My 
shoulder and asked, "My dear, what are you searching for?" I said, "I am 
searching for something." He understood that there was some inner 
significance in My reply. He said, "Raju, how can You search for 
something that You do not know?" I told him that I had lost the collar pin 
which he had presented to Me. He said, "I will give you ten such collar 
pins. Don't worry about it. Come, let's go home." 


That day was the day of change. The link with worldly ties had 
gone in the form of the pin; the pilgrimage to Hampi also served 
its purpose. Baba left home saying that Maya could not bind Him 
any longer. 


(Telugu Song) 


Man has two types of desires: One is worldly and the other spiritual. It is 
said, worldly education is for life here while spiritual knowledge is for the 
life hereafter. However, man gives importance to worldly education only. 
He is always in search of worldly happiness. However, I am not interested 
in such happiness. I told Narayana Raju that the bondage of worldly 
attachment was lost in the form of collar pin. On coming to know of this 
incident, the Excise Commissioner Hanumantha Rao came in his car and 
said to Me, "Raju, what are You looking for? Please come with me. I will 
give You whatever You want." He had intense love for Me. I told him that 
I was not searching for anything. People around Me asked, "Are You 
searching for God?" I replied, "One need not search for God, for He is 
everywhere. Nor am I searching for a trivial thing like a collar pin." Then I 
was taken to the house of one H.S. Ramana, who was a lecturer in 
English. They questioned Me, "What do You want? Is it the pin or God?" I 
told them, "I don't need a pin. I can get any number of pins, for 
everything is in My hand. Then, do you think that I am searching for God? 
He is everywhere. I don't need to search for Him." Narayana Raju asked, 
"Where is God? Can we see Him?" Earlier I had given him a ring. It 
disappeared from his finger and appeared on My finger. He was stunned. 
He asked, "How did it happen?" I said, "I can do anything. Everything is in 
My hand." (Swami with a wave of His hand, materialised the same ring 
which He had given to Narayana Raju. He held it aloft and showed it to 
the congregation.) Watching all this, Seshama Raju was also astonished. 
He gave up the feeling that He was My elder brother. Shedding tears of 
joy and repentance, he asked, "My dear, You are all-knowing; everything 
is in Your hand. Then, what are You searching for?" I also did not address 
him as brother. I told him that I was no longer bound by worldly 
relationship. I held the hand of Narayana Raju and asked, "What is this?" 


128 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


He said, "It is my hand." I took out the pen from his pocket and asked, 
"What is this?" "It is my pen", he said. "You say, it is my hand, my pen, 
my body, my mind, my senses, etc. The word 'my' indicates that you are 
different from all this. Then who are you?" I asked him. Then everyone 
started thinking, "Yes, what Raju says is correct. We say, this is mine and 
that is mine, but we do not know who we are." Everybody was silent. 
They accepted that they did not know their true identity. I told them that 
I had come down in human form only to make people realise their true 
identity. 


It is the eye that sees and the mind that thinks. (Showing the ring and 
handkerchief, Bhagawan said) Your eyes can see the ring and the 
handkerchief. On what basis can you call this a ring? Similarly, what 
makes you say that it is a handkerchief? You say, mind is the basis for all 
this. What is mind? Whom does it belong to? You do not know. What you 
think you know, in reality, you do not know, that is your true Self. Make 
efforts to realise it. 


From that day onwards, many seekers of Truth started visiting Me. They 
used to say, "Raju, what You are saying is correct. But how are we to 
realise our true identity?" People quote from scriptures and talk high 
philosophy but do not know their real meaning. "You say, this is my ring, 
my body, my handkerchief, so on and so forth. Then who are you?" I 
questioned them. They had no answer. Then I started explaining thus: 
"There are two important aspects that you have to consider, one is 
Drishyam (seen) and the other is Drashta (seer). Yad Drishyam 
Thannasyam (all that is seen is bound to perish). So, whatever you see is 
only an illusion. You are the Drashta, that is your true identity." 


The English lecturer, H.S. Ramana was a noble person. His house was on 
the way to My school. He used to sit in the front verandah of his house. 
As soon as he saw Me, he used to call 'Raju!', take Me into his house and 
offer Me coffee and snacks. But, I was not interested in these worldly 
things. Earlier, I used to address him as 'Sir'. But, from that day onwards, 
the worldly relationship of teacher-student had ceased between us. I used 
to tell him that all that was seen by the eye is merely Drishyam which 
was perishable and that one had to go beyond and search for the 
Drashta. From that day onwards wherever I went and whomever I met, I 
used to teach these higher principles. 


Then, one day Ramana called Seshama Raju and told him, "Seshama 
Raju! Do not trouble yourself much in trying to understand the behaviour 
of Sathyam. This boy is delving deeper and deeper into the mysteries of 
life. It is not possible for anybody to fathom His true nature. Let us wait 
for some time and see", saying thus, he took Me into his house and 
offered snacks, coffee, meals, etc., with great love. Poor man! He did not 
realise that I was never interested in those worldly matters. I did not 
touch any of these food stuffs. In My view, they were all worldly things 
which underwent constant change. They were never permanent. I 
explained to him, "You brought this Upma for Me. How real is this stuff? 


129 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


Only till one consumes it. What happens to it after eating? Nobody can 
see its shape thereafter. It just disappears. You are all considering these 
unreal worldly things as real." Thus, I started teaching them higher 
Vedantic concepts. H.S. Ramana was astonished at My knowledge of 
these higher principles. Till then, he was addressing Me as "Raju! Raju!" 
But, from then on he started addressing Me as 'Guruji'! Holding My feet, 
he pleaded with Me "Guruji! Please come to my house." Those who were 
witnessing the scene were amazed that this elderly gentleman who was a 
teacher was holding the feet of this young boy, his student. 


Then Ramana declared in front of all those people, "Not only me; a day 
will come when the entire world will fall at His feet." The people 
gathered there on that occasion were all powerful, holding high positions 
in society. There was a neighbour by name Ramanarayana Sastri, who 
was an astrologer. He was called in and appraised of all those higher 
truths of life which I was explaining to them. Sri Sastri was amazed at My 
knowledge of Vedantic concepts at such a young age and shed tears of 
joy. One or two drops of tears fell at My feet. From then onwards, 
everybody in Uravakonda started addressing Me as Sathya Sai Baba. I 
told them that I had come only for the purpose of revealing this truth. 
Unable to comprehend the full truth about My revelations, some of them 
questioned Me, "How can You declare Yourself to be Sai Baba?" I just took 
some flowers in My hand and threw them on the floor. Lo and behold! The 
flowers arranged themselves as Sathya Sai Baba in Telugu letters. On 
witnessing this miracle, they were wonderstruck and dumbfounded! Then, 
everybody started chanting in chorus "Sathya Sai Baba Ki Jai", "Sathya 
Sai Baba Ki Jai"! I emphatically told them that this was a name which 
they themselves had ascribed to Me and, in fact, I had no name at all! I 
declared thus on the occasion thus: 


Know that I am Sai in reality, 

Cast off your worldly relationships, 

Give up your efforts to restrain Me, 

The worldly attachments can no longer bind Me, 
None, however great he may be, can hold Me. 


(Telugu Poem) 


I got up and started walking away. In the meanwhile, all those assembled 
there including Ramana and Sastri tried to follow Me. I advised them not 
to be after Me, but, to strive for self-introspection and mental 
transformation. Since Iam not the body, none can hold Me. Therefore, I 
advised them to follow My ideals. Only then can they realise My true 
nature. 


In this vast expanse of the universe, right from the minutest atom to the 
mightiest, everything is permeated by the Atmic reality. It appears as the 
minutest of the minute and mightiest of the mighty. In fact, the principle 
of oneness that pervades microcosm and macrocosm is the fundamental 
reality which you have to enquire into. That is why Ramana Maharishi 


130 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


used to say, "Enquire, who you really are?" 
You are not a single entity. You are, in fact, three-in-one, 


The one you think you are, (body) 
The one others think you are (mind) and 
The one you really are (Atma). 


The Atma is known as conscience and the body which consists of the 
senses is called conscious. The Chaitanya (consciousness) which is 
present in all, transcends the senses. There is yet another principle that is 
beyond consciousness. It is called Super Consciousness. 

In the earlier days, not many people knew who Sai Baba was. He was 
considered a Muslim saint. When I first returned to Puttaparthi declaring 
Myself as Sai Baba, people thought that I had taken a Muslim name. But, 
no one can bind Me to a particular religion like Hinduism or Islam. 


The Vaishnavites say that Lord Vishnu is the greatest while the 
Saivites declare that Lord Siva is the greatest of all. Gaanapatyas 
(the worshippers of Ganapati) declare that Ganapati is the 
greatest. The educated say Goddess Sarada is the greatest. 
Shaaktas (worshippers of Shakti) proclaim that Goddess Shakti is 
the greatest. My devotees say I am the greatest. Some others say 
all are one. People may speak on the basis of their feelings but in 
truth, there is only one GOD and the rest are names. 


(Telugu Poem) 


Different people may ascribe different names to the Atmic Reality and try 
to define it in different ways. But, the underlying Atma Tattwa is one and 
the same. This truth has to be explained to the people in an 
understandable language. You can see that there are some houses 
beyond. In the front portion of the house, you will find a verandah; then a 
living room and then a kitchen. Thereafter, you will find a bathroom and a 
toilet. Thus, there are different names for different utilities. How did they 
acquire these names? It is only because they are so divided by walls, for 
different purposes. But, the truth is they are all parts of the same house. 
Similarly, different people have different names and they establish 
different relationships with people like mother, father, brother, etc. From 
where did you acquire these relationships? Everything is your own 
making. Remove these barriers. What remains is a vast expanse of 
oneness. One person refers to Divinity as Atma, another refers to it as 
Brahman and the third one calls it as Vishnu. These are only names 
ascribed by human beings to the nameless, formless, attributeless 
Divinity. The Brahma Tattwa is one that has no names ascribed to it. 


Where did the Brahman come from? The Atmic consciousness that 
permeates every living being is referred to as Brahman. When it is 
individualised, it is called conscience. It is also referred to as Jiva. When 
the Atma Tattwa is encased in a body, it becomes an individual. The 


131 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


individual, the Atma and consciousness - all the three are one and the 
same. People think they are different because they are given different 
names. Remove the names. There is only one Atma Tattwa in every 
individual. It has no form. It assumes different forms by joining different 
individuals. Supposing you name this object (showing a handkerchief) as 
Atma. It is a handkerchief in common parlance. But, when you look at it 
from a Spiritual angle, it is an object. I call it as thread. Again, after some 
time I refer to it as cotton; whether we call it as handkerchief or thread or 
cotton, it refers to only one object. Only different names are given to the 
object. Take for instance the names of Rama and Krishna. Rama was not 
born with that particular name. He was christened Rama only after His 
birth. No. Similarly, the name Krishna. Since He was an embodiment of 
bliss, He was referred to as Krishna. Akarshati Iti Krishna (because He 
attracts, He is Krishna). But, His real nature is Ananda. He is Ananda 
Swarupa (embodiment of bliss). The same principle of Ananda has taken 
different names. This one single principle of Ananda is: 


Brahmanandam, Parama Sukhadam, KevalamJnanamurtim, 
Dwandwateetam, Gagana Sadrisham, Tattwamasyadi Lakshyam, Ekam, 
Nityam, Vimalam, Achalam, Sarvadhee Sakshibhutam, Bhavateetam, 
Trigunarahitam 


(God is the embodiment of supreme bliss, He is wisdom absolute, the One 
without a second, beyond the pair of opposites, expansive and pervasive 
like the sky, the goal indicated by the Mahavakya Tattwamasi, the 
eternal, pure, unchanging, the witness of all functions of the intellect, 
beyond all mental conditions and the three Gunas of Sattwa, Rajas and 
Thamas). 


Divinity has no attributes. How can one give a name to it? Since it is not 
possible to assign any particular name to this principle, they named it as 
Atma. This Atma Tattwa is permeating every individual. It has no specific 
form. Explaining thus, I told those people that it is only for making them 
realise this principle that I have come. Then, Seshama Raju put a big 
question. He was a Telugu Pandit. Whatever question he put, had certain 
value. He questioned, "Who are You?" I answered, "Since you are calling 
Me as Sathya, I am Sathya. Since you are referring to Me as your brother, 
I am your brother. Since you call Me as a student, I am a student. By 
whatever name and form you refer to Me, I assume that name and form. 
In fact, no one is able to realise the truth. No one has any relationship 
whatsoever with Me. Call Me by any name, I will answer. If you call Me 
"Sai", I will answer. If you call Me "Baba", I will respond. By whatever 
name you call Me, it is the same for Me. All these names are only names 
ascribed to Me. I have, in fact, come to make you realise this truth." 


In the classroom, three of us used to share a desk - Myself in the middle, 
flanked by Ramesh and Suresh on either side. They were very young. One 
was eight years old, the other nine years and I was 8 12 years old. 
Ramesh and Suresh were not good in studies. Whenever the teachers 
asked them questions, they would give the answers prompted by Me. It 


132 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


was the time of our E.S.L.C. public examination. The roll numbers of our 
seats in the examination hall were so arranged that we had to sit 
separately, quite at a distance from each other. It was not possible for 
them to get any help from Me. They were much worried. I infused 
courage in them saying, "You need not write anything. You just attend the 
examination. I will take care of the rest." 


I completed My answer paper in a few minutes. I took some more answer 
sheets from the invigilator and wrote the answers in Ramesh's 
handwriting. After completing it, I took another set of answer sheets and 
wrote the answers in Suresh's handwriting. I also wrote their names on 
the answer sheets. When the final bell rang, all the students got up, and I 
silently placed all the three answer sheets on the table of the examiner. 
When the results were announced, only we three got first class. The 
teachers were surprised as to how Ramesh and Suresh also got first class. 
The mathematics teacher Thirumal Rao called the three of us. He asked 
Ramesh and Suresh whether they had written the answers on their own. 
Prior to this, I had cautioned Ramesh and Suresh not to reveal the truth 
under any circumstances. I told them, "If they ask you any question, tell 
them that you remembered the answers then and now have forgotten. If 
you follow My command, I am yours and you are Mine." They obeyed My 
command and told Thirumal Rao that they had written the answers on 
their own. There was no scope for any doubt. They could not have copied 
from Me, since we were seated far from each other. Their answer sheets 
were in their own handwriting. The local people were overjoyed. They 
took out a grand procession carrying us on their shoulders. 


There was a businessman by name Kote Subbanna. Somehow he came to 
know that I could compose excellent poetry. One day he came to Me and 
pleaded, "Raju, there is a new medicine by name Bala Bhaskara in my 
stores. Please write a song on the efficacy of the medicine which would 
serve as an advertisement. I will give You whatever You want. I am 
prepared to pay You any amount of money." I told him, "I am not here to 
sell My poetry. You give Me the details of the medicine. I will certainly 
compose a song for you." Then I composed the following song: 


There it is! There it is! Oh, children! come, come! 
There is the medicine Bala Bhaskara; 

Be it an upset stomach or a swollen leg; 

Be it a joint pain or flatulence; 

Be it any ailment, known or unknown; 

Take this Bala Bhaskara for an instant cure! 

If you wish to know where it is available: 

There is the shop of Kote Subbanna; 

It is in that shop that you can pick it up. 

Come here boys! come here! 

It is an excellent tonic 

Prepared by the famous physician Gopalacharya himself, 
Come here boys! come here! 


133 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


(Telugu Song) 


This song was taught to ten children who went about carrying placards 
and singing the song composed by Me in the streets. Everybody came to 
know of the medicine and all the stock was sold out in no time. Kote 
Subbanna became very popular. His joy knew no bounds. He brought a 
new pair of dress stitched for Me as an expression of his gratitude, but I 
refused to accept them. 


Meanwhile, our headmaster Lakshmipathy Sastri was transferred. All the 
students felt sorry about it. Seshama Raju was also transferred from 
Uravakonda to Kamalapuram. Hence, I had to leave Uravakonda. Ramesh 
and Suresh were very much attached to Me. Such intense love cannot be 
found even among parents and siblings. When I left Uravakonda, the 
other children in the school became inconsolable. Ramesh and Suresh did 
not shed tears but they could not bear the separation from Me. I was very 
young at that time and had to obey the command of Seshama Raju. 
Hence, I boarded the bus and left Uravakonda. Ramesh, utterly dejected, 
fell into a well and died. The second boy went on repeating "Raju, Raju, 
Raju ..." and ultimately turned mad. He was taken to various mental 
hospitals but there was no improvement. Finally, his father came to Me 
and prayed, "Suresh will be cured of his madness if he sees You at least 
once. Please come and see him." I went to the mental hospital to see 
him. He was continuously repeating "Raju, Raju, Raju ..." Seeing Me, he 
shed tears and breathed his last. 


Later, Ramesh and Suresh were born as two dogs and were brought to Me 
by an officer from Bangalore. They used to be with Me always when I was 
in Old Mandir. They were named Jack and Jill. One day, the Maharani of 
Mysore came to have My Darshan. She was a great devotee and a very 
orthodox woman. She would always maintain distance from others. She 
would not touch anything that was touched by others. She was so 
orthodox that she would insist upon giving a bath to the cow before 
milking it. As there was no proper road to Puttaparthi, she alighted from 
the car at Karnatanagepalli and walked the rest of the distance to the Old 
Mandir. How did she come? She did not want to put her foot on the road 
used by others. Hence, she had brought four wooden planks with her. She 
put her steps on each of those planks and reached the Mandir. The 
Maharani decided to rest for the night in the Mandir. The driver had his 
dinner and was returning to Karnatanagepalli where the car was parked. 
During night, there was heavy rain. The driver slept in the car and Jack 
slept under the car near the wheel. Next morning, the driver started the 
car, not knowing that Jack was sleeping under it. The wheel of the car ran 
over the back of Jack and its backbone broke. Jack dragged itself across 
the river, wailing all the while. A washerman named Subbanna used to 
take care of the Old Mandir day and night. He came running to Me and 
said, "Swami, Jack might have met with an accident. It is coming wailing 
in pain." I came out at once. Jack came close to Me, wailing loudly, fell at 
My feet and breathed its last. It was buried behind the Old Mandir and a 
Brindavanam was erected there. As Jack had passed away, Jill stopped 


134 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


eating food and died after a few days. It was also buried by the side of 
Jack. In this manner, Ramesh and Suresh did penance to be with Me 
always. Even after their death, they took birth as dogs to be with Me. 


During My childhood, I used to compose several songs with deep meaning 
and gave joy to the villagers by having them sung. One day, a communist 
party leader by name Narayana Reddy from Bukkapatnam, approached 
Me with a request to compose some songs which could inspire our 
freedom fighters. A doll was placed in a cradle on the stage. I then 
composed a song in the form of a lullaby to the doll. 


Do not cry, my child, do not cry. 

If you cry, you will not be called a valiant son of Bharat. 
Go to sleep, my child, go to sleep. 

Did you get scared because the terrible Hitler has invaded the 
invincible Russia? 

Go to sleep, my child, go to sleep. 

Do not cry, my child, do not cry. 

For the Red Army is marching under Stalin. 

They will put an end to Hitler. 

Why do you cry my child? 

Is it because the country is suffering under foreign rule? 
Do not cry, my child, do not cry. 

All the countrymen shall unite and fight to win freedom; 
Go to sleep, my child, go to sleep." 


(Telugu Song) 


The villagers listened to the song with appreciation and amazement. Many 
of them wondered as to how this young boy Sathyanarayana Raju had 
come to know about Hitler and Stalin. These names were unknown to the 
people in this region. This song was printed in a pamphlet and distributed 
in the villages. People from other political parties started coming to Me, 
requesting Me to write songs for them. Seshama Raju scolded Me, saying 
that I should not involve Myself in political affairs. I told him, "I have 
nothing to do with political parties. I don't belong to any party. All parties 
are Mine. I belong to all." 


The song became very popular in the village. They brought a few pants, 
shirts and towels for Me. But I refused to accept them. I distributed them 
to other children right in their presence. I told them, "I composed the 
song only to encourage you, not for any monetary benefits." From that 
day I stopped writing such songs. Nowadays, I don't even compose 
Bhajans. I am not writing any articles even for Sanathana Sarathi. Kasturi 
used to plead with Me to write articles. He would say, "Swami, unless 
Your Name appears in Sanathana Sarathi, it has no value at all." 


All the children in the school were very fond of Me. I too loved them 


dearly. Whenever there were any special preparations at home like Vadas 
and Pakodas, I used to take them to school and distribute to other 


133 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


children. I was friendly with all. I had no enmity towards anyone. Seeing 
My noble deeds, Ramesh and Suresh developed great attachment towards 
Me and ultimately offered their lives to Me. Because of their love and 
devotion, I helped them in their examinations. After that I never involved 
Myself in matters related to examinations. Once a government official 
asked Me, "Swami, how could You write exams on their behalf?" I replied, 
"Why not, Ramesh and Suresh are also My names." In this manner, I can 
go on narrating various incidents in My life story. There is no end to it. In 
fact, words are inadequate to describe My story. 


I always have special love for students. Similarly, students have intense 
love for Me. They seek My guidance whenever they have any problem. 
Even yesterday, a research scholar prayed for My guidance in the 
preparation of His thesis. He is writing a thesis on Mahabharata. He asked 
Me a few questions about characters like Bhishma, Bhima and 
Dharmaraja. I told him that he should find the answers by himself. Right 
now, you can find the research scholar sitting behind in the verandah. I 
told him to enquire within to find the right answers. 


Students are full of love for Swami. They consider Swami as their mother, 
father and everything. They address Me as Sai Matha. They sing, "We are 
the children of Sai Matha." When they consider Me as their mother, how 
can I not respond to their prayers? Hence, I too shower motherly love on 
them. Yad Bhavam Tad Bhavati (as is the feeling, so is the result). It is 
only a reflection of the love they have for Me. The love that exists 
between Swami and students is that of a mother and her children. Let 
anybody say anything, Swami is Your mother. I am the mother to those 
who consider Me as their mother, father to those who believe I am their 
father. I respond to you in accordance with your feelings. Even your own 
mother cannot give you as much love as Swami showers on you. 


Students! 

Work hard and study well. The two boys who are sitting down by My side 
are feeling anxious that Swami has been standing for a long time. They 
have been praying that I should sit. 


(In the end, Bhagawan permitted two former students of the Institute, 
who are presently working in different institutions of the Ashram to 
address the youth.) 


Date: 21 Oct 2003, Occasion: -, Place: Prasanthi Nilayam 


136 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


18. LOVE IS GOD - LIVE IN LOVE 


Date: 28 Oct Occasion: Vice-Chancellors’ Place: Prasanthi 
2003 Conference Nilayam 


One may master all forms of knowledge, 

One may vanquish one's adversaries in debate, 

One may fight with valour and courage in the battlefield, 

One may be an emperor reigning over vast kingdoms, 

One may offer cows and gold as an act of charity, 

One may count the countless stars in the sky, 

One may tell the names of different living creatures on the earth, 
One may be an expert in eight-limbed (Ashtanga) Yoga, 

One may reach even the moon, 

But it is near impossible to control the body, mind and senses, 
Turn the vision inward 

And achieve the supreme state of equanimity of the mind. 


(Telugu Poem) 


Embodiments of Love! 

Today, a number of discussions and deliberations are being held in the 
field of education. First and foremost, we must try to recognize the true 
meaning of education. One may read all the available books and elucidate 
the meaning contained in these books. But, that does not entitle one to 
be called an educated person. There are several highly educated people 
today in the world. But, what transformation and discriminatory power 
have they achieved on account of their education? What benefit has 
accrued to the world on account of these so called educated people? None 
tries to understand and evaluate this aspect. It is only when an educated 
person looks inward that he will be able to realize the true meaning and 
philosophy underlying education. In contrast to this situation, people are 
applying their intelligence in worldly matters. 


There are, however, some who enquire into the nature of Atma Tattwa. 
Realising the importance of an enquiry into the nature of Atma Tattwa, we 
have introduced this concept in the M.B.A. course in Sri Sathya Sai 
Institute of Higher Learning. The letters M.B.A. stand for understanding 
the nature of the mind (M), the physical body (B), and the Atma (A). It is 
easier to understand the nature of the mind and body. But, to understand 
the nature of the Atma is not that easy. No one can understand what 
Atma is. It has no form. It is pure consciousness. Even the educated 
people are unable to understand that the Atma Tattwa is consciousness. 
Most of them are able to go up to the stage of conscious. Some others are 
able to reach the next stage of conscience. The sum and substance of all 
this is that man today is unable to understand the Atma Tattwa, The pure 
consciousness. It is only when one is able to understand the conscious, he 


137 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


can understand what conscience is. Again, it is only when, one is able to 
understand conscience, he can really understand the principle of 
consciousness. Thus all the three categories of conscious, conscience and 
consciousness are interlinked. 


Dear Students! 

You may feel that spirituality is too abstract and not easily 
understandable. The Atma Tattwa cannot be understood and realized by 
merely developing material knowledge. In fact, Atma Tattwa is beyond 
the scope of material knowledge. It is transcendental. It is fundamental 
knowledge. It is at the base of all physical, material and secular 
knowledge. 


Dear Students! 

You may be under the mistaken impression that spirituality is that which 
cannot be understood. But, this is not correct. Spirituality is 
consciousness which has an inner meaning. What is awareness? Our 
normal understanding of this term is awareness about a particular object 
or aspect. Take for instance (showing a handkerchief), this object. When 

a question is put as to what it is, the answer comes that it is a 
handkerchief. This knowledge about the object is considered to be 
awareness. Again, when I question you (showing a flower) what it is, you 
reply that it is a flower. This is also considered to be an awareness. All 
these are the outer forms of different material objects. This is a cloth 
(showing the handkerchief). What is the basis for this cloth? The thread. 
Again, what is the basis for this thread? The cotton. Thus this cloth cannot 
be made without the thread and cotton. The cotton is the fundamental 
object that forms the basis for the thread and the cloth. Unfortunately, 
today we are only recognizing the cloth, but not the fundamental object of 
cotton, the basis for the cloth. Therefore, what is of paramount 
importance today is to recognize the Atma Tattwa that is at the root of all 
knowledge. If one is able to realize this Atma Tattwa, he can easily realize 
every other aspect. 


What is Atma Tattwa? For example, we have the physical body. This body 
has several limbs which function continuously. But, what is it that makes 
the limbs in the body function? We hold a particular object, say, a flower 
with one hand. What is it that gives power to the hand to hold the flower? 
We smell the flower. From where did we get this power of smelling? We 
do not make any effort to understand and recognize the inner source of 
all these powers; i.e., the Atma Tattwa. We say this is my hand, my leg, 
my finger, my head, etc. But, who are you? This "you" has to be 
understood first, so that you can say my hand, my leg, my finger, my 
head, etc. Whose head is this? Whose leg is this? Unless you understand 
this aspect how can you say "I" and "Mine"? Vedantha is that knowledge 
which is concerned about "who are you?" and "who am I?" But, none 
makes any effort to enquire into himself "who am I?" The fundamental 
question for the basis for everything in this universe is: "Who am I?" If 
one has understood this "I", he would have understood everything else. 
Spirituality is not something ununderstandable or a futile exercise. There 


138 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


is a fundamental principle in this universe which is the prime mover. We 
must make efforts to understand that fundamental principle. 


Embodiments of Love! 

What is Love? What is its nature? From where does this originate? Cana 
human being live without love? Impossible. That is why, it is said, "Love is 
God; Live in Love". One has to understand this principle of Love, which is 
the basis for everything in this universe. Without Love, there cannot be 
life in this world. There is an underlying power that permeates the entire 
universe. That is Truth. What is Truth? Truth is said to be 
"Trikalabadhyam Sathyam" - It is present in all the periods of time: past, 
present and future. However, we cannot come to a conclusion only on 
account of that dictum. "Sathyam" (Truth) is that which transcends time. 
There is no tangible form for the concept of Truth. But, there is meaning. 
We say, "Truth is God, Love is God". We go on repeating the word "God". 
We make use of this word "God" in different circumstances. Even an 
atheist says "Oh! My God!", whenever he commits a mistake. People use 
this word "God" even without knowing its meaning. 


However, none can define the term properly. Similarly, none can define 
the term "Truth". The most appropriate method would be by one's own 
experience. How can one correctly describe that experience? For example, 
one can go on repeatingi+1=2,2+2=4and2-1=1etc., ad 
infinitum. He can only repeat plus and minus, no one can define the basis 
for the calculations. We are able to give names of different objects in this 
world. But, we are not making any effort to understand the true nature of 
these objects. The whole world is full of material objects. This is a 
material world. However, there is something beyond this material world. 
That is, "Buddhi grahyamatheendriyam" (that which is unintelligible and 
beyond the grasp of the intellect). That is transcendental. We can count 
the objects in this world and say that there are so many crores of objects. 
What is there beyond that number? Thus, when you go on enquiring, you 
will end up nowhere. The fact is there is a fundamental principle that is 
present in every human being. When you say "Love is God", that "Love" is 
everywhere, omnipresent. This fundamental principle of Love is present in 
every human being, nay, in every living being. When you say "Truth is in 
me" and "I am Truth" what does it mean? What is that "I" and "Me"? If 
you analyse carefully, this "I" in you is also the "I" in others. This is the 
only Truth. This Truth can be understood only by spiritual enquiry. And 
that too by a steady and sincere enquiry into one's own nature. Few 
undertake such an enquiry today. We are making use of several terms in 
a casual manner, without understanding their real meaning . 


Embodiments of Love! 

You need not have to waste your time, however, in trying to understand 
some abstract concepts which you are unable to comprehend. You just 
develop firm faith in the existence of God. You firmly believe that there is 
God and you are God. We cannot understand anything without 
developing faith. Hence, first and foremost, develop firm faith in the 
concept of "I". Only then can you understand the second concept "you". A 


139 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


small example. When "I" and "you" join together, it becomes "we". 
However, "we" + "He" becomes only "He", who exists forever. The "I" and 
"you" change constantly. When you are a child you say "Iam a boy". 
When you are a youth, you say "Iam aman". Similarly, when you are 
old, you say, "I am an old man". Thus, you are undergoing constant 
changes in different stages of life. Hence, there is no use in sticking on to 
this changing principle. Attach yourself to the changeless principle, i.e., 
"He". That "He" is God. That "He" is present in you, him and in every 
person. "He is everywhere - within you, above you, below you and around 
you". Therefore this "He" principle represents the omnipresent Divinity. 
People should develop firm faith in such a Divine Principle. Supposing you 
say "I love Him" and none else. How can this be true? It means that you 
do not love yourself. When you say "this is my body", can you believe this 
body? You cannot, since it undergoes constant changes and is perishable. 
However, the non-dual principle of Atma Tattwa immanent in the body is 
eternal and transcendental. It has no other name, except "Atma". Then, 
the question arises as to who has given that name. In fact, this name did 
not come from somebody. The Atma is omnipresent. "He" is everywhere. 
How can one give a name to such an all-pervading Atma Tattwa? It is 
only a futile exercise. 


Do not waste your time in this futile exercise. Develop firm faith in this 
omnipresent Atma Tattwa and propagate it. That faith is awareness. 
Without that awareness you cannot exist. This is a rose flower (Showing a 
rose flower). You have recognized it as such. But, who gave that name to 
this flower? You do not know. You simply repeat a name that is given to a 
flower in the English language. Thus, we go on repeating the words 
without understanding the underlying Truth. Hence, first and foremost, 
one has to turn his vision inwards and meditate upon the Atma Tattwa 
present in him. This Atma Tattwa can be realized only by constant 
sadhana. It is only after realizing this Atma Tattwa can one enter into any 
discussion. Also understand the nature of the physical body. The physical 
body consists of various limbs. In all these limbs, you will find the 
principle of "I", immanent. That is why, you say that this is my body, my 
hand, my finger, etc. When you go on enquiring into the nature of the 
body, you will realize that the same principle of "I" is present in all the 
limbs. It is very difficult to understand the spiritual concepts. But, you 
should not give up your sadhana on that score. On the other hand it has 
to be pursued vigorously. It is futile to run after the worldly objects. If 
you are able to understand the Atma Tattwa, it amounts to understanding 
everything else. If you go on enquiring "who am I", you will ultimately 
realize the Truth that the "I" principle is nothing but the Atma Tattwa. 
Develop firm faith in that Atma Tattwa. 


Several people give different names to the principle of Atma Tattwa. But, 
it has no name and form at all. It is beyond all names and forms. It is 
transcendental. The power of consciousness immanent in man is not to be 
found anywhere else. One has to understand and realize this 
consciousness. This is possible only by constant sadhana and enquiry. 


140 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


Embodiments of Love! 


You students cannot understand spiritual concepts so easily. However, if 
you develop firm faith, you will be able to understand these things easily. 
But today people have become blind having lost the eyes of faith. What is 
Prema (Love)? You do not know. What is darkness? Is there anybody 
today who has seen darkness? Just close your eyes. What do you see? 
You reply that you are seeing darkness. It means that you are able to see 
and recognize darkness. Otherwise, how can you Say that it is darkness? 
Therefore, it is established that there is a basis for everything in this 
world. In order to realize the Truth, one has to develop faith. You carry on 
your life's journey with firm faith as your guide. You are going 
somewhere, unless you know where you are going, how can you reach 
your destination? Hence, make a firm resolve that you are going to the 
Mandir. Only then can you reach the Mandir. Similarly, first and foremost, 
make Atma Tattwa as your goal in life's journey. 


Embodiments of Love! 


You are not able to understand what real Prema (love) is. You love the 
physical body and its beauty. You love wealth. You love the external form. 
You love one's outward behaviour. Wherefrom do all these things come? 
What is the basis for all these aspects? How long will these external forms 
remain? All of them undergo changes continuously. What is the use of 
clinging to these changing external forms? You must direct your love to 
the changeless principle of Atma Tattwa. The Atma Tattwa does not 
undergo any change, whatsoever. Nothing can be added to it nor deleted 
from it. Therefore, you must develop firm faith in such a changeless 
principle. You often say that you love so and so very much. But, what do 
you know of him? Do you love his physical form? Did you develop liking 
for his behaviour? Do you love his sweet disposition? What is it that has 
drawn you to him? In fact, all these factors are only transitory. There is, 
however, one quality in you that is responsible for all this. That is love. 
That love of God. Love is His form. 


Hence, you cultivate love for love's sake. There cannot be life without 
love. A small example to illustrate the point. A mother has a son. He is 20 
years old. After sometime, the son died. Then, the mother was wailing 
over the body of the son "Oh! Son! I was able to live as long as you were 
alive. How can I live now?" Such type of grief is the result of attachment 
of the mother developed towards the physical form of the son. It is not 
true love. What is important is love; but not love for the physical form. It 
is only those who are able to love for love's sake, can attain real love. 
Those who love the physical body do so as long as the body is present. 
Thereafter the love ebbs away. Therefore, love for love's sake. Such love 
is life. That life is God. That is Atma Tattwa, verily. Atma Tattwa is the 
only reality. 


141 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


Embodiments of Love! 
You have to seek love through love only. The Gopikas prayed thus: 


Oh Krishna, play your sweet flute and sow the seeds of love in the 
desert of loveless hearts. 
Let the rain of love fall on earth and make the rivers of love flow. 


(Telugu Song) 


The rivers of love must flow continuously. It is enough, if you can 
understand the one principle of love. This love is everything. Treat this 
love as the be-all and end-all of your life. Do not direct your love towards 
material objects. If you continue to love for love's sake, then such a love 
will be eternal. It is not the body that is to be loved, but the principle of 
love. All the names and forms are evanescent and impermanent. We 
should not love such things. Love directed towards such things is physical, 
whereas love for love's sake is eternal. Consider Truth as Truth. You 
should not associate Truth with material objects. Similarly, love should 
not be associated with material objects. Love is simply love. As such, love 
is God. You must attain Divinity with such love. 


Dear students! 

You encounter several appointments (expectations) and disappointments 
in life. When you have an appointment, you will have a disappointment 
also when it is not fulfilled. Therefore, do not have appointments (desires) 
at all. Then, there is no scope for disappointment. Do not give importance 
to the form. In fact, your Atma Tattwa represents your true form. Do not 
confine Divinity to a particular name and form. The names like Rama, 
Krishna, Govinda are only names attributed by man to God. They are not 
innate. Not much of importance can be attached to them. However, one 
has to take a particular name in the initial stages of his spiritual quest. 
For instance, it is necessary to acquire different types of education. It is 
also necessary to realize the essence of all the education. That is, of 
course, the Truth. But how long? Until you experience that essence. Once 
you experience the essence of knowledge, even that vanishes. Hence, do 
not depend upon the name and form. Truth is Truth. That is the only 
Truth. It has no form. Love is God. Love has no form. Cultivate such 
Divine Love. God exists. There can be no doubt about it. If God does not 
exist, there is no scope for nature to exist. From an experience of 
Prakruthi (Nature) emerges apprehension of Paramathma (the supreme 
self). From Paramathma, the realization of Paratattwa (Supreme Reality) 
springs. That Paratattwa is Atma Tattwa. Therefore, always love that 
Paratattwa. Do not confine your love to the particular, which is always 
susceptible to change. Time permitting, I will delineate on this Prema 
Tattwa (Principle of Love) in greater detail. When students are able to 
understand the nature of this divine love, there can be no scope for 
disappointment. They are always engrossed in appointment and 
disappointment. Love has only a name, but no form. You can direct that 
love towards any form. 


142 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


Embodiments of Love! 

God can be attained only through one route. That is Love. That is Truth. 
Do not confine the principle "I" to a particular form. A small example. 
Janakiramaiah (younger brother of Swami's physical body) died recently. 
There are several people who loved him. They have been making obituary 
references everyday in the newspapers, saying "Janakiramaiah! You have 
left your mortal coil, leaving us alone. You please take birth again, so that 
we can love you again". Is it necessary for Janakiramaiah to take birth 
once again in order that these people may love him? Is that what these 
people wish for? Should we confine our entire life to birth and death only? 
In fact, both birth and death are unreal. Where there is birth, there is 
death surely. The twin stages of life, i.e., birth and death are only for the 
body, not for the Atma. We have to direct our love towards the Eternal 
Atma Tattwa, not the body which is subject to birth and death. I often 
address you as "Bangaru!" What is the underlying meaning in addressing 
you in that manner? Gold as a metal does not perish. Its shape changes 
when it is melted and made into different types of ornaments. You, as 
gold may take different forms, but your Atma Tattwa does not undergo 
any change. You have to strive to attain the changeless principle of Atma 
Tattwa, but not the changing forms. I address you as "Bangaru!", 
reminding you of your real nature, i.e., the changeless Atma Tattwa. Gold 
is always gold. It is Truth. It is eternal. You have to always crave for 
attaining such an eternal reality. Keeping this aspect in view only, Adi 
Shankara in his famous "Bhaja Govindam" sang thus: 


Punarapi Jananam Punarapi Maranam 

Punarapi Janani Jathare Sayanam 

Iha Samsare Bahu Dustare 

Kripayapare Pahi Murare. 

(Oh Lord! I am caught up in this cycle of birth and death; time and again, 
I am experiencing the agony of staying in the mother's womb. It is very 
difficult to cross this ocean of worldly life. Please take me across this 
ocean and grant me liberation.) 


We have to crave for that principle which has no birth and death. Why 
should we wish to be born again? 


Embodiments of Love! 

There is Divine Love in you which has neither birth nor death. You direct 
your love towards that Divine Love. That love is always with you. If you 
cultivate such love, you will always remain as embodiments of love. Have 
firm faith in this Divine Love. Do not believe the worldly love, lest you 
should be deceived. The worldly love is like passing clouds. Such clouds 
come and go. They are not permanent. Love the eternal love. That is the 
Atma Tattwa. Love that Atma Tattwa. People who wish to enter the 
spiritual field and to know the path that leads to Divinity, please come to 
Me. I will explain. Do not be deceived by worldly love that causes only 
disappointment. Cultivate such type of love that will not cause 
disappointment. Pursue any type of education; but, understand the inner 


143 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


meaning of education. Then put it into practice, experience and enjoy that 
essence of that education. Do not be disappointed by directing your love 
towards all and sundry. Several students are being disappointed in that 
manner. In the end, they are unable to love anybody. That is not the right 
way. Love the principle of Love itself, which is Divine and Eternal. The 
more you love that Divine Love, the more it grows. 


Embodiments of Love! 

I always address you as "Embodiments of Love!" Cultivate such type of 
love only. When you cultivate such love, it will, in turn, protect you. That 
is what is meant by the saying, "with you, in you and around you". 


(Bhagawan concluded the Divine Discourse with the Bhajan "Prema 
Muditha Manase Kaho...") 


(The Programme ended with singing of the National Anthem.) 


Date: 28 Oct 2003, Occasion: Vice-Chancellors’ Conference, 
Place: Prasanthi Nilayam 


144 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


19. DIVINE DISCOURSE 


Date: 22 Occasion: Convocation of Sri Sathya Sai Place: Prasanthi 
Nov 2003 Institute of Higher Learning Nilayam 


This land of Bharat is the motherland for great people, who 
acquired name and fame in different continents. This land of 
Bharat is the battlefield where the warriors of the foreign country 
were driven out and freedom from foreign rule acquired. This land 
of Bharat has acquired great name and fame for erudite 
scholarship. This land of Bharat is a divine land which has 
produced great intellectuals in the fields of music, art, literature 
and various sciences. Having been born in such a great land of 
Bharat, Oh students! The responsibility to protect the wealth of 
righteousness of this country is yours. 


(Telugu Poem) 


Embodiments of Love! 


Bharat has earned great reputation in all fields of human endeavour, be it 
physical, spiritual, moral and ethical. It is a matter of great pride to 
declare "I am a Bharatiya". Having been born in this sacred land of Bharat 
and having enjoyed its wealth, water and food, it is unfortunate that some 
people feel ashamed to identify themselves as Bharatiyas. Many people 
born in this sacred land have earned good reputation. But unfortunately, 
Bharatiyas instead of marching ahead with courage and determination are 
falling back. Truly speaking, to earn the epithet of Bharatiya is in itself a 
great honour. Having earned such appellation, the citizens of this country 
should become role models for the rest of the world. The culture of Bharat 
is renowned worldwide for its sacredness. It has demonstrated great 
ideals in moral, ethical and spiritual fields. Having taken birth in such a 
sacred land, how noble a Bharatiya should be! You should uphold the 
prestige and honour of this country. 


Embodiments of Love! 


The sacred culture of Bharat should be practised and propagated in every 
nook and corner of the country. It should be passed on to generation 
after generation. But alas! many Bharatiyas are migrating to foreign lands 
forgetting their own motherland. To forget ones motherland amounts to 
ingratitude. Every son of Bharat should live true to his name and bring 
glory to the motherland. But instead some are bringing bad name to the 
country. Bharat is a sacred land, its glory keeps increasing day by day. 
You need not make any special effort to bring good name to the country; 


145 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


it is enough if you lead your life in an ideal manner like a true Bharatiya. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Bharat is the crest jewel among all nations. It rests on the strong 
foundation of love. It has demonstrated ideals in all fields of life. One who 
forgets such a sacred land will certainly be put to disrepute. Wherever 
you go, you should feel proud to proclaim that you are a Bharatiya. 
People with such patriotism and nationalism are very rare these days. 
Instead of bringing glory to the motherland, people are going abroad to 
meet their selfish ends. Having gone there, they forget the motherland 
and spend their time and energy for the progress of that country. You can 
very well imagine the fate of a person who forgets his mother. Mother and 
the motherland are to be revered by one and all. Bharat is the land of the 
Vedas. The glory of Bharatiya culture cannot be described in words. You 
should make effort to uphold this sacred culture and earn a good name 
for yourself. You should strain every sinew and discharge your duties to 
perfection. But Bharatiyas who are supposed to demonstrate idealism to 
others are failing in this regard. Since ancient times, Bharat has 
demonstrated idealism to all nations. The name and fame that Bharat has 
acquired is unmatched. Bharat is the centre of righteousness. It lays great 
emphasis on the practise of truth and righteousness. Sathyam Vada, 
Dharmam Chara (speak truth, practise righteousness). But today people 
have lost regard for truth and righteousness. Dharayati iti Dharma (that 
which supports is Dharma). The code of conduct as prescribed by the 
culture of Bharat is most ideal and should be practised by one and all. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Ancient Bharatiyas never craved for name and fame. They attained glory 
on account of their nobility. The culture of Bharat has laid great emphasis 
on the spirit of sacrifice. Our ancients placed national interest above self- 
interest. They had no trace of selfishness in them. That is why their glory 
has not diminished a bit with the passage of time. They took refuge in 
righteousness. They considered truth as their life-breath. But today are 
we making any efforts to uphold the pristine glory of Bharat? Days are 
rolling by but Bharatiyas are not striving for the uplift of the nation, 
instead they are forgetting their own culture. He is a true Bharatiya who 
is prepared to sacrifice even his life for the sake of Dnarma. 


This land of Bharat is the motherland for great people, who acquired 
name and fame in different continents. Bharat Matha (mother India) was 
adorned with the garland of righteous people. But such garland has faded 
today. But the culture of Bharat will never fade with the passage of time. 
It is eternal and immortal. Ancient Bharatiyas adhered to Sathya and 
Dharma even in small matters. Sathya and Dharma were their guiding 
principles. That is why their lives continue to inspire people even after 
many aeons and generations. But today Bharatiyas are after money. How 


146 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


long will the money last. Money comes and goes, morality comes and 
grows. You can be called a Bharatiya only when you develop morality. 


Students - Boys and Girls! 

Remember always that your education is not merely to amass wealth or 
to eke out a livelihood. Money cannot confer true happiness on you. Do 
not deviate from Dharma for the sake of Dnana (money). Dharma is our 
life, truth is our breath. Good reputation is our wealth. You should not 
crave for worldly name and fame. Once you practise Dharma, you will 
naturally attain good reputation. Dharma is related to the heart. Practise 
of Dharma is termed as Ritam which will make you immortal. But today 
we do not find anybody adhering to Ritam. Bharat has given birth to 
many great scholars, poets and men of sacrifice who demonstrated great 
ideals. But today people have forgotten them. We should always 
remember people who have sacrificed their life for a noble cause and try 
to emulate them. It is the spirit of sacrifice that has protected and 
sustained this country for many ages and generations. Sacrifice is the 
Dharma of Bharatiyas. You should offer your lives for the protection of 
Dharma and not for amassing wealth. 


Embodiments of Love! 

Love is the eternal principle that is present in all. There is no human being 
without love. But he is using his love for selfish purposes. You should 
eschew selfishness and self-interest and develop spirit of sacrifice with 
courage and conviction. How can you become courageous? It is possible 
only when you practise Dharma. Bharat has given birth to many noble 
persons who sacrificed their lives for the cause of Dharma. Endaro 
Mahanubhavulu, Andariki Vandanamulu (there are many great souls; I 
prostrate before all of them). They never craved for name and fame. They 
led a life of Thyaga (sacrifice). Thyaga is true Yoga. You should practise 
this Yoga and become deserving of Divine grace. Your studies are not 
meant for the acquisition of money but for understanding the nature of 
mind. Today wherever you see, money is given prime importance. Even 
the field of music has become money-centred. Music can captivate the 
heart. It is divine. M.S. Subbulakshmi has earned great reputation with 
her melodious singing. She never craved for money. She dedicated her 
music to uphold the glory of Bharat. Everyone should strive for the 
honour of the country. No doubt man has acquired expertise in the fields 
of music, literature and fine arts, but he is using his skill to earn money. 
He has become business-minded. Any activity done with a business mind 
cannot please the heart. You should conduct self-enquiry and develop 
spirit of sacrifice. Only then can there be a transformation of heart. 


Where there is self-confidence, there is self-satisfaction. Where there is 
self-satisfaction, there is self-sacrifice. And, through self-sacrifice comes 
self-realisation. 


So long as you do not give up selfishness, you cannot achieve anything 


worthwhile in life. Fish is better than selfish. You should cast aside 
selfishness and cultivate selflessness. 


147 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


Embodiments of Love! 


You are acquiring various types of education. In spite of his 
education and intelligence, a foolish man will not know his true 
Self and a mean-minded person will not give up his evil qualities. 
Modern education leads only to argumentation, not to total 
wisdom. What is the use of acquiring worldly education if it 
cannot lead you to immortality? Acquire the knowledge that will 
make you immortal. 


(Telugu Poem) 


You should acquire the knowledge of the Self. Consider it as your very 
life. Knowledge is your true energy. But man is ruining his energy 
because of his selfishness and self-interest. You should sacrifice your self- 
interest. Only then can you be truly called the children of Bharat. 


Students - Boys and Girls! 

Give up selfishness. Develop the spirit of sacrifice. Be prepared to 
sacrifice your life for the sake of Sathya and Dharma. Today people are 
afraid to follow the path of truth. Why should one be afraid to speak 
truth? In fact, one should be afraid to utter falsehood. One who adheres 
to truth is always fearless. When you do not follow the path of truth, the 
fire of fear will burn you to ashes. 


Embodiments of Love! 

Consider love as your life and truth as your breath. There is an intimate 
and inseparable relationship between love and truth. Today man uses the 
word love without actually knowing its meaning. As he does not know the 
value and meaning of love, he is utilising it for trivial and mundane 
purposes. He is under the mistaken notion that worldly and physical 
attachment is love and considers such love as his life. True love will reign 
supreme only when he gets rid of selfishness and develops spirit of 
sacrifice. Love is God, God is love. But you are craving for worldly love 
which is bereft of life. You should aspire for divine love which is your very 
life. 


Today there are many who are highly educated. But what is the help they 
are rendering to society? Practically nothing. They are acquiring degrees 
for the sake of earning money. They do not serve society with the spirit of 
love and sacrifice. Love is the very form of Brahman. True spiritual 
discipline lies in connecting your love with divine love. Your life will be 
sanctified when you have steady and selfless love. 


Embodiments of Love! 

Modern students are taking to wrong path in the name of love. They do 
not understand what true love is. Love is the gift of God to every man. It 
should be utilised for the service of society. Unity is very essential for the 
progress of community. Man should share his love with others. Only then 
will he have the right to be a part of society. 


148 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


Embodiments of Love! 

Love is a small word, but it is pregnant with profound meaning. But 
people use it in the worldly sense, "I love you, I love you ..." You should 
be prepared to sacrifice for others all that is dear to you. That is true love. 
Love is God, live in love. Only then will you be able to understand the true 
nature of love. Do not misinterpret love in the worldly sense. Do not 
equate love to physical relationship. You should be prepared to give up 
your love for love. But today nobody is prepared to sacrifice their life for 
love. People are ready to take others' life to meet their selfish ends. 


Students! 

You might have acquired high educational qualifications. But all these will 
prove futile if you do not earn Divine love. Only God's love is true and 
eternal. Worldly love is transient. It attracts you for a moment like a 
twinkling star. Acquire divine love which is the fundamental principle of 
your life. Be prepared to offer your life for the sake of Divine love. 


Students! 

All of you should live like brothers and sisters. All are the children of God. 
When you realise this truth, you will experience true love. You are born to 
different parents but the life principle in each of you is one and the same. 
Consider love as your life. Only then the education you acquire will be 
meaningful. If you forget love, your life becomes meaningless. Live for 
the sake of love. Share your love with your fellowmen and become 
recipients of Divine love. What you have to share with others is not 
worldly love. True love is related to the heart. People talk of Divine love 
but get intoxicated by drinking the deep wine of worldly love. Love 
everybody without a trace of selfishness. That is Divine love. Only when 
you develop such love can you attain the ultimate merger with the Divine. 
Pray to God for His love. Lead your lives spreading the message of love. 
Love is the goal of your life. Once you become the recipient of God's love, 
you will be loved by the whole world. Such is the power of God's love. It 
is totally selfless and sacred. Hence, always pray for His love. 


Embodiments of Love! 

I am prepared to do anything, even sacrifice My life for your welfare. I 
expect from you only one thing - Love God, Live in God. Only then can 
you be called a true student. If you crave for worldly love, you will 
become a stupid. Heart-to-heart, love to love - This is the type of 
relationship you should develop. Do not crave for money. It comes and 
goes. Share your love with everyone wholeheartedly. Bereft of love, heart 
becomes dry. Fill it with love and keep it always pure and fresh. Love is 
not related to materials. It is related to the heart. 


Students! 

What is Vidya (education)? It is not study of matter. True education is the 
experience of effulgent love. Any number of electric bulbs cannot match 
the effulgence of love. Hence, develop love Bangaru! Only then will your 
education be fruitful. Knowledge is God's gift. It should not be offered to 


149 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


others; it should be offered only to God. 


Embodiments of Love! 

Love is your life. Love is your goal. The Bhagavadgita also lays great 
emphasis on the principle of love. Having studied here for a long time, 
you should fill your life with love. You have immense love for Me. It 
cannot be described in words. Love others as you love Swami. Give Me 
your love. Take My love in turn. There is no trace of body attachment in 
Me. Doctors said they would perform hip surgery on Me. I told "You can 
do whatever you want. I am not the body. This body is yours." Your love 
becomes worldly in nature when you have body consciousness. You 
should develop such love which transcends body consciousness. Only then 
can you understand the eternal truth. When you truly experience Divine 
love, you will not lead a worldly life. You will make your love flow 
incessantly towards God. 


(The function concluded with the singing of National Anthem.) 


Date: 22 Nov 2003, Occasion: Convocation of Sri Sathya Sai 
Institute of Higher Learning, Place: Prasanthi Nilayam 


150 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


20. MOTHER’S ROLE IN HUMAN VALUES 


Date: 23 Nov Occasion: Birthday Place: Prasanthi 
2003 Celebrations Nilayam 


Bereft of truth, righteousness, love and peace, the value of all 
your education is zero, 

Bereft of truth, righteousness, love and peace, the result of all 
your good deeds is zero, 

Bereft of truth, righteousness, love and peace, the utility of 
holding positions of authority is zero, 

Bereft of truth, righteousness, love and peace, the sanctity of all 
your acts of charity is zero, 

These four qualities are the four pillars that support the mansion 
of Sanathana Dharma. 


(Telugu Poem) 


Embodiments of Love! 

The mansion of human life rests on the four pillars of truth, 
righteousness, love and peace. The safety and security of life depend on 
these four values. Since ancient times, the culture of Bharat has been 
able to sustain itself as it is built on the bedrock of these values. Our 
ancestors led their lives strictly adhering to these eternal values. Bereft of 
these values, the mansion of life will collapse in a moment. Humanity 
continues to exist till this day only due to the fact that he/she is practising 
these four values at least to a certain extent. 


The individual child's life is greatly influenced by the qualities of the 
parents. The loving care of Jijabai made Shivaji a great warrior. Rama's 
divinity blossomed because of the noble qualities of His mother Kausalya. 
The twins Lava and Kusha could become powerful and famous due to their 
noble and virtuous mother Sita. The same can be said of our ancient 
sages and seers. They could sanctify their lives because of the noble 
influence of their parents. Today, people neglect their parents as they fail 
to recognise the impact and influence they bear on their lives. They forget 
the fact that they could attain exalted position in life only because of their 
parents. Gandhi became a Mahatma because of his pious mother Putlibai. 
She used to observe a strict vow wherein she would wait for the cooing of 
the cuckoo before partaking of her food. However, on one day, she had to 
wait for a long time for the call of the cuckoo without taking food. The 
young Gandhi could not bear to see his mother fasting for such a long 
time. Hence, he went out of the house and imitated the cooing of the 
cuckoo. Then he came inside and told, "Mother, now that the cuckoo has 
made its call, please take your food." She at once recognised that her son 
was telling a lie. Unable to contain her grief, she slapped Gandhi on his 
cheeks and said, "What sin have I committed that such a liar should be 


131 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


born to me!" She was shedding tears as she spoke. Gandhi repented and 
prayed for her forgiveness. He took a pledge that he would never utter a 
lie thenceforth. In this manner, our ancients developed virtues and 
attained exalted position only because of their mothers. Today, the 
country is facing hardship as people have no regard for truth and are 
indulging in falsehood in their thoughts, words and deeds. The welfare of 
a nation depends on the teaching that the mother imparts to her children. 
When parents tread the path of truth, the children would naturally 
emulate them. 


In olden days, it was a common practice among the women of Bharat to 
perform the sacred ritual of Sathyanarayana Vratam, on every full moon 
day. Likewise, mother Easwaramma used to perform Sathyanarayana 
Vratam every full moon day in the company of Karanam Subbamma, who 
was her neighbour. Karanam Subbamma would often tell Easwaramma, 
"You are performing Sathyanarayana Vratam. With His blessings, you will 
bear a son. I want you to name him Sathyanarayana." On a particular full 
moon day, Easwaramma did not have food till very late in the afternoon 
as she was participating in the Sathyanarayana Vratam being performed 
in Subbamma's house. 


The family members including her husband Pedda Venkama Raju were 
very much upset to see her remain without food for such a long time. 
Pedda Venkama Raju argued that there was no need to observe such 
severe austerities. But Easwaramma was determined. She told them not 
to wait for her saying, "I am not at all hungry. Sathyanarayana Vratam is 
more important for me than food." After the ritual was completed, 
Subbamma brought Prasadam (blessed food) for Easwaramma. Only after 
partaking of the Prasadam did Easwaramma have her food that day. 
Women in those days used to perform such rituals with all sincerity and 
devotion. It was only after partaking of Prasadam could Easwaramma 
conceive. Yad Bhavam Tad Bhavati (as is the feeling, so is the result). 
Some people have faith in scriptural injunctions and adhere to them with 
earnestness, whereas some others ignore them. Easwaramma was the 
one who followed the injunctions strictly. Only after performing the 
Vratam and partaking of the Prasadam, would she commence her 
household chores. She was unlettered. But she had unflinching faith in 
God. During the seventh month of her pregnancy, one day Subbamma 
told her, "Easwaramma, the child in your womb is safe only due to the 
grace of Lord Sathyanarayana." She extracted a promise from her that 
the child would be named Sathyanarayana. The mother of Pedda 
Venkama Raju was also a great devotee of the Lord. She too was of the 
opinion that the child should be named after Lord Sathyanarayana. 


Prior to the birth of the child, a very significant incident took place. 
Puttaparthi, was then a tiny hamlet. In the centre there was a well from 
which people would draw water. One day Easwaramma was fetching 
water from the well. All of a sudden she saw a white luminous light, 
emerging like lightning from the sky, entering her womb. There was a 
sudden gust of wind. Subbamma who came out of her house at that time 


152 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


saw the light entering the womb of Easwaramma. Till this day, I have not 
revealed this to anyone. I am disclosing this today so that you may 
understand the significance associated with the advent of the Avatar. A 
day prior to this, as Pedda Venkama Raju was passing in front of 
Subbamma's house, she called him inside and told him, "Venkama Raju, 
tomorrow when the child is born, name him as Sathyanarayana." But he 
brushed her advice aside saying, it was her foolish imagination. 


At 3 o'clock in the morning, at an auspicious moment, the child was born. 
It is natural for any child to cry when it is born. But this child did not cry 
at all. The midwife and the people in the household were anxious that the 
child might be stillborn. Easwaramma too was very much worried. 
Without anybody noticing her, she pinched the child to make it cry. On 
the contrary, to her utter surprise, the baby started smiling. Everyone 
was mystified to see the newborn babe smiling. Just then Subbamma 
entered the house and said, "Easwaramma, I heard that you have given 
birth to a male child at an auspicious moment. Can I have a glimpse of 
the child?" Easwaramma wrapped the child in a cloth and placed him in 
front of Subbamma. Subbamma was an orthodox Brahmin lady. In those 
days, orthodox Brahmins would maintain distance from others. If they 
happened to touch them inadvertently, they would at once have a bath. 
That was the reason, why Easwaramma kept the baby at a distance from 
Subbamma. Watching this, the mother-in-law said, "Easwaramma, she 
has come here with a lot of love and concern to see the child. Why don't 
you let Subbamma hold the child in her arms? Why do you keep him at a 
distance?" Easwaramma said, "Oh mother! Subbamma is a very pious and 
orthodox brahmin lady. She may not like to touch the newborn baby. 
Hence, we should maintain distance from her." In fact, Subbamma herself 
had no such discriminatory feelings. 


Mother Easwaramma looked after her child with love and care. Days rolled 
by and the child grew into a boy. He was mithabhashi and mithaahari 
(one who spoke less and ate less). Easwaramma was mystified by the 
strange behaviour of her son. Usually children are fond of eating. 
Especially some people would prefer non-vegetarian items like fish or 
meat. But her son was totally averse to non-vegetarian food. He would 
not even visit the houses where non-vegetarian food was cooked. Seeing 
his noble qualities, Easwaramma realised that the child was not an 
ordinary one, but one of divine nature. Her eldest daughter Venkamma 
also recognised the divine nature of the child. Together, they brought up 
the child with love and care. They would sing devotional songs as 
lullabies. The child was brought up in such a noble environment. 


As there was no proper school in Puttaparthi, Seshama Raju, the elder 
brother of this body, took Me to Uravakonda and admitted Me in a school. 
The then Municipal Chairman of Bellary, Rama Raju was a friend of 
Seshama Raju. He took us to the Virupaksha temple in Hampi during 
holidays. I was reluctant to enter the temple. Hence, Seshama Raju 
instructed Me to keep a watch over their belongings as they went inside 
to have Darshan of the deity. I readily agreed and remained outside. The 


153 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


priest was giving arati to the deity. To their utter astonishment, they 
found Me standing inside the sanctum sanctorum in place of Lord 
Virupaksha. Seshama Raju could not believe his eyes. In fact, he was 
very angry thinking that I was transgressing My limits. He thought it was 
improper on My part to have entered the sanctum sanctorum. He at once 
came out of the temple only to find Me there! He again went inside and 
found Me there also! Still he was having doubts. He told his wife, "You go 
outside and keep a watch over Sathya. Do not allow Him to go anywhere. 
Meanwhile, I will go inside and see whether He is still there." She did 
accordingly. He again saw a smiling Sathya standing in the sanctum 
sanctorum. He wondered whether it was a dream, hallucination or reality. 
At that time, his friend Rama Raju noticed a brilliant aura around My face. 
He revealed this only to his wife and not to anybody else including 
Seshama Raju. In fact, Seshama Raju was full of doubts. 


The vacation was over and we were returning to Uravakonda. Rama Raju 
brought a pair of knickers and a shirt for Me as parting gift. But I refused 
to accept them. In those days, wearing a collar pin was considered a 
fashion. Hence, Rama Raju presented a gold collar pin to Me with the 
prayer that I should remember him always. Wearing a collar pin was very 
common among the children hailing from rich families. The collar pin 
dropped on the way while I was proceeding to the school in Uravakonda. 
It could not be traced. I at once discarded the books and returned home. 
I declared: 


Know that I am Sai in reality, 

Cast off your worldly relationships, 

Give up your efforts to restrain Me, 

The worldly attachments can no longer bind Me, 
None, however great he may be, can deter Me. 


(Telugu Poem) 


Seshama Raju was not at home when I sang this poem. Later on when his 
wife told him about it, he laughed and brushed it aside saying, I would 
have got it composed by somebody. Being a poet himself, he thought it 
was impossible for a young boy like Me to compose such excellent poetry. 


Excise Inspector Hanumantha Rao had great love for Me. Even his 
children were highly devoted to Me. When Hanumantha Rao came to 
know about the happenings, he at once came in his car and took Me to his 
house. He went on questioning, "My dear, did Your brother or sister-in- 
law scold You or did they beat You? Why have You decided to leave the 
house?" I sang a song: 


The link with the world had gone in the form of the pin; the 
pilgrimage to Hampi also served its purpose. Baba left home 
saying that Maya could not bind Him any longer. 


(Telugu Song) 


154 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


I said, "The worldly attachment is like a small pin which I gave up. Hence, 
I have left the house. I will no longer stay there." I did not even enter the 
house of Hanumantha Rao. There was a big rock in front of the house. I 
sat there and did not speak to anybody. Everyone was stupefied beyond 
words to see the change that had taken place in Me. In the evening, 
Seshama Raju who was on his way back home from school, tried to take 
Me with him. But I was firm in My decision not to go home. Then 
Hanumantha Rao persuaded him saying, "Do not compel Sathya to go 
with you. Let him remain here for some time. I will bring him to you 
myself afterwards." 


I remained there for some time. Many people came to Me and put all 
sorts of questions like "Are You a ghost or a demon? Who are You?" I told 
them, I am neither a ghost nor a demon. "Know that I am Sai Baba in 
reality." They asked Me, "How are we to believe that you are Sai Baba? 
Can you prove Your claim?" In fact, in those days nobody in Anantapur 
District had even heard the name of Sai Baba. I took some flowers in My 
hand and threw them on the floor. As people were watching 
wonderstruck, the flowers arranged themselves as the letters Sai Baba in 
Telugu. Somebody brought a camera and took a photograph of Me sitting 
on the rock. There was a small stone in front of Me which appeared like 
Shirdi Sai Baba in the photograph. Many copies were made of the 
photograph and distributed to all. 


The same rock on which I sat that day remains there even today. At the 
same place, the Andhra State President of Sri Sathya Sai Organisations, 
Anjanaiah has built a beautiful Mandir with a spacious hall. 


Gradually My fame spread far and wide. People from various villages and 
cities started to flock around Me. People possessed by evil spirits were 
brought to Me in bullock-carts. They believed that I could drive away the 
evil spirits. People who were mentally retarded were also brought to Me. 
True to their faith, the evil spirits were driven away and the patients were 
cured of their mental ailments. Then they started believing in My Divinity. 


As people were coming in large numbers, it was not possible for Seshama 
Raju to keep Me with him. Hence, he wrote a letter to Pedda Venkama 
Raju to come and take Me away to Puttaparthi. In those days, Puttaparthi 
was such a remote village that it would take several days for letters to 
reach. However, Pedda Venkama Raju received the letter in Bukkapatnam 
where he had gone to make purchases in the market. The letter said, 
"Father, it is not possible for us to keep Sathya with us any longer. Please 
come and take him home at once." Pedda Venkama Raju came to 
Uravakonda from Bukkapatnam straightaway. He did not have sufficient 
money in his pocket. He took the bus fare from Seshama Raju and 
brought Me to Bukkapatnam by bus. From there, we had to walk all the 
way to Puttaparthi, as there was no transport facility. In fact, the name of 
Puttaparthi was hardly known beyond the closest localities. 


When we reached Puttaparthi, Kondama Raju (grandfather of this body) 


155 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


was at home. He was very austere and God-minded. He told Venkama 
Raju, "Venkappa, let Him do whatever He wants, do not raise any 
objection. He is immersed in divine consciousness. Let him stay with me 
for some time." He kept Me with him and looked after Me with great love 
and care. 


The four brothers - Pedda Venkama Raju, Chinna Venkama Raju, 
Venkatarama Raju and Venkata Subba Raju decided to live separately. 
Kondama Raju divided the property equally among them. Pedda Venkama 
Raju then asked, "Father, whom are you going to stay with? "Kondama 
Raju replied, "I will not stay with anyone. I do not want any property for 
myself. Give me Sathya. That is enough. He will look after me." In those 
days, nobody used to call Me by the full name Sathyanarayana. Everyone 
used to address Me as 'Sathya'. From then onwards, I stayed with 
Kondama Raju and served him. Everyday morning and evening, 
Venkamma used to come to Me. Sometimes she would ask, "Sathya, do 
You get dreams? Does anyone appear before You and talk to You?" 
However, I would not say anything to her. She had immense faith in Sai 
Baba. One day, she prayed, "Sathya, please give me a photograph of Sai 
Baba." I at once materialised a photograph of Sai Baba and gave her. She 
kept the photograph with her till her last breath. 


One day Kondama Raju called Venkamma and told her, "Our people are 
living in ignorance, they are unable to recognise the Divine nature of 
Sathya. He is verily God Himself. He is never hungry, never thirsty. He 
has transcended hunger and sleep." 


Namagiriamma was the actual name of Easwaramma, given by her 
parents. As Kondama Raju recognised My Divinity, he told his son, Pedda 
Venkama Raju, to change her name to Easwaramma as he was very well 
aware that she was the mother of Easwara Himself. 


In the middle of the night, Kondama Raju would quietly place his hand 
near My nostrils, just to see whether I was breathing or not. Sometimes, 
he would not notice any breathing process taking place. He would only 
hear the sound Soham coming from Me. People started pouring into 
Kondama Raju's house to see Me. If anyone questioned them, they would 
reply, "The grandson of Kondama Raju is one of divine powers. He 
appears in our dreams and solves our problems." 


Once, Seshama Raju came to Puttaparthi during holidays. He did not like 
SO many people visiting the house of Kondama Raju. At that time, he was 
thoroughly sceptical. He argued with Kondama Raju and told him not to 
allow anybody to come to his house. In those days, the educated were 
highly respected in the villages. Seshama Raju had just completed 
teachers’ training. Hence, people in the village considered him to be 
highly educated. He told Kondama Raju, "Grandfather, do not allow 
anybody to come near this boy. He does not have any divine power. He is 
suffering from hysteria." In this manner, he spoke derisively about Me. 


156 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


There used to be an exorcist in Kadiri who was considered to be an expert 
in driving away from people the evil spirits that had taken possession of 
them. I was put in a cart for transporting Me to Kadiri and Venkamma 
accompanied Me. At no time would she be parted from Me. This so-called 
exorcist of Kadiri was a thorough drunkard. He asserted that I was 
possessed by some powerful spirit and boasted that he would rid Me of 
the evil and belaboured Me with canes, sticks, whips and the like. He even 
went to the extent of pouring some highly corrosive liquids into My eyes 
expecting to drive away the spirit in this manner. I submitted Myself to all 
this torture without demur. In the evening when I got free, I approached 
Venkamma and asked her to put a little fluid of cow dung dissolved in 
water. With this treatment overnight, My eyes became clear again. So, for 
every maltreatment of this kind, I used to go to Venkamma and got the 
situation remedied. Finally, he had My head shaved and scratched deeply 
with a sharp knife. The scalp became bloody with severe wounds. Seating 
Me, water was poured from a height of 10 feet above; it was a terribly 
painful operation. After this treatment failed, he started rubbing lemon 
juice into the wounds. Venkamma could not bear the sight of this torture. 
Quietly, she called the cartman and in the darkness of night, she took Me 
back home to Puttaparthi. 


Steadily the fame of Sai's greatness was spreading far and wide. There 
was such a rush of people that there was hardly any space for people to 
stay in the house. Then Pedda Venkama Raju told the people to come to 
the house only on Thursdays every week. But people protested saying 
that they could not bear their sufferings till Thursday. Then Subbamma 
called Venkappa and told him that as it was not practical to accommodate 
the surging crowds in his house, she would take Me to her house and 
meet all My needs and also of the visitors. As Subbamma was a Brahmin 
and Swami belonged to the Raju caste, the Brahmins of Puttaparthi took 
objection to Subbamma's proposal and decided to boycott Subbamma. 
She however said that as she was childless and had no inclination to go 
about visiting anybody, she was not worried by the proposed boycott. "I 
shall never forsake Sathya", she said. In the village, there were a few 
Harijan residences. 


These Harijans were highly devoted to Swami. I used to visit their houses. 
Even Subbamma accompanied Me to those places. She would not bear to 
be separated from Me even for a moment. She was looking after Me as 
her own son. All the Brahmins of the village were completely inimical to 
Subbamma and even her own mother and brother turned against her. In 
the path of Divinity incarnate such impediments do arise and she was 
quite aware of the situation. She declared that she was unconcerned 
about the enmity of anybody. She was quite firm in her resolve to hold on 
to Me. Soon, even her house started overflowing with the throng of 
visitors. So, once Venkappa approached Subbamma and said, "Why 
should you undergo this kind of ordeals on account of my son? Let us put 
Him in a separate house." Then Subbamma gave some land between the 
Sathyabhama and Venugopala Swami temples. A small room was 
constructed there. They used to lock Me up in the room, but, in spite of 


157 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


the locked closed room, I used to get out and sit on the top of the hill. 
These kinds of wonders were of daily occurrence. 


Meanwhile, those who were opposed to Subbamma on caste grounds 
decided to get rid of Swami by poison. I was very fond of vadas (Indian 
delicacy) in those days. So, these people made some vadas and mixed 
some virulent poison in some of them. Subbamma was warning Me all the 
time against visiting those houses. But, I used to go to all places despite 
her objection. On this occasion, I visited this house and picked up the 
specific vadas that had been poisoned and ate them. The sequel to this 
attempt is already known. 


Another attempt of this kind was when some of them set fire to My 
improvised house. The house had a thatched roof. Some miscreants set 
fire to the house. As the fire was raging, people were worried as to what 
would have happened to Me inside. Suddenly, there was a cloudburst 
which poured down just above the house and put out the fire. There was 
however, not a drop of rain anywhere else. Venkamma, Subbamma and 
Easwaramma came there weeping. The roof was fully burnt and only the 
walls were standing. They peeped over the wall and found Me sleeping 
peacefully. I was totally unharmed. Then Subbamma had the lock broken 
open and took Me away to her house. After several such trials and tests, 
people developed greater faith in Sai Baba. 


In Penukonda, another person started claiming miraculous powers, saying 
that he was a devotee of Sai Baba. Several others started imitating My 
dress and manners, started going about trying to collect a following at 
different places. Merely assuming My name and manners, one cannot 
have a following indefinitely. People realised the truth very soon. 


After this, My sojourn to Bangalore began. Easwaramma and Venkamma 
entreated that I should not forsake Puttaparthi. I promised them that I 
would never abandon Puttaparthi. Various royalties including the 
Maharani of Mysore used to visit Puttaparthi. Those days Chitravathi was 
flowing most of the time. They used to cross the river by putting planks 
and driving the cars over such improvised causeways. As, such following 
by the high and low of the land increased, all opportunities for creating 
obstacles by the local opponents vanished. 


All great men have been moulded by their mothers. It is the high moral 
character and behaviour of the mothers that would result in the greatness 
of their progeny. It is the virtues of Kausalya that resulted in the 
greatness of Rama. Similarly, Sita brought up Lava and Kusa to be great. 
In this manner, virtuous mothers were responsible for ideal children. After 
I had promised Easwaramma, I never abandoned Puttaparthi. The whole 
world may flock here but I shall not leave Puttaparthi. Generally, the 
Avatars adhere to their place of birth. If you uproot a plant from here and 
plant it elsewhere, how long will it survive? A tree should grow where the 
seed sprouted. In this manner only, Sathya Sai Baba has retained his 
roots in Puttaparthi and has made Puttaparthi a place of pilgrimage. When 


158 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


the High School at Bukkapatnam was established, they requested Me for 
a prayer song and I composed a suitable verse emphasising the unity in 
diversity of the people of Bharat. 


The power of motherhood is indescribable. It is the righteous observances 
and strict adherence to moral values of the mothers that manifest in their 
children. They (mothers) may be unlettered. Their greatness does not 
depend on literacy or book learning. It is the unlettered Easwaramma's 
virtues that have brought about this greatness of the name and fame of 
Puttaparthi. It is a matter of regret that Easwaramma is forgotten, while 
her son is extolled. Without Easwaramma, how could there be such a 
phenomenal Power? Never neglect your parents. 


What is the origin of the name of this village Puttaparthi? There is a 
strange story associated with it. Near the temple of Venugopala Swami, 
there used to be an anthill in which there was a snake. Everyday the 
cowherds would take their cows for grazing to the outskirts of the village. 
One of the cows would go to the anthill and the snake would drink milk 
from its udder. Everyday the cow would return home with its udder 
empty. The cowherds found out the reason behind this and planned to kill 
the snake. One day as the snake was drinking milk from the cow, they hit 
it with a boulder. The snake got enraged and pronounced a curse on 
them, saying, the cowherds and their cows would no longer be able to live 
in the village. That is why, the cowherds left Puttaparthi village and built 
their houses near Gokulam. Even today you can see it for yourselves. The 
boulder with which the cowherds tried to kill the snake is now being 
worshipped as Venugopala Swami idol. 


Today I narrated at length all this in order to make you aware of the 
significance of the names Sai Baba and Puttaparthi. Puttaparthi has a 
great history behind it. Many eminent people visited this place. Many 
people of affluence lived here and brought great name and fame to this 
village. In those days, the Mysore Maharaja and his mother used to come 
here quite frequently. Many such eminent personalities recognised the 
greatness of Puttaparthi and revered it. 


The Lord of Puttaparthi will protect you always, 

He is the embodiment of compassion, 

He will hold your hand and take you across the ocean of life, 
He will never forsake you under any circumstances. 


(Telugu Poem) 


Embodiments of Love! 

You are really fortunate, having done great merit, for you are able to 
enjoy the Divine proximity of Sai. It is your great good fortune that you 
are able to sing with Swami and play with Him. You are with Sai and Sai 
is with you. That is why I often say, "I and you are one." The power and 
glory of God is beyond the ken of human understanding. Develop 
unwavering faith in him. 


159 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


Students! 

Having come to Puttaparthi and studied here, you should make every 
effort to uphold the prestige of Puttaparthi. I want to bring to your notice 
one important thing. Usually students like to spend their vacations at their 
respective homes. But here the students do not like to go home even 
after the vacation starts. Only very few of them go home. Most of them 
like to stay back even after completing their post graduation. What is the 
reason for this? Here is the greatest Divine magnet. God attracts one and 
all. His power is beyond all estimation. In the years to come, you will 
experience the power of this magnet more and more. 


(Bhagavan sang the Bhajan, "Hari Bhajan Bina..." and continued the 
Discourse.) 


(Pointing to Dr. Anjanaiah, Swami said) He has constructed a Mandir in 
Uravakonda. The Mandir enshrines the rock on which I sat when I gave 
the first teaching to mankind. He completed his M.Sc. Ph.D. and was 
doing a job. Later on, he resigned and dedicated himself to the service of 
Swami. At present, he is the State President of Sri Sathya Sai Seva 
Organisations, Andhra Pradesh. (Pointing to an elderly devotee) He is the 
father-in-law of Dr. Anjanaiah. He also stays in Uravakonda. He has kept 
aside 100 acres of land for Swami. He is growing various types of fruits 
there and sending them to Puttaparthi. At present he has completed 100 
years of his life. I want to tell you another important thing. Here, in 
Prasanthi Nilayam, all the devotees who dedicate their lives to Swami live 
for full 100 years. Kasturi came here and lived a full life. 


Similar was the case with Pujari Kistappa. All of you might have heard of 
Kamavadhani. He was a great Vedic scholar. He came and stayed here for 
30 years. Never did he leave Puttaparthi. One day after performing Rama 
Kalyanam, here in the Mandir, he told Me, "Swami, I am going to My 
room. I will have a sacred bath and come back." I told him, "You don't 
need to come back. After bath, have your food and sleep peacefully." He 
went home and had a bath. As instructed by Swami, he had his food and 
rested. He died peacefully in his sleep. The name of Sai was always in his 
mind. He never had any illness. There was another devotee by name 
Soorayya. He was a bachelor. He had no desires. Prior to coming here, he 
was working for Venkatagiri Raja. One day he expressed his desire to the 
Raja that he wanted to go to Puttaparthi. The Raja was very happy and 
made all the arrangements for his coming here. He stayed here for more 
than 30 years and served Swami. He too lived for 100 years and died 
peacefully in his sleep. 


(Swami called Sri Gopal Rao to the dais) 
Many of you might have heard of Gopal Rao. He is also completing 100 
years. Even at an advanced age, he used to go to canteen regularly and 


serve water to the devotees. When he was the Chairman of Andhra Bank, 
there was a major strike. Many big people were arrested. Indira Gandhi 


160 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


sent him a telegram. That day I happened to go to his house for lunch. I 
told him, "Gopal Rao, do not yield to political pressure. What you have 
chosen is the path of truth. Do not budge from it." He obeyed My 
command. Nobody could touch him. At present he is living in Prasanthi 
Nilayam happily doing Namasmarana. Dr. Padmanabhan 's father, 
Seshagiri Rao came here at the age of 63 after his retirement. He also 
lived for 100 years and had a peaceful death. All these devotees led a 
happy and healthy life. At no point of time did they seek the service of 
others. I told Gopal Rao that he would die peacefully without depending 
on others for service. I told him to be courageous. In this manner, many 
devotees led a long and peaceful life in Divine proximity. Physical body is 
bound to perish one day or the other. But one should leave the body 
peacefully without being wholly dependent on others. (At the end, Swami 
permitted Sri Gopal Rao to speak a few words.) 


Date: 23 Nov 2003, Occasion: Birthday Celebrations, Place: Prasanthi 
Nilayam 


161 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


21. YOU ARE GOD YOURSELF 


Date: 25 Dec Occasion: Christmas Place: Prasanthi 
2003 Celebrations Nilayam 


For the sake of young Prahlada, 

For the desperate elephant king, 

For the infant Dhruva, steadfast in devotion 

For the indigent Kuchela, prolific in family, pauper in substance, 
The lotus-eyed Vishnu, extolled by the Vedas, 

The ever compassionate one of manifold bounties conferred: 
Take all these together, the Lord of Lords is now incarnate, 

The embodiment of love and compassion of all the above, 

And more. 


(Telugu Poem) 


Embodiments of Love! 

Where is God? When does He incarnate? Where does He incarnate? These 
are the questions that are troubling the minds of people today. God is 
omnipresent. All are the embodiments of God. Today, people attribute 
various names and forms to God like Rama, Krishna and Jesus, and 
celebrate their birthdays. Truly speaking, can there be a birthday for God? 
No. To think that God took birth on a particular day in a year is a sign of 
ignorance. God is in the form of breath in every man. 'Soham', this 
symbolises the process of inhalation and exhalation. 'So' means 'That' 
(God), 'Ham' stands for 'I' (individual). Though there are two words, 
namely God and individual, there is no difference between them. They are 
one and the same. God in fact has no birth. He does not need to achieve 
any goals. However, in order to instill faith in the minds of people, He 
incarnates. If there is birth, there has to be death too. But, God is beyond 
birth and death. He has neither a beginning nor an end. To think there is 
a birthday for God is only your imagination. Devotees limit God to a 
physical frame, worship Him and celebrate His birthdays. That is all a 
figment of their imagination and does not correspond to the truth. 


Every day, in this world, many are born and many die. What is meant by 
birth and death? To assume a body is birth and to cast off the same is 
death. It is out of illusion that man experiences the dualities of birth and 
death, whereas God transcends both. Sarvatah Panipadam Tat 
Sarvathokshi Siromukham, Sarvatah Sruthimalloke Sarvamavruthya 
Tishthati (with hands, feet, eyes, head, mouth and ears pervading 
everything, He permeates the entire universe). It is out of ignorance that 
man is caught in the cycle of birth and death. Birth and death are caused 
by the Will of God. 


God is the very personification of love. He is present in all beings in the 


162 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


form of the life-breath. Since ancient times, people have made concerted 
efforts to understand the mystery of birth and death. One need not go 
that far to understand this mystery. The body which we have assumed 
makes us experience it every moment. The process of inhalation 
symbolises birth and exhalation death. Man is unable to understand the 
inner significance of this breathing process. What is it that man is 
supposed to do, to escape from the cycle of birth and death? He should 
develop love more and more. But, today man does not love his fellow 
human beings even. That does not mean that he lacks love. There is love 
in him but he is unable to experience it. He should attach value to the 
principle of love and not merely to individuals. 


When we inhale (‘So’), the life principle enters our body and when we 
exhale (‘Ham’), it goes out. Every moment, this process of inhalation and 
exhalation reminds us of our inherent divinity (I am God). So long as 
there is life-breath, the body is considered to be Sivam (auspicious). Once 
the life-breath ebbs away, it becomes Savam (corpse). Both birth and 
death are related to the body and not to the life principle. Many changes 
take place between birth and death in a mysterious way. It is God who is 
responsible for all these. But some people deny the existence of God and 
waste their time in vain argumentation. God DOES exist. He neither 
comes nor goes. He is present everywhere at all times. Man experiences 
birth and death because of his body attachment. He will be released from 
the cycle of birth and death only when he gives up body attachment and 
surrenders himself completely to the Will of God. 


Oh God, I offer the sacred heart to You which You have given me. 
What else can I offer at Your Lotus Feet? I pray that You accept 
my humble offering. 


(Telugu Poem) 


Birth and death arise out of illusion. Every day in this world, many beings 
are born and many die. Birth and death happen according to the time and 
circumstances. Between birth and death, man gets deluded by the 
physical body and develops various relationships at the physical level. He 
identifies himself with the body and gets carried away by the feeling of I 
and mine. This is a grave mistake. So long as the body lasts, you are 
related to so and so. Once the body perishes, what happens to your 
relationship? True relationship lies at the Atmic level and not at the 
physical level. Prior to birth who is related to whom? What happens after 
death? In fact, both birth and death are the results of bhrama (delusion) 
because of which you are unable to realise Brahma (Divinity). As we are 
enmeshed in this worldliness, we are unable to comprehend the 
transcendental principle. 


True spiritual practice lies in understanding one's true identity. One 
should enquire, "Who am I"? All the spiritual practices are meant to make 
you realise who you really are. Everyone uses the term 'T' while 
introducing himself. It means that the principle of 'I' (Self) present in you 


163 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


is the same as the one in others. But man is unable to understand this 
oneness. He is carried away by the differences based on physical body. 
Consequently, he is giving room to conflicts and unrest. 


Embodiments of Love! 

Birth and death are related to the body and not to the individual soul. 
Mind is responsible for both. Everything is man's own making. Life is a 
dream. How can anything that appears in a dream be true? It is all a 
mere illusion. So long as you are immersed in this bhrama (delusion), you 
cannot have the vision of Brahma. It is only when you break the shackles 
of illusion, can you experience the reality. 


You can understand your true identity by observing your breathing 
process. But man is not interested in such an easy and simple path. He is 
taking to rough and difficult paths and is ultimately getting frustrated. So 
long as there is a thorn in the flesh, it hurts. Body attachment is like a 
thorn which is the cause of all suffering. Once you give up body 
attachment, you will Know your true Self. You suffer because you identify 
yourself with the body. It is but an illusion. That is why Sankaracharya 
said: 


Punarapi Jananam Punarapi Maranam 
Punarapi Janani Jathare Sayanam 

Iha Samsare Bahu Dustare 
Kripayapare Pahi Murare. 


(From birth to birth 

From death to death 

From womb to womb 

Tarrying a while 

Such is the sojourn 

Of this transient life, 

Oh destroyer of the demon Mura, 
Be my boatman 

On this turbulent ocean 

By your bounteous grace.) 


One need not undertake intense spiritual practices to cross the ocean of 
Samsara. All that one has to do is to contemplate on God incessantly. 
Though God is within, man is unable to realise Him. In the dream state, 
man may experience death and feel sad about it. When he wakes up, he 
will heave a sigh of relief realising that what he saw was only a dream. 
Then who was the one who died in the dream? It was just a creation of 
the mind. Similarly, even in the waking state, whatever man experiences 
is a creation of the mind. My father, my mother, my wife, my children, 
etc., all such feelings arise out of illusion. They do not correspond to the 
reality. It is because of illusion that man develops physical relationship 
and ultimately subjects himself to suffering. When man develops pure and 


164 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


unsullied love, he will not experience pain or suffering. Love for the 
physical body is false and fleeting. Love for the Self is true and eternal. In 
order to understand the truth of your identity, you should enquire within. 


Once Sankaracharya was proceeding to the river Ganga along with his 
disciples. On the way, he found a person sitting under a tree and 
repeating Dukrun Karane, Dukrun Karane. He was in fact trying to master 
the rules of Panini's grammar. Sankara took pity on him and advised him 
to contemplate on the Lord instead of wasting his time in the acquisition 
of worldly knowledge. 


Bhaja Govindam, Bhaja Govindam 

Govindam Bhaja Moodha Mathe 

Samprapthe Sannihithe Kale 

Nahi Nahi Rakshati Dukrun Karane. 

(Oh foolish man, chant the name of Lord Govinda; the rules of grammar 
will not come to your rescue when the end approaches. ) 


Bhrama and Brahma are based on your mind. They are not present 
outside. Brahma is within you. But as you are immersed in bhrama 
(delusion), you consider Brahma (Divinity) to be a distant entity. Once 
you realise that you are Brahma, you will be free from bhrama once for 
all. You suffer because you identify yourself with the body. Once you get 
rid of body attachment, you will experience everlasting happiness. 


Embodiments of Love! 

Pleasure and pain are your own making. They are not given by God. You 
are the cause of your suffering, none else. Understand this truth. From 
the spiritual point of view, pleasure, pain and the worldly relationships are 
illusory. They are not real. Right from dawn to dusk, man is leading a life 
of delusion. Having been born as a human being, man should experience 
the truth. The physical body grows for a certain period and later on 
becomes weak and decrepit. Birth and growth are related to the body 
which is unreal. But man considers body to be real and thereby suffers. 
When you see with your eyes wide open, you are able to see many 
people. But, when you close your eyes, you cannot see anybody. From 
where do so many people come when you open your eyes? Where do they 
go when you close your eyes? You do not know. In fact, you do not know 
the place of your origin and also your destination. That is why you suffer. 
Once you realise that you are not the body and nothing in this world 
belongs to you, you will not suffer. Everything in this world is of your own 
making. Nothing is real. 


Embodiments of Love! 

It is only God, the embodiment of love, who is with you and in you 
always. Bereft of love, man cannot exist. Love is your life. Love is the 
light that dispels the darkness of ignorance. One who does not cultivate 
love will be born again and again. Punarapi Jananam Punarapi Maranam. 
Whoever is born will die one day and whoever dies will be born again. 


165 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


Birth and death are the Prabhava (effect) of the objective world. As he is 
deluded by the Prabhava, man is subjecting himself to Pramada (danger). 


Embodiments of Love! 

Worldly love is transient; it cannot be called love at all. True love is 
immortal. You should cultivate such love. Physical body grows and 
decays. How can you consider it to be real? In fact, nothing in this world 
is real. Body attachment is the cause of delusion. Hence, gradually reduce 
your body attachment. This is the most important sadhana you have to 
undertake. Japa (chanting), Thapa (penance), Dhyana (meditation), Yoga 
(communion with God), etc., do not constitute true sadhana. Whatever 
you consider to be real is in fact unreal. Whatever is unreal has to be 
given up. This truth has to be understood in the first instance. It is very 
easy to give up body attachment. I wonder why people are not able to do 
so! 


You can see a number of bulbs glowing in this hall. But the electric 
current passing through them is the same. Bodies are like bulbs and the 
principle of Atma is like the current passing through all the bulbs. 
Understand this oneness and share your love with one and all. Do not 
consider anyone to be your enemy. You consider the one who loves you 
to be your friend and the one who hates you to be your foe. In fact, there 
is neither friend a nor a foe. It is only your imagination. 


Today, people perform various sadhanas to experience divinity. Will God 
come closer to you because of these sadhanas or does He go away from 
you if you do not perform them? No. It is only the bhrama that goes away 
from you when you perform the sadhanas. As a result, you become closer 
to Brahma. You should make every effort to get rid of bhrama. Give up 
the feeling that you are the body and you are the doer. Only then can you 
be free from delusion and fear. Reduce your body attachment. That is the 
sadhana you are supposed to undertake. Spiritual practice does not lie in 
the performance of Japa , Thapa, Dhyana , etc. They are done only for 
your mental satisfaction and not for having the vision of God. Give up all 
these practices. Develop firm faith that you are God. Remind yourself 
constantly, "I am God, I am God, I am God". Then you will become God. 
Body is merely the vesture you have put on. It is not your true Self. As 
the body attachment increases, the suffering also increases. 


Tyaja Durjana Samsargam; Bhaja Sadhu Samagamam; Kuru Punyam 
Ahorathram (Give up bad company; join good company and perform 
meritorious deeds day and night). In this world, you see many names and 
forms. Does it mean that they are all different from each other? No. All 
are one. It is only divinity that expresses itself as mother, father, brother, 
sister, etc. Names and forms may be different, but the underlying truth is 
one. When you keep this principle of truth in view, love will flow from you 
incessantly. Immerse yourself in the river of love. Do not give up love 
under any circumstances. Even if someone were to hate you, treat him as 
your own brother. If you were to meet him on the road, do not show 
anger; greet him with love. Your love will certainly bring about 


166 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


transformation in him. True happiness lies in the spirit of sacrifice. Thyaga 
(sacrifice) is the true Yoga. Man, today, does not cultivate Thyaga. On the 
other hand, he seeks Bhoga (pleasure) and thereby subjects himself to 
Roga (disease). When you develop the spirit of sacrifice, you will be free 
from suffering. True spiritual practice is that which helps you to overcome 
delusion. What is the use, if you get drowned in delusion more and more 
with the advancement of age? 


I am not the body, nothing is mine." This is what you should know. 
Question yourself, "Who am I"? You will get the reply, "I am I". When you 
understand and experience this truth, nobody can cause any suffering to 
you. You cannot escape from suffering so long as you are immersed in the 
dualistic feeling that you are a mere mortal and God is separate from you. 
The feeling that "I am separate from you" is your own imagination. When 
'T' and 'you' are joined together, it becomes 'we'. However, 'we' + 'He' 
(God) becomes only 'He' who is changeless. 'I' and 'you' change 
constantly. 


Embodiments of Love! 

Many people do sadhanas like Japa and Dhyana, but they are not of much 
use. However, they lead to some change in due course of time. They may 
confer temporary results but they cannot grant eternal bliss. You should 
not worry for temporary results. The feeling of 'I' and 'mine' is the root 
cause of worry. You will be haunted by worry so long as you don't realise 
Hari (God). You are worried because you identify yourself with the body. 
Once you identify yourself with the Self (God), you will be free from all 
worries. Hence, you should make every effort to realise your true Self. 
Under any circumstances, do not shed tears of sorrow. One will be free 
from sorrow when one gives up body attachment. In order to be free from 
worry and fear and to attain everlasting peace, you should realise that "I 
am I". When you have firm belief in this statement, nothing can shake 
you. Do not develop undue attachment to the body and material 
possessions. You will be redeemed only when you lead your life with a 
spirit of sacrifice. What you should achieve is Thyaga and not Bhoga. To 
consider something as yours (‘mine’) is Bhoga. To realise that nothing is 
yours (‘not mine') is Yoga. This Yoga bestows on you the true strength. 


Jesus performed various types of sadhanas and ultimately realised this 
truth. Once Mary and Joseph took their child Jesus to a fair in Jerusalem. 
In the crowd, the parents lost trace of Jesus and searched for him 
everywhere. All the while, Jesus was sitting in a corner of the temple and 
listening to the sermon of the priest. The parents were searching for him 
outside the temple. Mother Mary ultimately found him in the temple. She 
rushed towards him and affectionately embraced him saying, "My son, 
what happened to you? Where had you gone? We have been in search of 
you." Jesus told her, "Mother, I have not stepped out of the temple. I 
have been listening to the sermon of the priest. Why should you have any 
fear? Those who believe in the world will have fears. But, why should 
anyone believing in God, fear at all? Iam in the company of my Father, 
why do you fear?" 


167 


Sathya Sai Speaks Volume 36 (2003) 


Forgetting your innate divinity, you are in search of God in the external 
world. You are God yourself. Is it not foolishness to search for yourself in 
the outside world? Look within, only then can you find God. It is very easy 
to understand this oneness. However, you should have firm faith to begin 
with. You should believe that God is not separate from you. On a deep 
enquiry, you will realise that God is in you and also outside. 


Embodiments of Love! 

Turn your vision inward and search for your true Self. Self-enquiry leads 
to true Sakshatkara (vision of God). Once you have Sakshatkara, you will 
be free from all worries. It is a mistake to say that you have not 
experienced God. He is present in you. A person kept a ten rupee note in 
a book and forgot about it. He was carrying it all along. One day he was in 
need of ten rupees. He asked his friend to lend him ten rupees. His friend 
readily agreed. But before giving the money, his friend wanted to see the 
book he was carrying. As he opened the book, the ten rupee note fell 
from it. He was happy that he had the required amount with him and that 
there was no need to borrow it from his friend. Likewise, today man is in 
search of God, as he has forgotten his innate divinity. Man can realise 
God only by self-enquiry. 


Embodiments of Love! Students! 

You are making various efforts to experience Divinity. Do not search for 
God outside. He is in you. Everything is in you. All that you see outside is 
illusory. Do not be carried away by the illusory world. Only then can you 
attain peace and ultimately realise the truth "I am I". To know this simple 
truth, you need not go through various sacred texts. Keep the texts aside. 
Enjoy the taste of divinity within. Develop inner vision and visualise your 
true Self. 


(Bhagavan concluded His Discourse with the Bhajan, "Bhaja Govindam 


Date: 25 Dec 2003, Occasion: Christmas Celebrations, Place: 
Prasanthi Nilayam 


168 


