SATHYA SAI SPEAKS 
VOLUME 31 


Discourses of 
BHAGAWAN SRI SATHYA SAI BABA 
Delivered during 1998 


PRASANTHI NILAYAM 


SRI SATHYA SAI BOOKS & PUBLICATIONS TRUST 
Prasanthi Nilayam - 515 134 
Anantapur District, Andhra Pradesh, India 


Grams: BOOK TRUST STD: 08555 ISD: 91-8555 
Phone: 87375. 
FAX 87236 


© Sri Sathya Sai Books & Publications Trust 
Prasanthi Nilayam (India) 


All Rights Reserved 


The copyright and the rights of translation in any language 
are reserved by the Publisher. No part, para, passage, text or 
photograph or art work of this book should be reproduced, 
transmitted or utilised, in original language or by translation, in 
any form, or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photo- 
copying, recording or by any information, storage or retrieval 
system, except with and prior permission, in writing from the 
Convener, Sri Sathya Sai Books & Publications Trust, Prasan- 
thi Nilayam, (Andhra Pradesh) India, except for brief passages 
quoted in book review. This book can be exported from India 
only by Sri Sathya Sai Books and Publications Trust, Prasanthi 
Nilayam (India). 


International Standard Book No 81 - 7208 - 337 — 8 
81 - 7208 - 118 - 9 (set) 


First Edition: 
Published by 


The Convener, 


Sri Sathya Sai Books & Publications Trust 


Prasanthi Nilayam, India, Pin code 515 134 
Phone: 87375 Fax: 87236 
STD: 08555 ISD: 91 - 8555 


Contents 


_ 


80 GO BON Sa a 


—= © 


NO NO NNN DNDN PMP KF PF HF HK Ke 
WM RWN PrP SS RAND NA PF WN 


Transform yourselves and transform the world..... 1 


Promotion of unity: Students’ duty 
Buddha’s gospel of good life 

From negative to positive 

The power of the Lord’s name 

The message of Sakkubai’s devotion 
The wise and the envious 

A new way of life 

Potency of Rama’s name 

The path of Nirvana 

Man, truth, love, and God 

Render service with divine awareness 
Glory of womanhood 

Going beyond the mind 

We are all one 

Love of God with service to society 
Love and surrender 

Faith, love, and grace 

Install Divinity in the heart 

Love is the essence of divine life 
Love is God’s fragrance 

Greatness of mother’s love 

The essence of Buddha’s teachings 
Quest for truth 

True education fosters human values 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 2 


26. 
2h 
205 
29. 
30. 
31. 
32, 
J3: 
34. 
box 
36. 
aT: 
38, 
39. 
40. 
Al. 
42. 
43. 
44. 
45. 


Truth andlove shape dharma ——————i—ia..... Zod 
Glory of Vinayaka sn 237 
Subjugate yourego. saa 248 
Knowledge without practice is meaningless _...... 261 
Worship of God is energy principle ia... 280 
Know youtrue identity 4 2 290 
Obey God’scommands a. 300 
Entire universe is within you a... 311 
Bhagavan’s assurance todevotees  —_tia..... 321 
Power ofdivinelove 2 sa 333 
Develop steadfast faithinGod a. 345 
Offer yourself toGod st 355 
Install God’s feetin yourheart a. 371 
Light the lampofwisdom = = —— ...., 384 
Serve parents,serveGod a. 394 
Unity isourlifebreath tn 406 
Fuse spirituality witheducation ——...... 418 
Fill you heart with noble feelings —...... 428 
Love God wholeheartedly ann 440 


Sacrifice leads toimmortality a. 464 


1 


Transform yourselves and 
transform the world 


The Cosmos is controlled by God; 

God is subject to Truth 

That Truth is subject to the authority of 
Sacred and noble beings. 


Men today must become embodiments of Truth. They must 
have mastery over Truth. 


“The entire creation emerged from Truth (Sathya). 
Everything merges in Truth. What is there in the 
cosmos without its basis in Truth? This is the pure 
Truth of Being (Suddha Satwa) oh man.” 

[Telugu Poem]. 


Every man has his origin in Truth. He is sustained by 
Truth. And he merges in Truth. He is the embodiment of Truth. 
When every individual recognizes this truth, the whole world 
will be permeated by Truth. What man should seek today is not 
pleasure. Nor is his goal sorrow. Man should bring under his 
control the source of pleasure and pain. More than pleasure, it 
is pain that awakens the wisdom in man. If you study the lives 
of great men, you find that it is out of trouble and pain that 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 ps 


they derived wisdom. Without sorrow there can be no wisdom. 
It is pain that teaches many wise lessons to man. 

Not realizing this profound truth, man pursues pleasure 
endlessly. No doubt man needs to be happy. But how is happi- 
ness to be achieved? It is only when sorrow is overcome that 
man realizes happiness. Hence everyone should welcome sor- 
row in the same spirit in which he greets happiness. 


Pain and pleasure are intermingled. 

No one can separate them. 

Pleasure is never alone by itself. 

When pain is relieved, pleasure is experienced. 
[Telugu Poem]. 


Wherefrom does pleasure come? When pain is got rid of, 
pleasure is secured. 


Treat pleasure and pain alike as divine gifts 


In our country today the young boys and girls are the in- 
heritors of the prosperity or poverty of the nation. The future 
progress of the nation depends on them. Hence, these boys and 
girls are the true wealth of the nation. 

It has to be realized that man is the architect of his own 
pleasure and pain. Hence he should face with equanimity 
whatever happens to him — good or evil. 

God is described as Siddhiswaroopa (the embodiment of 
wish fulfillment). He is also described as Amogha (One with- 
out a limit or measure). This means that the power of the Di- 
vine is infinite. He is also known as Aprameya (the immeasur- 
able). Hence, everyone should treat whatever happens to him 
as a gift from God. Pleasure and pain should be treated alike as 
Divine gifts. There is a unique joy in this process. 

In daily life we tend to treat defeat, loss or grief as calami- 
ties. But, nothing occurs in the world without a cause. Hunger 
is the cause for eating. Thirst is the cause for drinking. Diffi- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 5 


culties are the cause of sorrow. If man is to enjoy enduring 
happiness, he must discover the source of such happiness. That 
source is love (prema). There is nothing greater than love in 
this world. Everything has a price. The price to be paid for en- 
during happiness is Divine Love. Without Love, no object can 
give you real happiness. 

Hence, the primary wealth for man is Love. Everyone 
should seek to acquire this wealth. With this wealth anyone 
can enjoy enduring bliss. 


Pain divinizes the pleasure that follows it 


We witness in the world all kinds of pains and sorrows. But 
none of these is permanent. Every term of pain is followed by 
pleasure. The experience of pleasure is refined and enhanced 
by the earlier experience of pain. Like the refinement of gold 
by melting in a crucible, pain divinises the pleasure that fol- 
lows it. 

The New Year or a new month does not bring with it any 
new joy or sorrow. As Sandipan Chatterjee (who had spoken 
earlier) said every moment is new. Every second is new, be- 
cause it heralds the march of time. A year is in fact a succes- 
sion of seconds turning into minutes, days and months. 

It is only when every moment is cherished as new, will the 
new year become new. The sacred way in which every mo- 
ment is spent will determine the fruitfulness of the year. 

If you wish to lead a sacred life and have sacred experi- 
ences, you must engage yourself in sacred actions. The good 
and evil in the world can be changed only by the change in 
men’s actions. Transformation of society must start with trans- 
formation of individuals. 

This morning the students recited a Vedic prayer about stu- 
dents living together in amity and acting in unison. But they 
did not mention the crucial passage in the prayer which de- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 4 


clares: Let us live in harmony free from conflict” The Vedic 
hymn stresses that unity can come only when people live to- 
gether without discord. Hence everyone should give no room 
for conflict or unrest but lead a life of harmony and love with 
others. 


Love is the dispeller of the darkness of ignorance 


God is ever love incarnate. His love permeates the world. 
The universe is termed Visvam because of the Lord’s presence 
in the entire cosmos. One of the names of the Lord is Vishnu. 
Etymologically the word refers to one who is present through- 
out the universe. God is the cause and the cosmos is the effect. 
The Lord is also known as Atma, which means light or efful- 
gence. The Lord is the dispeller of the darkness of ignorance. 

Every word used in the ancient scriptures has profound in- 
ner meaning. This profundity is characteristic of the Bhara- 
thiya spiritual heritage. Very few are interested in exploring 
these profundities. Most people confine themselves to ritualis- 
tic worship for a brief time every day. They do not even at- 
tempt to know what for they are performing these rituals. 
There is no meaning in performing these rituals without under- 
standing the purpose and goal of life. The ultimate purpose of 
all spiritual exercises is to realize the Love Principle (Love of 
the Divine). To foster love is the purpose of all spiritual en- 
deavor. In no circumstance should love be given up or ignored. 
Where there is love, there can be no hatred, grief or want. 

Time is passing. You are all growing in years. But there is 
little change in your attitudes. Purity in thought results in pu- 
rity in knowledge and wisdom. Self-Realization can come only 
through spiritual wisdom (Jnana). 

Many in the world acquire wealth, fame and position. But 
what have they achieved in terms of the goal of life? Their 
failure is due to lack of understanding of the unity that under- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 5 


lies the apparent diversity. It is a mark of spiritual goodness to 
recognize the divine in everyone. Prahlada declared that you 
can find God wherever you seek Him. His father, Hiranya- 
kasipu, was a great person because of his attainments. But he 
failed to achieve goodness because of his denial of the Divine. 
A similar difference can be seen between Rama’s goodness 
and Ravana’s greatness. 

The lesson for students today is that they should follow the 
sacred path of righteousness. They should work for the welfare 
of society. Students should cultivate three qualities. They 
should cherish love for all living beings; they should cultivate 
all good qualities; they should acquire all useful knowledge. 
Love is the basis for these three qualities. 


Fill your hearts with Love 


Embodiments of Love! See that your love for God does not 
fluctuate according to whether your wishes are fulfilled or not. 
Remember that you reap the fruits of your actions, according 
to whether they are good or bad. Love of God alone can confer 
enduring bliss. Eschew bad qualities like hatred and envy. 

Today marks the beginning of the year 1998. At least from 
today fill your hearts with Love. Look upon all as God’s chil- 
dren. Sri Krishna has declared that all human beings are sparks 
of Himself. This means that everyone should lead a godly life. 
Everyone should express his love to some persons everyday. 
Thereby the whole world will be filled with love. 

Ponder for a moment on the phenomenon you are witness- 
ing here today, with thousands gathered from all parts of the 
world. What is the reason? You are seeking to find something 
here that is lacking in your native land. What is that? It is Di- 
vine Love. You are missing it in your place. You have not 
found it in yourself. Hence you have come here, like a sick 
man going to a hospital. Now that you have come here, take 
back with you Divine Love. Fill your hearts with that Love. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 6 


Carry it with you wherever you go like a sick man who carries 
his medicines with him. Let Divine Love guide you like the 
mariner’s compass points ever toward the Divine. Dedicate all 
your thoughts and actions to the Divine. Thereby you will be 
divinising your entire life. It is by leading such a godly life that 
our ancients left a glorious heritage. Boys and girls today 
should fill their minds and hearts with such sacred ideals and 
transform the entire society into a loving community. 


Role of sports in influencing young people 


You are aware that on December 30 players from many 
countries came to Prasanthi Nilayam to take part in a cricket 
match. All of them had taken a resolve to play the game in a 
sporting spirit, with a pure mind and with due regard to the 
rules of the game. They played the game in this sublime spirit. 
Not only did they enjoy the game, but they filled the large 
mass of spectators with joy. Our young students showed great 
interest in the match. 

Among the spectators were large numbers of people from 
neighboring villages and towns. Sports and games have a well- 
defined role in influencing young people. Life is a Game, Play 
it! Life is a Dream, Realize it! Life is Love, Enjoy it! Life is a 
Challenge, Meet it! People must be ready to face all the ordeals 
in life. The capacity to face the challenges of life is given to 
man alone. 

Every act in daily life can be sanctified by dedicating it to 
God. By dedicating all thoughts to God man can achieve 
peace. There is no need to wait for a suitable time for embark- 
ing on this exercise. The time is at your beck and call. Great 
people do not wait on Time. They make time their servant. 

Endowed with a sacred body man is misusing it. Human 
life is like a bamboo that has many knots in the form of desires 
for wealth, wife and children. These knots have to be removed. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 7 


From the new year, you have to understand the true mean- 
ing of humanness and transform your life. You will then be 
true servants of the nation. Play your part in every field of 
public life, keeping your heart pure and unsullied. 


Sanctify all actions by dedicating them to God 


Students! Remember that you are in a ‘golden age’ in your 
lives. Do not waste it. Do your duty. Love and revere your par- 
ents. Serve society. Adhere to the good qualities associated 
with right education. Be happy and make others happy. 

From this new year onwards, when students cultivate hu- 
mility, reverence for elders and love toward all, I shall feel 
very happy. 

At a meeting of the Central Trust yesterday, I told the 
members including Sri Indulal Shah, that I had no interest in 
property. Do not involve me in any connection with these 
properties. I do not wish to have any connection with money or 
property. My only concern is with my devotees. Telling them 
all this, I signed the papers. 

You are my property. When I have this boundless property, 
why should I have any interest in material assets? Students are 
my property. Nothing can give me greater pleasure than what I 
get from seeing the students lead ideal lives. That is the return 
I expect from you. No fee of any kind is received from you for 
your education. But I want you to pay one special fee - that is 
love. When you offer that fee, you will be offering everything, 
as it were. 

Lakshmana surrendered to Rama totally, declaring that he 
was offering his family and everything he possessed to Rama. 
Everyone should follow Lakshmana’s example. He revered his 
elder brother’s wife as his mother. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 8 


The eyes should see only what is good 


The eyes should see only what is good. The hands should 
be engaged in good actions. The ears should hear no evil and 
listen only to what is good. Talk no evil. Talk only what is 
good. Think no evil. Think what is good. Do no evil. Do what 
is good. This is the way to God. 

The eyes should see only sacred objects. The whole world 
will be transformed when your vision becomes holy. 

This is New Year Day according to the Gregorian calendar. 
We have other New Year days according to the practice in dif- 
ferent parts of the country. There is no need to bother about the 
year as such. Devote every moment to actions that will please 
God. Develop love for God, which will confer every blessing 
on you. This is exemplified by the life of Harishchandra. He 
sacrificed everything in the cause of truth. And ultimately he 
got back everything by the grace of God. 

On this New Year Day I wish you all every happiness and 
prosperity. The ancients used to bless those who come to them 
with long life of 100 years and good health. They wished the 
people long life so that they may lead worthy lives. Lead a 
long life, happy life, peaceful life, loving life and divine life. 
Redeem your lives by practicing Divine Love. 


1 January 1998, morning 
Sai Kulwant Hall, Prasanthi Nilayam 


Promotion of unity: 
Students’ duty 


Before desiring anything, a person must make 
themself worthy. 

Charity (or generosity) qualifies someone for a 
good name. 

Adherence to Truth qualifies them to attain 
Heaven. 

Character makes them fit to enjoy happiness. 


To do anything in the world, one must have competence 
(yogyatha). For the practice of righteousness (dharma), one 
must have competence. According to his fitness, man embarks 
on righteous action. To achieve fame man must qualify himself 
to deserve it. It is by generosity (danam) that one achieves a 
good name. Heaven is realised by Truth alone. Character is the 
root cause of all happiness for man. Hence, to get happiness, or 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 10 


go to Heaven or earn a good name, one must acquire the requi- 
site worthiness. 


The significance of Sankranthi 


This festive day has been celebrated from ancient times as 
a day of fulfillment and joy. Every festival is a social occasion, 
arising in society, flourishing in society, and promoting the 
well being of society. Every festival has been designed to pro- 
mote the welfare of society. With social changes, festivals also 
have undergone changes. 

Today’s festival is an extremely important one for Bharati- 
yas (Indians). It is a festival to celebrate the glory of the Sun 
God. The Sun moves every month from one sign of Zodiac to 
the next. 

Sankranthi, meaning “sacred change’, occurs every month 
as the Sun moves from one house of the Zodiac to another. But 
special sacredness attaches to the movement of the Sun to Cap- 
ricorn (Makara-Sankranthi). 


The Sun appears cool 

The day is shortened 

And is made pleasant by chill wind 

On fields lit by moonlight 

The crows caw over the grain heaps 

While farmers sing in joy 

Over the golden harvest 

The flowers express their joy 

By putting forth their petals 

While in every home, filled with grain, 

The people welcome the advent of Sankranthi 
(Telugu Poem) 


On Sankranthi day, the farmers rejoice over the fullness 
with the newly harvested crop of the granaries in their homes. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 11 


When the Sun enters the sign of Capricorn, it begins its north- 
ward motion. The sun shines in every human body, illuminat- 
ing the six chakras (spiritual centres in the body). Of these 
chakras, two are most important: the hridaya (heart) chakra 
and the sahasrara chakra. 

The hridaya chakra has eight petals. God is the Lord of the 
eight-petaled hridaya chakra. These eight petals are regarded 
as eight consorts of the Lord. In this context, the Lord is 
adored in the form of the Sun. The world cannot survive with- 
out the Sun. The solar system is derived from the Sun. Hence, 
the Sun is worshipped as divine. 


Sahasrara Chakra represents sixteen thousand gopikas 


The ancient sages adored the eight-petaled divine centre in 
the heart and thereby reached the sahasrara chakra and en- 
joyed supreme bliss. 

The sahasrara chakra has a thousand petals. Each petal 
carries sixteen phases (kalas). Thus the sahasrara chakra is 
said to represent 16,000 cowherd maidens (gopikas), while the 
eight petals of the hridaya chakra are adored as the eight con- 
sorts of Krishna. 

The syllable go in the word gopikas (cowherd maidens) has 
four meanings: The Veda, the cow, the earth, and the faculty of 
speech (vak). The gopikas derive their different attributes from 
these different meanings. They chant the Vedas, protect the 
cows, nourish the earth, and proclaim the glories of the Divine 
by their speech. 

In making an offering to Krishna, the mantra that is used is 
Kleem Krishnaya Govindaya Gopijanavallabhaya Swaha. It is 
interesting to explore the full significance of this mantra. 
Kleem means the earth. It is the first element. Krishnaya signi- 
fies water. Govindaya signifies fire (agni). Gopijanavallab- 
haya signifies air (vayu). Swaha signifies space (akasa). Thus, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 12 


the mantra represents all five elements in the cosmos as mani- 
festations of the Divine. 

The cosmos cannot exist without these five elements. They 
are all-pervading. It follows that there is no place in the cos- 
mos where God is not immanent. The cowherd maidens, 
through this mantra, taught the world that God should be 
adored as the omnipresent Divine everywhere in the cosmos. 
Hence, in every atom, all the time, in every particle, the Divine 
is present. 


The spiritual goal of the ancient sages 


The ancient sages reached the thousand petaled Sahasrara 
through the adoration of the Lord in the eight-petaled lotus of 
the heart. They used all their God-given intelligence for this 
spiritual goal. But modern man uses his intelligence only for 
worldly ends. The sages considered cultivation of virtues, good 
qualities, and righteous conduct as true education. 

What do the eight petals of the heart represent? They are: 
love (prema), truth (sathyam), forbearance (sahanam), sacri- 
fice (thyaga), compassion (daya), beauty (sundaram), bliss 
(ananda) and peace (santhi). To realize the bliss of the Divine, 
all the other qualities have to be fostered. God is the embodi- 
ment of all these eight attributes. Sacrifice is the most impor- 
tant of them. 

The chakora bird is an example for man in the pursuit of 
purity. It will not drink any water except what rains from a 
cloud in the sky. It sees in a dark rain-bearing cloud the divine 
form of the Lord. Man should seek to see and experience the 
Divine in every object and every being. Students should expe- 
rience the Divine in all their studies and sports. It has been 
said: Life is a game, Play it! 

Life must be permeated with love. Through love, truth can 
be realized and a righteous life can be lived. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 13 


The ancients attached the highest value to good character. 
They considered that if character was lost, all was lost. Today, 
people consider that if wealth is lost all is lost. They attach no 
value to character. 

Men should strive to lead virtuous lives. The cowherd 
maids (gopikas) provide the supreme example of how to lead a 
life dedicated to the Divine. The episode of Uddhava’s mission 
to the cowherd maids and their reaction to it as described in the 
Bhagavatam shows what true and one-pointed devotion to 
Krishna meant for the cowherd maids. They had totally surren- 
dered their minds and hearts to Krishna. 


The sacredness of Uttarayana 


This day marks the entry of the Sun into the sign of Capri- 
corn in his northward journey (Uttarayana). Bhishmacharya, 
lying on a bed of arrows after he fell wounded, waited for the 
commencement of Uttarayana to give up his spirit to the Lord. 
He lay on the bed of arrows for 56 days. This signifies the sa- 
credness of this day. This is the moment to fill one’s heart with 
divine feelings. 

There is no need to seek God in a temple, mosque, or 
church. He is enshrined in every human heart. Unfortunately 
people go on expensive pilgrimages to all sorts of places, for- 
getting that God is the dweller in their hearts. 

Why should Indian students go abroad for studies or jobs? 
It is better to earn ten rupees within India than ten thousand 
rupees abroad. This craze for going abroad is utterly meaning- 
less. It is better to lead a good life within India than to pursue 
the mirage of careers abroad. 

In this context, it is good to remember the teachings of the 
sage Narada on devotion. Narada is misrepresented as one who 
reveled in promoting discord. This is totally wrong. He ex- 
pounded the highest truths about devotion (bhakti) and taught 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 14 


how man should realize oneness with God through intense de- 
votion. 


Integral relationship between society and nature 


What people need today is yearning for unity in diversity. 
Human beings are like limbs of the body of society. They are 
integral parts of society. Society is a part of nature, and nature 
is a limb of God. Hence, the integral and organic relationship 
between the individual and God through society and nature 
should be properly understood. 

The body is important in the spiritual process. The Gita has 
declared that the body (kshetra) and the indwelling knower 
(kshetrajna) are one. Hence, men should engage themselves in 
sacred actions that will promote the welfare of society and up- 
hold its reputation. 

To transform society, the first requisite is individual trans- 
formation. Purify your heart. Then society will also become 
pure. You should adhere to truth, like Harishchandra did, pre- 
pared to face any ordeal. Never go back on your plighted word. 

Students! You have participated in many games. Prizes are 
awarded to winners in sports. But do not aspire for prizes given 
by others. Seek the reward of self-satisfaction. You must have 
the feeling, "I did my duty". Duty is God; work is worship. 

Today, the wardens approached me and said that Swami 
should distribute prizes to the winners in the sports events. At 
the outset, I did not agree to distribute. A prize is called bahu- 
mathi. The meaning of bahumathi is “multi-minded”. When a 
single mind can play so many monkey tricks, what is the result 
of bestowing many minds? There is a saying that a bachelor is 
equal to a hundred monkeys. I do not like to confer prizes that 
unsettle the minds of the students. 

What is the prize that should be awarded to the students? 
You are good! You are good! That is the award that you should 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 15 


earn from Swami. Many prize-winning students look forward 
to getting prostration at Swami’s feet (padanamaskar) when 
they receive prizes from Swami. Yesterday, I allowed all stu- 
dents to offer padanamaskar because they were willing to 
forgo receiving the prizes. It is their spirit of sacrifice that has 
enabled them to get this benediction from Bhagavan. 


From self-confidence to self-realization 


A spiritual edifice is built on the foundation of self-con- 
fidence. The walls are made up of self-satisfaction. Self-sacri- 
fice is the roof. Self-Realization is fulfillment in life. 

Students! Fill your minds and hearts with these sacred 
spiritual truths and go out into the world to spread the spiritual 
message in every street and every alley. 

The world today is in utter confusion. Unrest and fear stalk 
the world. To eliminate this disorder and fear, you have to in- 
still devotion among the people. 

Today, the world lacks righteousness and spirituality. Peo- 
ple are immersed in materialism and worldliness. They are af- 
ter power and pelf. This is utterly wrong. Money comes and 
goes. Morality comes and grows. You may carry on your vo- 
cational duties. But along with it, render social service. See the 
divine in the people whom you serve. 

Even an agnostic occasionally invokes the name of God. 
For instance, on one occasion, Jawaharlal Nehru was visiting 
the Meenakshi Temple in Madurai. During the worship of the 
Goddess, Nehru noticed a large emerald adorning the idol. He 
asked about the value of the emerald. He was interested in the 
value of the gem. But the devotees in the sanctum were medi- 
tating on the divine form of the Goddess. They were concerned 
about Divinity. Nehru looked at the idol from a worldly point 
of view. When he was informed that the ornament was worth 
several lakhs, spontaneously he exclaimed: "My God!" What 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 16 


made him think of God? Because God is in everyone. When 
expressing surprise at something one exclaims: "Oh! My 
God!" In this manner, people give expression to the Divinity 
within them unconsciously. 


A lesson to the Pandavas 


Doubts about God may sometimes arise even among 
staunch believers. This may be illustrated from an incident in 
the Mahabharata. Once, while the Pandavas were in exile in 
the forest, Krishna visited them. Krishna was told that the five 
brothers took turns during the night to keep a vigil over the ac- 
tivities of evil spirits and demons. One night, an evil spirit ap- 
peared before the Pandava brothers, and they had great diffi- 
culty in fighting it. In view of this, Dharmaja, the eldest of the 
Pandavas, tried to dissuade Krishna from participating in sen- 
try duty. Krishna, however, insisted on taking his share. 

During that period no evil spirit appeared. Then came Ar- 
juna’s turn, and Krishna watched the scene from a distance. To 
Arjuna’s surprise, no evil spirit appeared while Krishna was 
there. Krishna then explained to Arjuna that evil spirits were 
only a reflection of one’s hatred and fear, and when one is free 
from these, no evil spirit would appear or do any harm. 
Krishna revealed that the Divine existed even in so-called evil 
spirits and that if a person gets rid of the evil qualities within 
him, the evil spirits can do no harm. One’s anger assumes the 
form of a demon. If you develop love, everything you confront 
will have the form of love. This was the lesson Krishna taught 
the Pandavas. 

Students should eschew bad qualities like anger, hatred, 
and envy. By manifesting love, they will enjoy bliss. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 17 


"Follow your dharma" 


The essential message of the Gita is: Follow your dharma. 
Do your duty without expectation of its fruits. If you are a 
householder, perform your duties as a householder. Whatever 
your stage in life, act according to the duties appropriate to that 
stage. If everyone does his duty, there is nothing greater in life. 

But there is one duty that is common to all stages: the duty 
dictated by the heart (hridaya-dharma). Fill your hearts with 
love. Through this you can accomplish anything. Start the day 
with Love, Fill the day with Love, End the day with Love 
—this is the way to God. 

I am presenting a silver cup to each campus of the Institute. 
Accept it as my love offering to every student individually. 
Everyone should develop a sense of oneness with all. The 
world today suffers from divisiveness. Students should go out 
into the world and promote the sense of human unity. That will 
be the offering you can make to Me. 

You are all my property. And I am yours. Let us share each 
other’s love. That is the true path of devotion. Ritualistic wor- 
ship is not the true mark of devotion. The essence of devotion 
is the feeling of identification with God. 

During the recent Unity Cup Cricket Match, a cricketer of 
repute observed, “I don’t do any work on my own. Whatever I 
do, I regard as Swami’s work. Because I did Swami’s work, 
my work was taken care of by Swami. I did not attend to my 
work. After coming here, I received a telegram to the effect: 
“Your task has been accomplished successfully.’” He then an- 
nounced that, “while I attended to Swami’s work, Swami car- 
ried out my work.” 

Likewise, if you do Swami’s work, your work will be taken 
care of by Me. Dedicate every action to the Divine. The re- 
sponse will be equally divine. This has been described as “di- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 18 


vine vibration”. That vibration will sustain and support your 
life. 

Take up social service in the villages after you go back to 
your homes. That is the way to make use of your studies and 
put Swami’s teachings into practice. Instill in the villages de- 
votion to God. Practise what you preach. This is true service. 


14 January 1998 
Sai Kulwant Hall, Prasanthi Nilayam 


A mirror, though clean, may not reflect your image 
if there is no mercury coating behind it. So also the 
heart may be pure, but there should be a coating of 
love behind it to facilitate reflection of God. 

— Baba 


Buddha’s gospel of good life 


Embodiments of Divine Love! 


Man today is acquiring various types of knowledge. 
Among these he is learning how to live and act like lions and 
other animals. 

What is the meaning of knowledge (jnana)? It is not mere 
acquaintance with numerous books. Even the acquisition of 
information about all the objects in the animate and inanimate 
is not knowledge. True knowledge is awareness of the relation- 
ship between the individual and collective (samashti) and their 
oneness. 

Men today do not recognize the nature their humanness. 
How can they recognize their inherent divinity? 

It is only when man is aware of his humanness that he will 
be competent to recognize his divinity. How then, is man to 
reach humanness? What is the means? Buddha undertook vari- 
ous inquiries to discover the Divine and came to the conclusion 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 20 


that it is only through mastery over his senses he can achieve 
this. Man has to make the right use of his senses for sacred 
purposes to realize his divinity. 


Samyag darsanam 


Hence, Buddha declared that the first requisite is samyag- 
darsanam (Having the right vision). The implication of this 
statement is that, having been bestowed with the great gift of 
eyes, man should use them for seeing sacred objects and holy 
beings. But, on the contrary, by using his eyes to look at unsa- 
cred objects and evil persons, man fills himself with bad 
thoughts and becomes a prey to evil tendencies. What one sees 
influences the feelings in the heart. The state of the heart de- 
termines the nature of one’s thoughts. The thoughts influence 
one's life. 

Hence to lead a good life the first requisite is a pure vision. 
Man has to cultivate sacred outlook. As a result of looking at 
cruel, ugly, and wicked scenes man leads an animal existence. 
The very first inquiry one should make is to ascertain what is 
pure, edifying, and godly that he should see. Whatever he sees 
leaves its imprint on man. Few realize the effects of this. 

Human life today is racked by anxiety, misery, unrest and 
troubles of various kinds. The root cause of all this is that man 
is witnessing what is repulsive, wicked and demeaning. For 
transforming one's life, the first requisite is a proper vision. 
The eye (netra) is comparable to a spiritual text (sastra) and 
one's vision (drishti) determines one's views of the cosmos 
(srishti). Hence to acquire the highest knowledge one has to 
purify the vision. This means one should avoid seeing what is 
obnoxious. One should strive to see only that which is sacred 
and pure. What man sees is like seeds sown in the heart. Evil 
scenes give rise to evil thoughts. Good scenes evoke good 
thoughts. When sacred scenes are implanted in the heart there 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 21 


will be no room for bad feelings or thoughts to grow in the 
heart. 

This was the first lesson Buddha taught. Buddha wandered 
all over the country in search of spiritual peace and liberation. 
After many years of inquiry he came to the conclusion that the 
secret of spiritual wisdom was not to be got from scholars or 
by study. He realized that spiritual understanding could only 
come from mastery of the senses. 


Samyag vachanam 


From developing sacred vision, man should proceed to 
samyag vachanam (sacred speech). Buddha declared that only 
sacred thoughts could lead to sacred speech. Buddha declared 
that the tongue should not be used recklessly to utter whatever 
one thinks. The tongue has been given to speak the truth, to 
expatiate on what is sacred and pure. The tongue has not been 
given to man to pamper the palate with delicious sweets. It is 
not given for talking as one likes. It is not to be used for caus- 
ing displeasure to others. Nor is it to be used for indulging in 
falsehood. The tongue has been given to man to speak the 
truth, to be sweet to others, to praise the Divine and enjoy the 
bliss derived from such sacred speech. 

There are people who devote their entire time to reading all 
kinds of books, without trying to put into practice what they 
learn from such reading. What is the use of such reading? 
Buddha spoke out against scholarship unrelated to the good 
life. He carried out a great deal of study and met many great 
men. He listened to many discourses. He realized that true 
knowledge could not be got by these means. He realized that a 
pure, unsullied consciousness confers the highest knowledge. 
True knowledge is derived from a pure inner consciousness 
(antahkarana). 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 22, 


This year (1998) is dedicated to Peace. How is this Peace 
to be achieved? The first requisite is purification of one's vi- 
sion. The second requisite is the cultivation of sacred feelings 
within, which will be conducive to purity in speech. Harmony 
will promote a climate of peace. The well being of society is 
bound up with the transformation of the individuals composing 
it. Righteous individuals alone can build a righteous commu- 
nity. A pure mind is essential for pure thoughts, pure vision 
and pure speech. 

The country today has plenty of persons who talk a great 
deal and display book knowledge, but do not practice even a 
fraction of what they have read or speak about. It is such peo- 
ple who are responsible for the lamentable plight of the nation. 


Samyag karma and samyag sadhana 


Buddha emphasized goodness in action (samyag-karma). 
The mark of good action is harmony in thought, word, and 
deed. When there is no such harmony, the action belies what is 
said or thought. 

Buddha went on to declare that good action is conducive to 
good spiritual progress (samyag-sadhana). Good deeds con- 
stitute genuine spirituality. Mere formal worship or ritualistic 
practices do not constitute spiritual striving. These religious 
practices are good in a way. But they do not constitute spiritual 
sadhana. True spirituality consists in the unity of thought, 
word and deed in all their purity and sacredness. 

Buddha declared that when spiritual striving of this nature 
has been completed, there is samyag-jivanam (leading a pure 
life). 

This is how the five organs of perception (panchendriyas) 
should be used to achieve the supreme goal of life. Good vi- 
sion, good thoughts, good speech, good deeds and good spiri- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 23 


tual endeavor are the prerequisites for a good life (samyagjiva- 
nam). 

In this context, the meaning of spiritual striving should be 
properly understood. Essentially spiritual striving calls for the 
shedding of all bad qualities and the cultivation of good 
thoughts. Spiritual sadhana means cultivating good thoughts 
and undertaking good deeds. 


The true meaning of dharma 


To achieve happiness, man embarks on acquiring various 
kinds of knowledge and pursues various occupations. He seeks 
happiness through marriage and having children and building a 
mansion for his residence. But is he happy thereby? No. 

In his last moments, Buddha summoned his stepbrother 
Ananda to impart to him his final message. Ananda was the 
son of Gautami (Buddha's stepmother). Placing his palm on the 
head of his younger brother, Buddha said: “My dear child! I 
came to the world to teach (the Truth). If anyone asks, ‘Where 
is God?’ the answer is: ‘He is everywhere’. Truth is God. 
Speak the Truth. Do not harm anyone. Recognize that the 
highest dharma is nonviolence ahimsa).” 

What is dharma? Is it celibacy or the duties of a house- 
holder or a renunciant (sanyasi)? These are transient obliga- 
tions, which have to be observed as incidental duties in the 
journey of life. The Supreme duty is refraining from causing 
harm to anyone. This truth is proclaimed in the scriptures in 
the exhortation: “Speak the truth. Speak what is pleasing 
(Sathyam bruyaath; priyam bruyaath.)” Thus, pleasing speech 
is declared as a supreme duty. 

Buddha told Ananda that this truth was learnt by him from 
his own experience. He said, “When I left the palace, my father 
(the King) was told that I was doing a great wrong in re- 
nouncing the family. My parents, kinsmen and others tried to 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 24 


put pressure on me to return to the ties of family life. These 
wrong efforts on their side made me more determined to pur- 
sue the spiritual path. In the quest for spiritual peace several 
ordeals have to be overcome. Today I have found the Truth 
about life. What is it? The sanctification of the five senses is 
the way to Truth. If the senses are polluted, of what avail are 
spiritual exercises? When the water in a tank is polluted, all 
taps will only give polluted water. Your heart is the tank. Your 
vision and thoughts are impure. Your speech is foul. When the 
heart is polluted in this manner, the senses are bound to be sul- 
lied.” 


Speak sweetly and never use harsh words 


When the heart is filled with good thoughts and feelings, 
all that comes out of the senses - your speech, your vision, 
your actions - will all be pure. That was why Jayadeva ex- 
horted the God-given tongue to use its sweetness to proclaim 
the glory of God by chanting the Lord's sweet names: Govinda, 
Damodara and Madhava. One should always speak sweetly 
and never use harsh words. 

People today are immersed in worldly pursuits to secure 
transient pleasures but few are interested in spiritual pursuits, 
which will give them everlasting bliss. When people experi- 
ence spiritual bliss (Atma-ananda) all other forms of happiness 
will automatically come. People immersed in mundane pur- 
suits have no time for spiritual matters. The Gita exhorts man- 
kind to turn away from the ephemeral attractions of the misery- 
laden world and to seek the Divine. 

You must realize the greatness and preciousness of human 
life. You witnessed the lion-dance earlier. The external trap- 
pings were those of lions but the persons who performed the 
dance were young men. It is not the external form that matters 
but the human element behind it. Flaunting the human form 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 25 


without displaying human qualities is meaningless. You must 
cultivate human values such as good vision, sweet speech, 
good thoughts and good actions, which constitute the good life. 
Only then you will be a total human being. 


Good life leads to nirvana 


After getting enlightenment under the Bodhi tree in Gaya, 
Buddha embarked upon his mission of preaching. Once two of 
his disciples were accompanying him. Buddha noticed that 
they were looking at some women who were bringing water 
from a river. Buddha chided them for their misconduct and ex- 
pelled them from the Sangha. He said that while walking on 
the road the eyes should be concentrated on the road in front 
and should not go astray. I condemned the habit of young men 
to look at cinema posters on roadside walls while going on bi- 
cycles. Such actions are often the cause of serious accidents. 

Buddha declared that the good life leads to liberation (nir- 
vana). This is the sacred consummation for a good life. In this 
state, a man is tree from desires and actions prompted by them. 

Having taken human birth, all human beings should foster 
human values. In the Sathya Sai Organization, we have given 
the highest place to human values. It is only when human val- 
ues are fostered that divine values cam emerge. 

Before his passing, Buddha taught his stepbrother, Ananda, 
the transience of worldly pleasures and the meaninglessness of 
a purely mundane existence. 

When Ananda started weeping, noticing the imminent 
passing of Buddha, the Enlightened One asked him: “Why are 
you weeping?” Ananda said, “I am weeping because your 
passing is imminent.” Buddha told him that he should not 
worry about what happens to the body that is perishable and 
full of infirmities. He exhorted Ananda not to bother about the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 26 


body or the mind, but lead a life based on the dictates of the 
conscience. Giving this advice, Buddha breathed his last. 


Bharat has been the birthplace of sacred beings 


Many high-souled spiritual leaders like Buddha have 
shown mankind the path they should follow for reaching the 
highest goal of life. Bharat has been the unique birthplace of 
many such saints and sages. Bharat has been the land of men 
and women known for their purity and holiness. It is the birth- 
place of sacred beings like Harishchandra and others who ad- 
hered to the path of truth at any cost. These truths are valid 
even now. 

Today, you celebrate the New Lunar Year. The year is de- 
scribed as Samvatsara in Sanskrit. This term is also one of the 
names of God. Hence the advent of the New Year should be 
hailed as the advent of the Divine. 

Without recognizing this divine significance of the New 
Year, there is no purpose in celebrating it with lavish decora- 
tions and sumptuous feasts. It is not the feast that is important. 
It is the ideal that is to be pursued which is important. Today 
what is important is the quest for peace within, which can be 
got only by internal purity. 

Human actions have been divided into five categories of 
which those prompted by the heart are the highest and others 
done with egoistic motives are inferior. Whatever is done 
should be done wholeheartedly so that it gets sanctified. 

Maintain silence and speak as little as possible. Since Janu- 
ary 1, I have been restricting My speech to a minimum, con- 
fining My words to what was necessary. Swami went on to 
say: I am restricting my talking with others even in the inter- 
view room. What is the reason? I want to set an example to 
others by practicing what I preach. My life is my message. I 
must show the way. Many do not understand my actions. But, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 27 


when they do not understand, they should remain silent. But, 
instead they misinterpret my actions. That is a great sin. 

From today, you must resolve to use your eyes properly, to 
see only the good. Why use binoculars to see distant objects? If 
your vision is impaired, do not lament over it. Consider even 
blindness as a blessing. It your hearing gets worse, do not 
moan over it. How much of the noise of the world is worth 
hearing at all? What use is there in listening to the cacophony 
of mutual abuse? Welcome the fact that you are saved from 
listening to such gossip. 

Whatever your disabilities, look upon them as gifts from 
God. All things will turn out to be for your own good. 


Peace is to be found only in Prasanthi Nilayam 


Devotees have gathered here from Malaysia, Singapore, 
Hong Kong, Indonesia, Taiwan and Japan. You may have 
come with many problems and worries. Leave them here and 
return to your places with your hearts filled with bliss. Leave 
all your bad thoughts and feelings and fill yourselves with the 
peace and joy of Prasanthi Nilayam. Coming here with restless 
minds, do not go back in the same state. Prasanthi (Supreme 
Peace) is very valuable for man. Today peace is not to be 
found anywhere in the world. You find only pieces (divisions) 
everywhere. Peace is to be found only here. Carry it with you. 
This is a place hallowed by the vibrations of numerous good 
devotees. Many noble souls have spent their lives here. Fill 
your hearts with their noble thoughts. Do not bother about 
what others may say. Develop self-confidence and proceed to- 
ward self-realization through self-sacrifice. Ignore incidental 
troubles, which are passing clouds. Think only about God. 
There is nothing more vital than that. Try to acquire Divine 
Love. Love is God. Live in Love. The best way to love God is 
to love all, serve all. All are embodiments of God. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 28 


Foster love. Adhere to Truth. Follow Righteousness. 
Achieve Peace. This is the special benediction of Swami on 
this day on all. Wherever you may go, speak softly and sweetly 
Thereby you will earn the esteem of society. This is the most 
valuable reward you have to secure this New Year. 


The Gift Swami Wants 


You have presented many things as ‘gifts’ to Bhagavan. 
This ‘Tiger Map’ is one of them. That is not the gift I want. 
Hand over to me your ‘tigerly’ qualities. That is the gift I 
would like. The tiger is a cruel animal. Rid yourself of all cruel 
feelings and offer them to me. Lead the life of a useful, harm- 
less, sacred cow. It gives nourishing milk in return for cheap 
grass. 

Embodiments of Love! You have come here from long dis- 
tances, undergoing many discomforts. Return with joy in your 
hearts and share your joy with the people in your places in an 
unselfish spirit. A life of selfless love will lead you to libera- 
tion. 

Listening to your bhajans today gave immense joy to one 
and all. Community singing sets up vibrations that will cleanse 
the atmosphere. 


5 February 1998 
Sai Kulwant Hall, Prasanthi Nilayam 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 29 


4 


From negative to positive 


Students, Teachers and Doctors! 


The whole world is a stage and every individual is ana_c- 
tor. How should the actors conduct themselves? The primary 
goal of every actor should be to carry out their duty in the part 
assigned to them. He should set aside his individuality. How? 

During the recent festival, the students enacted a play. One 
student played the role of a municipal chairman. In that role he 
had to behave as a municipal chairman and not exhibit his in- 
dividual talents. These should be given a back seat. He should 
act his part well. However, who is the director of the cosmic 
drama? It is the Divine. Every human being is a manifestation 
of the Divine Will. He has taken birth as a human being to ful- 
fill his duty. He has to manifest his humanness. Every individ- 
ual has to play his role well and acquit himself worthily. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 30 


Maarakam and Thaarakam 


In the drama of life, there is a mixture of good and bad. 
Humanness is present in this mixture. Of the two —-the good 
and bad— one is known as maarakam and the other is known as 
thaarakam. Maarakam implies that one acts on the basis that 
nothing belongs to him and that, whatever words he utters or 
whatever action he does, all belong to God and nothing is his 
own. He plays his role in this spirit, ascribing nothing to him- 
self. Thaarakam represents the attitude of the actor, who is 
conscious of the role he is playing and does not forget his indi- 
viduality in his actions. He does not consider himself as merely 
acting a part but regards himself as the doer. The difference 
between the two is that while the former realizes the temporary 
nature of the part he is playing and is not attached to the things 
connected with the role, the other (thaarakam) develops at- 
tachment to the role he plays and does not wish to part with 
things connected with the role. In the concept of maarakam 
there is no sense of possessiveness. But in thaarakam, one is 
attached to what he considers as his. 

Modern man suffers from the sense of possession. This is a 
negative attitude. He is obsessed with the idea of "my" and 
"mine". He attaches excessive importance to the body, forget- 
ting the most precious Atmic principle that is within it which 
will give him enduring bliss. The reason for this attachment is 
the failure to use the senses properly and to become a slave of 
the desires prompted by the senses. 

The eyes, the ears and other sense organs should be used 
only to perceive sacred things. They should not be used indis- 
criminately to enjoy whatever pleases them. This is the reason 
why Swami advises people not to see evil, speak evil, or hear 
what is evil, but to see what is good, hear what is sacred, and 
speak what is good. These may seem simple maxims, but they 
are full of profound significance. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 31 


In this context, people should constantly discriminate b_ e- 
tween "negative" and "positive" actions. All bad and unwhole- 
some actions are "negative" in character. They should be es- 
chewed altogether. 


Human birth is a God-given gift 


Students should realize that what matters when they sing 
bhajans is not the tune or the conduct of the songs but the 
genuineness of the feeling with which they sing the bhajans. 
When their hearts are pure and full of deep devotion, the bha- 
jans will be full of feeling and will appeal to the hearts of the 
listeners. What ensures from the heart is "positive", while what 
comes from the mind is often negative". 

Human birth is a God-given gift which should be used with 
due care. It should be filled with righteous acts. Unfortunately, 
today men misuse all their God-given talents for unholy pur- 
poses. The mind should be filled with good thoughts, the heart 
should be filled with compassion, and the hands should be en- 
gaged in selfless service. 

Man will be caught up in "negative" behavior as long as he 
identifies himself with the body. The moment he considers 
himself the master of the senses, his actions will be "positive". 
Mastery of the senses leads to "liberation". Liberation is not 
something to be achieved in after-life. The striving for libera- 
tion must start early in life and proceed continuously. Another 
term for liberation is "emancipation". That is true freedom 
freedom from bondage to the senses. This means that you 
must carry on all duties without attachment to the fruits 
thereof. Today, all actions are performed with attachment to 
the results. For instance, students pursue study of the bio- 
science with a view to become doctors. There is per se nothing 
wrong in this. But when they become doctors they should be 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 32 


primarily concerned about the welfare of their patients and not 
in their earnings. 

Even in rendering social service, there is often an element 
of self-interest that vitiates the quality of your service. Instead 
of being a "positive" act of selfless love, the service becomes a 
"negative" act carrying the taint of self-interest. No permanent 
joy can be derived from such "negative" activities. 

Students must begin sanctifying their actions from their 
days at school. They must cultivate good company as part of 
their education. This is the way to get near to God. The final 
stage is Sayujyam (becoming one with God). 

Life is filled with bondages of various kinds —from hunger 
and poverty to ignorance and disease. To strive for freedom 
from these bondages is spiritual sadhana. It means giving up 
those actions that bind you. 


The story of the king and the shepherd 


It is not always easy to get the answers to spiritual ques- 
tions. There is a story to illustrate this. Once there was a king 
in Kapila, who was putting questions to various scholars in his 
kingdom. He was not satisfied with their answers and so turned 
them away from his court. A shepherd who heard about this 
came to the king and said he was prepared to answer any ques- 
tions put by the king. The king was surprised at his claim and 
said that if he failed to give a satisfactory answer he would be 
beheaded. The shepherd agreed to the condition. Then, he told 
the king that they should exchange places in keeping with the 
new situation, in which the king would be the learner and the 
shepherd would be the teacher. The king transferred his robe to 
the shepherd and sat at his feet, while the shepherd put on the 
king's robe and sat on the throne. He then asked the king to put 
his questions. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 33 


The king's first question was, "What does God do in this 
world?" The shepherd answered, "He makes a millionaire a 
pauper and a pauper a millionaire. Till now I was a poor man. 
Now I have been made a king with a seat on the throne. From 
being a king, you are now wearing a shepherd's clothing. This 
is what God has done." 

The king was fairly satisfied with the answer. His second 
question was: "Whom does God favor? Who is the recipient of 
His grace?" The shepherd pointed to a light and said, "The 
light from the lamp sends its rays in all directions. Likewise, 
God, who is embodiment of all effulgence, sees in all direc- 
tion, and showers His grace on all. He does not see in one di- 
rection alone." The king was pleased with the answer. 

While the shepherd was wondering what the king's third 
question would be, the king addressed him as "Swami!" and 
said: "Where is God?" The shepherd brought a cup of milk and 
asked the king, "Can you say in what part of the milk there is 
butter? In every molecule of the milk there is butter. Likewise, 
God is all-pervading. What is it that you have to do to see the 
butter in the milk? You have to make curd out of it, churn it 
and then the butter will rise to the top. Likewise, God, who is 
everywhere, has to be enshrined in the heart, turned into curd 
by good deeds and churned by sadhana. Then there will be di- 
rect experience of the Divine." 

The king was totally satisfied with the answers of the shep- 
herd. He gave away half of his kingdom to the shepherd and 
declared that wisdom was to be found more among the com- 
mon folk than among scholars. There is nothing great in mere 
scholarship as such. To give intelligent answers to questions 
out of wisdom gained from daily life is what matters. 

Today, very few people understand the difference between 
the "positive" and "negative" aspects of life. Whatever attracts 
the mind is "negative". Desireless actions are "positive". 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 34 


The discharge of duties in a spirit of detachment is the ba- 
sic obligation of everyone from a student to a scholar. Thereby 
you can manifest the divinity within you. But, if you cannot 
recognize your humanness, how can you recognize your divin- 
ity? The first requisite is purity of heart and a mind free from 
all desires. 

You may or may not believe it. Here is My body. It has a 
mind, intellect etc. exactly like that of any of you. But I am 
aware of the workings of the monkey mind. I have no desires 
in My mind. I do not let myself be caught by the wiles of the 
mind. It is natural for the mind to behave in that way. I do not 
get trapped by it. I am not attached to the body or the mind. I 
follow the conscience. 

Here is the body of Mine. You may touch any part of it. 
You will receive positive vibrations from it. There is no trace 
of the negative vibrations anywhere in my body. No negative 
thoughts enter in my mind. Sometimes I may appear to speak 
harshly. But it is not for my sake, but for correcting others. 
Although seventy-two years have gone by, yet I entertain no 
desires. I have had no desires at any time. 

The way my life is spent from moment to moment is re- 
markable. Every one of my actions is "positive" and not 
"negative". My whole body is "negative". But all my thoughts 
and actions are "positive". There is no disharmony between my 
thoughts and actions. In fact, this has been the case from the 
age of nine. 


How Swami taught a lesson to the village officer 


In this village (of Puttaparthi) there was a karnam (village 
officer) named Subbarao. He was the richest man in the vil- 
lage. He owned most of the lands here. All the villagers used to 
be afraid of him. Swami was a short lad at that time. The kar- 
nam was given to bad ways. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 35 


Swami called all his young friends together, taught them 
various songs, and asked them to go round the village singing 
the songs. The boys told Baba, "Swami! The karnam may beat 
us up". Swami assured them, "He has no authority to touch any 
of you. No one can object to your singing the songs". Swami 
taught them how to sing the songs tunefully. The boys did not 
know the meaning of the song. 

On the first day, when the boys sang the songs in front of 
the karnam’s house, the karnam went inside. On the second 
day, when the boys repeated their performance, the karnam 
went inside, brought some mangoes, distributed the fruits 
among the boys, and asked them not to sing the songs. He 
asked them: "Who taught you these songs?" They all shouted: 
"Raju. Raju taught us all the songs." 

One day the karnam invited Raju (the young Baba) to 
come to his house for tiffin (snack). Raju told him: "I don't 
want your tiffin". The karnam was furious that a young fellow 
should speak like that to him. 

In those songs I was teaching what was appropriate to 
those times. The song condemned those who went after women 
of ill fame and warned that such persons would be shunned by 
society and forfeit the respect of everyone. The boys were 
afraid to sing the song. The strong words used in the song were 
necessary to teach a lesson to those who misbehaved. To cor- 
rect people who were leading bad lives, I used to compose po- 
ems and write plays even from those early years. I am always 
in the habit of living up to what I preach. I do not preach what 
I do not practice. Whatever I do is of a "positive" character. I 
have no desires of any kind. 


Students are My property 


I have often declared that "students are my property". A 
student also said earlier: "Swami! we are your property." This 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 36 


is true. But there are properties of different kinds —-those that 
are valuable and those that are not. As long as students con- 
sider themselves as my property, they should lead ideal lives. 
You should not become useless garbage. You should stand up 
as high mountains. It is for this purpose that I am training all of 
you. Many students are not coming up to my expectations. 
They are not understanding my message. Some day they will 
understand it. There is no trace of the negative in me. Every- 
thing is positive. 

Pay heed to my advice. Talk as little as possible. Some stu- 
dents tell me that their parents want them to get married (after 
finishing their studies). I won't advise you not to get married. If 
you wish to marry, do so. But, I will not force anyone to marry 
against his will. Each one should consult his conscience and 
decide. 

Do your duties to your family. Do not let your children do 
what you consider is wrong. In the Mahabharatha, Dhrita- 
rashtra failed to correct his eldest son, Duryodhana, and the 
result was disastrous for the entire Kaurava clan. Vidura re- 
minded him that if only he had taken firm action to restrain 
Duryodhana, the family could have been saved. 


15 February 1998 
Institute Hostel, Prasanthi Nilayam 


5 


The power of the Lord's name 


Whether He is described as 

Cosmic Consciousness (Chaithanya) 

Or the Indwelling Knower (Kshetrajna) 

Or the Supreme Wisdom (Jnana) 

Or the Ego or the Supreme Lord (Easwara) 
Or Vishnu or Brahma 

Or the Primordial Energy 

Or the Bliss Divine (Ananda) 

Or the Abode of the Divine (Parmapadam) 
Or as the Atma or as Sath-Chith-Ananda 
All are various names and forms 

of the Supreme Self, which is nameless 
The Cosmos is permeated by Hari 

Nothing can be found in the Universe 
Without the Divine in it. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Every human being seeks to enjoy bliss. He aspires for a 
blissful life. Whether he is a scholar or an artist, a wielder of 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 38 


power or a man of status, he yearns for bliss. Every man strives 
from dawn to dusk for acquiring bliss. 

Bharatiya culture and tradition have proclaimed the great- 
ness of this bliss (ananda). But man is enveloped in two 
screens: the phenomenal and the spiritual. His vision is af- 
fected by the material outlook and the spiritual outlook. Unable 
to harmonize the two, man regards them as distinct from each 
other. The unity of these two represents the true Atmic princi- 
ple. 

Considering the material world of physical objects as the 
only, reality, man loses himself in the pursuit of material ob- 
jects. But, if the truth about these material objects is fully ex- 
plored, it will be found that they have no reality at all. They 
have only momentary and temporal reality. They do not have 
the stamp of permanent reality. They do not confer enduring 
bliss. To realize lasting bliss, man has to make the requisite 
effort. 


The Quest for Bliss 


Sath-Chith-Ananda (Being-Awareness-Bliss) pervades the 
entire universe. Every living being, from the ant onwards, is 
seeking this bliss, not man alone. For all living creatures, this 
bliss is the life-breath. 

The scriptures have dealt with this problem of bliss in vari- 
ous ways. They have proclaimed Sath-Chith-Ananda as the 
primary principle. 

The existence of the Universe as a fact is affirmed by nu- 
merous persons. But a blind man is not aware of its existence. 
However, hearing what others say about the world, he also be- 
lieves in its existence. He is not aware of its existence from his 
own personal experience. 

People today speak about Sath-Chith-Ananda as a reality 
after hearing about the statements in the Vedas, Puranas, and 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 39 


other scriptural texts. Such persons have no personal experi- 
ence of Sath-Chith-Ananda. Even the scholars who expound 
this concept are merely relating what they have learnt from 
books, but have no direct experience of this bliss. 

Every man should seek to know what Sath-Chith-Ananda 
means. Only then he will realize his own true self. Because of 
the delusion caused by the phenomenal world, man regards 
Sath-Chith-Ananda as distinct from himself. This feeling arises 
from his attachment to the body. Everyone should find out 
"Who am I?" When he has found the answer to this question, 
there will be no need for him to understand what is Sath-Chith- 
Ananda. 

As long as man identities himself with the body and his 
physical attributes, he will be in quest of Sath-Chith-Ananda. 
When a man has discovered the true nature of the "I", he will 
not go after any other thing. He will realize that he is the em- 
bodiment of Sath-Chith-Ananda. 

Every individual is an embodiment of Sath-Chith-Ananda. 
Sath - God; Chith - the Jiva (individual self). The unity of Sath 
and Chith is Ananda (Bliss). 


Mind is the root of bodily afflictions 


The human body is a prey to many ailments. Man regards 
all of them as bodily ailments. But not all of them are entirely 
related to the body. Purely bodily ailments can be treated by 
medicines. But most ailments in the world today have their 
origin in the mind. The aberrations of the mind set up reactions 
in the body and cause various diseases. The main cause of 
many human ailments is rooted in the mind. 

The mind and the body are interrelated. The influence of 
the mind on the body is of a negative character. This negativity 
is antagonistic to the experience of bliss. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 40 


Bad thoughts and bad feelings arise in the mind. At the 
same time, there are also good thoughts and good feelings. It is 
only when bad thoughts and feelings are weeded out that man 
can have good health. Many diseases have their origin in the 
thoughts that fill the mind. Bad thoughts cause indigestion, af- 
fect the heart, bring about variations in the blood pressure; 
wotries are the cause of many mental diseases. Diabetes and 
pulmonary diseases are traceable to mental causes. 


Different aspects of liberation 


Every man is in search of liberation (mukti). For whom is 
this liberation sought? Is it for the body? Is it for the mind or 
the intellect or the senses? When these questions are examined, 
the answer is that at the outset, liberation has to be secured for 
the mind, the intellect and the senses. Man has to liberate him- 
self first from the vagaries of the mind. Freedom from illness is 
one kind of liberation. Man loses peace of mind on account of 
various troubles. To get rid of this condition and secure peace 
of mind is another kind of liberation (mukti). Consuming food 
to get rid of the pangs of hunger is another kind of liberation. 
To be rid of the trials and tribulations of daily life is another 
aspect of liberation. All these types of liberation have to be se- 
cured while one is still alive. It is wrong to imagine that lib- 
eration is a state that is to be attained after death. 

The various kinds of liberation to be secured today relate to 
the physical. These troubles are bound to exist as long as one is 
attached to the body. All of them arise from the “negative” 
thoughts in man. 

The liberation men should seek is peace of mind. If peace 
is got, all else can be got easily. How is peace to be got? By 
leading a godly life. 

All forms of worship are of no avail if one’s heart is full of 
“negative” feelings and one's mind is filled with “negative” 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 4] 


thoughts. All actions performed by the different sense organs - 
the eyes, the ears, the tongue etc. get polluted when the mind is 
filled with “negative” thoughts. The six evil qualities in man 
—lust, anger, greed, delusion, pride and envy are his well- 
entrenched enemies. To get rid of these wicked elements and 
to install good qualities in their place, the only means is the 
fostering of the love principle (prema-thatwa). When man's 
heart is filled with love, all that he does will be “positive”. All 
good deeds come out of love. Sath-Chith-Ananda arises from 
love. Compassion and kindness are born out of love. All the 
sublime human values have their origin in love. When one is 
filled with love, he needs no other spiritual or ritualistic prac- 
tices. 


All good deeds come out of love 


The Atmic principle is the basis for the body. All activities 
in life should be linked to the Atmic principle. Man should dis- 
card attachment to transient worldly pleasures and pursue what 
is eternal and everlasting. 

When man constantly remembers that he is the embodi- 
ment of Sath-Chith-Ananda, in due course he will experience 
that bliss (Ananda). Man is covered by five sheaths: the An- 
namaya, Pranamaya, Manomaya, Vijnanamaya, and Anan- 
damaya Kosas, The first is a gross sheath, and each following 
sheath is subtler than the preceding one. Man has to proceed 
from the gross to the subtlest sheath of bliss. The Annamaya 
sheath is the body. It is perishable, but as long as one lives, the 
body should be kept in good health. The duties relating to the 
physical have to be carried out. What keeps the body going are 
the vibrations from the vital sheath (Pranamaya kosa). These 
vibrations are controlled by radiation from the mind (Mano- 
maya kosa). Beyond the mind is the Vijnanamaya kosa, which 
accounts for "constant integrated awareness" in man. When 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 42 


this state is reached, man can proceed next to Ananda without 
much effort. Experience of bliss will be automatic. 

It should be evident from this that humanness has been 
conferred on man so that he may ascend towards his divine 
destiny instead of wallowing in mundane pleasures and miser- 
ies. Thereby he will demonstrate his superiority over beasts 
and birds. 


Holiness of Bharathiya festivals 


All Bharathiya (Indian) festivals are designed to lead man 
toward God. They are intended to make people meditate on 
God. Unfortunately, today, instead of thinking about God, 
people indulge in feasts on holy days. Festivals should be de- 
voted to contemplating on God and experiencing the Divine. 

Today we are celebrating Sivarathri. Sivarathri means 
"Auspicious darkness". At least on this day one should chant 
Siva's name all through the night. At least on one day in a year 
chant the name of the Lord. 

Devotees are expected to keep awake this night by chant- 
ing the sacred name of Siva. Keeping awake in any other way 
is purposeless. Spending the night reciting the Lord's name 
sanctifies one's life. In the Gita, the Sthithaprajna is described 
as one who keeps awake when others sleep and for whom the 
daytime when others are awake serves as night. The inner 
meaning of this is that the Sthithaprajna (the realized person 
who is in a state of constant integrated awareness) contem- 
plates on God when others are oblivious to God. 

The main thing about which all should be concerned today 
is how to get rid of the negative thoughts in their minds. The 
six cardinal enemies of man —the six basic vices— have found 
their abode in the hearts of human beings. There is no room in 
their hearts for love or kindness. The foremost task is to fill the 
hearts with love. Then their entire life will be transformed and 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 43 


every act will be suffused with love. This love is "positive" and 
man should strive to foster the positive qualities. Being human, 
men should develop positive qualities like compassion and 
forbearance. 

Today human life is wasted in the pursuit of sensuous de- 
sires. All of them are negative in nature. Instead, men should 
entertain positive desires, which are natural to human beings. 
Divinise every desire and every action. 

Mundane pursuits, which have been with men over many 
lives, have to give way to divine pursuits at least in this life. 
Many do not realize the divine potencies that are in them. They 
have the capacity to do good or bad actions. By doing good 
acts they will experience bliss. Help ever, hurt never. 


Bhagavan’s Example for being always in Bliss 


Everyone should strive to manifest the bliss that is natural 
to him by fostering his loving nature. Peace lies in that bliss. 
All of you should know one thing. Although I am now sev- 
enty-two years in the present body, I have never had any nega- 
tive thoughts. Consequently I have had no ailments of any 
kind. I am always in a state of bliss. But, sometimes, to correct 
others I use harsh words. They are not "negative" words. They 
are filled with love. If you examine my heart, you will find it 
resemble a ball of iron. But from the worldly point of view, it 
will be soft as butter. No illness can affect my heart. 

I am engaged continuously in work from the moment of 
waking, to the time of rest at night. I meet devotees, collect 
letters from them, give them interviews and confer joy in one 
way or other on one and all. Every official anywhere has a 
weekly holiday. But I have no holidays at all. | am always ac- 
tive, whether I am here or elsewhere. Can you point out any- 
one who has been continuously active for seventy-two years? I 
have not desired a day of rest at any time. I am always restful. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 44 


How is this possible? Because I have no negative thoughts. I 
have no attachment to the body. This body exists for your sake. 
When you are attached to the body you need rest. Whatever I 
do or say, it is all for your sake, not for my sake. 


The Lord seeks devotees’ love 


People have to lead their lives based on recognition of this 
truth. There is only one thing I seek from all of you. Fill your 
hearts with love. Offer that love to me. I don’t ask anything 
from anyone. It is enough if you develop love and share it with 
others. It is only when you are happy that you can make others 
happy. What is happiness? It is union with God. By chanting 
the name of God you will experience happiness. 

Good and sacred acts like worship, japa, and meditation 
are useful for sanctifying time. But they are not ends in them- 
selves. They are tinged with worldliness. But what is needed is 
"positive" action, dedicated to the Divine. Then you will be 
free from disease. Only by having pure thoughts you can be 
hale and hearty. 

Have no ill will toward anybody. I have no hatred for any- 
one. Hence no one hates me. All are love-filled beings for me. 
I desire that all should be blissful. It is because of this univer- 
sal feeling in me that all are coming to me. If, on the contrary, 
I had been self- centered, would people from all parts of the 
world come here? I am utterly selfless from head to foot. There 
is no trace of selfishness in me. Any such feeling you may no- 
tice in me is only on your account and not for my sake. I have 
no desires except that everyone in all the worlds should be 
happy. All should become good. All should be loving and 
blissful. What more do I need? 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 45 


Love and faith begets peace and bliss 


Man deserves to enjoy peace and bliss, but does not make 
the necessary effort to get them. If he cultivates love and faith, 
he will acquire peace and bliss. Without these two, his effort is 
as fruitless as a letter that has neither a stamp nor the proper 
address. 

With love and faith in Swami, you can accomplish any task 
you undertake. Observe three maxims: Love of God; Fear of 
Sin; Morality in Society. To develop love of God you have to 
see whether every act of yours pleases God or not. When you 
please God, you will have no fear of sin. When these two are 
present, morality in society will follow naturally. 

All the ills of the world today are due to absence of fear of 
sin and decline in love for God. Decline in respect for human 
values has undermined world peace. 

When the Lord's name is chanted from the depths of the 
heart, it turns into the nectarine music of Krishna's flute, which 
charmed even the cows of Brindavan. The melody that flows 
from the devotee's heart confers ineffable bliss. 

Love and faith are the cardinal principles for redeeming 
human life. My life is my message. I have love for all. I have 
affection even for those who commit wrongs and for those who 
dislike me. I have no ill will towards anyone because of my 
love for all. And therefore the whole world loves me. The root 
cause of my love is my esteem for all (Visvasam). The basis 
for the esteem is adherence to the path of Truth. Divinity is the 
basis for adherence to Truth. Thus this Divinity is the primal 
source of universal love. All should practice universal brother- 
hood. Out of fraternity will be born Divinity. Then, humanity 
will manifest its glory. Men will behave like ideal human be- 
ings. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 46 


The message of Sivarathri 
Embodiments of Love! 


Try to understand my doctrine of Love. I often address you 
as "embodiments of the Divine Self". You will be true em- 
bodiments of the Divine only when you develop divine love. 
The only being worthy of love in this world is God. All others 
are only objects of transient attachment. On this sacred 
Sivarathri day, develop love for the Divine and redeem your 
lives. Manifest the Divine within you. Continuously chant the 
Divine name. Do every act with love. That is the highest 
spiritual sadhana. The way of love will transform the world. 
Love is God. Truth is God, Peace is God. This is the message 
of Sivarathri. Understanding this, dedicate all actions to God 
and render selfless service to the people to redeem your lives. 


25 February 1998, evening 
Sai Kulwant Hall, Prasanthi Nilayam 


6 


The message of 
Sakkubai's devotion 


God created the Cosmos out of Truth; 

The Cosmos is sustained by Truth; 

Without the glory of Truth what can flourish? 
This is the cardinal truth, behold all ye! 


Truth is valid for all times past, present and future. This 
truth protects life and sustains it. 

The inner significance of Truth (Sathyam) has to be prop- 
erly understood. Satht+e+yam = Sathyam. Sath means life. E 
means food (annam). Yam means Surya (the Sun). Food is de- 
rived from the Sun. Food sustains life. For the preservation of 
life, food is essential. "Bhikshaannam deharakshanaartham 
The Lord offers the gift of food to protect the body).” When 
this basic truth is forgotten, food becomes scarce for the peo- 
ple. When food is scarce, life begins to decay. Hence, the en- 
tire survival of the world depends on the Sun. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 48 


The significance of the term Sathya can be sought from an- 
other angle. sa, tha, ya are three syllables in it. When the word 
is read in the reverse order we have ya, tha, sa. This would 
mean that through the disciplines of yama, niyama and others, 
when thapas is performed, one can experience the manifesta- 
tion of sathya (the embodiment of truth). This means that by 
the control of me senses (yama, niyama etc.) thapas (penance) 
has to be performed to realize Truth. 

Thapas means the unity of the three gunas (qualities) 
satwa, rajas, and tamas. The absence of harmony among the 
three qualities results in tamas (the dullness of ignorance). 

The integral unity of feelings in the heart, the words spo- 
ken by the mouth and the actions done by the hands represents 
the unity of the three active principles in man. 


Pure feelings are the outcome of pure thoughts 


Feelings are related to thoughts. Only when the thoughts 
are good can the feelings be pure and sacred. Pure results are 
the outcome of pure thoughts. Here is a story to illustrate this: 

Once Sakkubai complained to the Saint Namadeva that 
somebody was stealing the cow-dung cakes she was making 
everyday. Namadeva asked Sakkubai, "How do you identify 
the cow-dung cakes made by you?" She replied: "I always re- 
cite the name of the Lord whatever action I may be doing. The 
cow-dung cakes I prepare bear the trait of the name I chant". 
She ran up to her home and brought a dung-cake made by her. 
She placed it close to the ear of Namadeva. The dung-cake was 
chanting the name of God: "Ranga! Ranga! Panduranga!” 
Namadeva heard these words coming out continuously from 
the cake. 

Namadeva wondered whether this was real. Even the great 
men of those days could develop doubts of this kind. Sakkubai 
was asked to prepare another dung-cake. She brought some 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 49 


dung and made it into a cake, while chanting the words, 
"Ranga! Ranga! Panduranga! Namadeva tested that cake by 
keeping it close to his ear. Once again he heard the words, 
"Ranga! Ranga! Panduranga!” issuing from the dung-cake. 
He realized that the power of the Lord's name was beyond all 
reckoning. Man's thoughts remain forever, outlasting his hu- 
man existence. 

Prior to this episode, Namadeva used to be known as 
Vamadeva. From that day, he started chanting the name of the 
Lord. Namadeva was the younger brother of Jnanadeva. 
Namadeva was ever blissful chanting the Lord's name. 

By reciting the Lord’s name any difficult task can be ac- 
complished. One becomes what one thinks (Yad bhavam thad 
bhavathi). Hence people should see that their thoughts are pure 
and good. Human life is the expression of one's thoughts. 
When an inquiry is made into what is most important for man, 
the general answer is: life is most important. Some others may 
declare wealth is most important. But Sakkubai was not of this 
view. She declared that the most important thing for anyone is 
the name of the Lord. It is God's name that promotes the fame 
of a person. 


The importance of thought waves 


In this context, the importance of thoughts should be prop- 
erly understood. Thoughts arising in the mind fill the atmos- 
phere with waves of energy. Like radio waves, they are present 
everywhere. We are able to listen in Puttaparthi to a broadcast 
from Delhi. How did the radio waves reach here from Delhi? 
By entering the ether in space. 

Likewise, thought waves are equally powerful and sacred. 
Hence our thoughts should be sublime and sacred. No evil 
ideas should affect our thoughts. Evil thoughts inevitably lead 
to evil actions. When cruel thoughts enter the mind, men be- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 50 


have like cruel animals. When, instead, there are good and 
loving thoughts in a man, they divinise the man and make him 
do good and sacred acts. Hence, every man's heart should be 
filled with love, compassion and kindness. 

When bad thoughts fill the mind, even ostensibly good acts 
result in bad consequences. Hence, the primary requisite is to 
make one's thoughts good and holy. Unfortunately, today, be- 
cause of the influence of the Kali Age, men's thoughts go 
astray and men lead bad lives. People should realize that there 
is no greater blessing than leading a pure life. By chanting the 
Lord's name men can cross an ocean of troubles. God's name is 
the boat for crossing the ocean of mundane existence. 

In the term, sathyam, the yam refers to Surya. Surya, the 
sun, is the sustainer of life on earth. The sun is also the deity 
presiding over the vision. If your vision is sacred, your life will 
be sacred. 

Among other meanings of Sathyam, one is Brahmam. 
Truth is God. There is nothing in the world where Truth is not 
present. Today people are oblivious to the greatness of Truth. 
People lead a life based on falsehood. The result is that there is 
widespread starvation. 


Chant the Lord’s name 


In ancient times, people led their lives based on the con- 
stant repetition of the Lord's name. The power of the Lord's 
name could be seen in the fact that even the cow-dung cakes 
made by Sakkubai, while reciting the Lord's name, chanted the 
name of Ranga. 

Every person should remember and recite the Lord's name 
whatever action they may be engaged in. The Divine pervades 
the cosmos. Hence, whatever you may see or say or do, the 
Divine is present in it. But the Divine is subtle —not perceiv- 
able or graspable. You should not conclude from this that there 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 51 


is no God. Air is not visible or cannot be held. But can its ex- 
istence be denied? Without air one cannot live for a moment. 
Air is only one of the five elements. All five elements are es- 
sential for life. They constitute the basic stuff of the universe. 
Their very existence proclaims the power of the Divine. How 
can the existence of God be denied by anyone? God does not 
mean any particular form. All forms are His. 

Sath-Chith-Ananda is manifest in man as supreme bliss 
—the bliss Divine. This bliss is present in man as his spiritual 
essence. Man has no need to go after trivial pleasures when he 
has this eternal bliss within himself. He will experience this 
bliss when he gets rid of the attachment to the body born out of 
delusion and ignorance. 


Krishna's response to Sakkuba’s devotion 


Sakkubai was one who had realized this truth and was in 
continuous contemplation of the Lord's name. Recognising the 
intensity of her devotion, Krishna assumed her form and sent 
her to Pandaripur. You can see the greatness of Bhagavan's 
love for the devotee. Assuming the devotee's form, the Lord 
performed all her domestic chores and enabled her to go to 
Pandaripur. God sees to it that the devotee is not exposed to 
calumny. He saw to it that no one pointed the finger of criti- 
cism at Sakkubai for her absence from the house. He himself 
assumed the form of Sakkubai and did all the household work. 
Sakkubai went to Pandaripuram and merged in the Lord there. 

The power of faith is incalculable. With faith any difficult 
task can be carried out. This truth cannot be understood in 
worldly affairs. 

It must be recognized that chanting the name of the Lord is 
highly sacred and efficacious. It serves to remove the impuri- 
ties in a person. It promotes good and sacred thoughts. When 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 a2 


the heart is filled with truth and love, only "positive" thoughts 
will arise. 

There is no meaning in reciting the name of Rama or 
Krishna once in a year. How often do you take your meals for 
the sake of the body? Does not the mind require to be fed 
equally? Contemplation of God is the food for the mind. To 
feed the belly and starve the mind is like decorating the chariot 
but starving the horse. To keep the chariot of the body moving, 
it is necessary to feed the horse of the mind. 

The body is taken care of openly in innumerable ways. The 
mind needs to be fed in private. No one can notice the chanting 
of the Lord's name. No one can rob one of the benefits it con- 
fers. Possessing this valuable capacity, man should not fail to 
make full use of it. You strive so much to earn wealth. Do you 
take the same trouble to experience God? Should you not spare 
sometime for thoughts of God? 


Jnana and namasmarana 


Walking on the road, a man may see a temple and make 
formal signs of worship. What are they worth? Worship should 
stem from the heart. Think of God in your mind and offer your 
worship in silence. Sakkubai had set an example to the world 
by her intense devotion to God. Even Namadeva became her 
disciple after seeing her exemplary devotion. He began chant- 
ing the Lord's name continually. He taught the people that re- 
citing the Lord's name is the means to experience God. 

Once, Namadeva and Jnanadeva were going through a for- 
est. For Jnanadeva everything was a manifestation of Divine 
Wisdom (Jnanamayam). He believed that through knowledge 
anything could be achieved. As they were going along they felt 
thirsty. They saw a derelict well. There was some water deep 
at the bottom of the well. Jnanadeva took the form of a bird, 
flew down to the bottom and drank the water to quench his 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 a3 


thirst. Jnanadeva could assume any form because of his spiri- 
tual powers. Namadeva said, “I don't need to assume any form. 
My God is within me. I can secure His nearness without my 
going to Him.” So saying, he sat under a tree and started recit- 
ing the Lord's name. The water in the well rose and overflowed 
so that Namadeva could quench his thirst easily. 

The true devotee should be able to bring God near him, 
without his having to go in search of God. If he is filled with 
love for God, that love will attract God toward him. 


Divine love is the most powerful magnet 


The world is full of magnetic power. A flower that attracts 
you has that magnetic power. The attachment between husband 
and wife is a sign of magnetic power. Magnetic attraction is 
the basis of all human relationships. The honey in a flower is 
the magnet that attracts a bee to the flower. 

Everything has some magnetic power that endows it with 
the power of attraction. Divine love is the most powerful mag- 
net in the universe. The gopikas (cowherd maids) were in- 
tensely attracted to Krishna by the power of this love. They 
declared that they would be attracted to Krishna in whatever 
form He might choose to manifest Himself —as a flower or a 
tree or a mountain or the ocean. To merge in the Divine, you 
may assume any form or resort to any means. God assumes 
many forms according to the needs of the situation. He cannot 
be confined to any particular place. All forms and names are 
His. Hence, by whatever name or form the Lord may be wor- 
shipped, His reality is one and the same. Some refer to God as 
Easwara, who smears Himself with vibhuti (the sacred ash). 
But vibhuti does not mean ash alone. It applies to every glori- 
ous attribute of the Divine. It refers to every potency of God. 
Easwara means one who is the treasure house of all that is pre- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 54 


cious. Therefore, it is impossible to measure or define His at- 
tributes. 

This infinite Divine can be realized only through love, 
which is all-powerful. The devotee's love for the Lord is like 
the love of a child for its mother. This love-bond is inextrica- 
ble. 

The lesson of Sivarathri is that devotees should foster good 
and sacred thoughts. They should be filled with godly 
thoughts. They should seek to become one with the Divine by 
reflecting on their inherent divinity. If you constantly chant the 
name of God, God realization will come in due course. 

Whatever other things they may possess, men suffer from 
lack of peace and bliss. These two can be got only from God. It 
is for these two that men should pray to God and not for any- 
thing else, because God alone can give them. When these are 
secured, all other things will come of their own accord by the 
grace of God. People should yearn for God. All other desires 
are worthless. 


26 February 1998, morning 
Sai Kulwant Hall, Prasanthi Nilayam 


7 


The wise and the envious 


Students! You are the inheritors of Truth and Righteou _ s- 
ness (Sathya and Dharma). Different persons are propagating 
these two principles in different ways. Truth and Righteous- 
ness are eternal. They remain unchanged through all the three 
categories of time —past, present, and future. It may be asked: 
What is the need to propagate ideals, which are ever-present 
and permanent? But the Lord declared in the Bhagavad Gita, 
"Whenever there is decline of dharma (righteousness) and a 
resurgence of adharma (unrighteousness) I incarnate Myself. 
Righteousness is imperishable. It is the practice of righteous- 
ness that declines not righteousness itself. It is like the sun be- 
ing covered for a time by a cloud. The sun is not apparently 
visible. But it is always there and shines again when the cloud 
moves away. Truth is the sun. Its effulgence is righteousness. 
Truth and righteousness are inseparable. They go together. 
They are inseparable like matter and energy. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 56 


The Sun of Truth illumines the world with the effulgence 
of Righteousness. It is the foremost duty of young people to- 
day to uphold Truth and Righteousness. Students ask today, 
“What is our duty?” Most of them feel that it is the job that 
makes the man (Udyogam Purushalakshanam). What then 
about the unemployed? Are they not men at all? 

Righteousness is not related to gender. It is the manifesta- 
tion of unity in thought, word, and deed. The same unity is the 
characteristic of Truth. Truth concerns utterance. Righteous- 
ness pertains to practice. Nowadays, precept prevails over 
practice. Practice is all-important. When righteousness is not 
practiced, it appears as if it has decayed. But Righteousness 
cannot decay or disappear. 


The story of Akbar and Birbal 


Today, students should consider it their primary duty to 
foster Truth and Righteousness. It is easy to talk about them, 
but putting them into practice is difficult. In this connection, I 
would relate a story about an episode during the reign of Em- 
peror Akbar in Delhi. 

Akbar had a very wise minister named Birbal. Birbal could 
always give satisfactory replies to the questions of the Em- 
peror. Seeing how much the Emperor relied on Birbal, other 
ministers and dignitaries in the court were envious of Birbal. 
The Commander-in-Chief of the army, who was one of this 
group, seized the opportunity of Birbal’s absence from the 
durbar hall one day to tell the Emperor: “Your Majesty! Here 
we are so many of us with considerable experience. Please 
consult us also. Why do you ask Birbal for everything?” 

On another day, Akbar came to the audience hall and in- 
quired about Birbal. The Commander-in-Chief said Birbal was 
away and informed the Emperor that he was ready to answer 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 57 


the Emperor's questions. All others also got up and said they 
were prepared to do so. 

Akbar got up and put the first question to the assembled 
dignitaries. He warned them that their answer should satisfy 
him. The first question he put was: Jn this world, which is the 
best flower? The Commander-in-Chief replied that the rose 
was the best flower. Other ministers mentioned the names of 
jasmine, champak, and other flowers. The Emperor was not 
satisfied. 

He then put a second question: Which milk is the best milk? 
Once again, there were a variety of answers, none of which 
satisfied the Emperor. 

He then put the third question: What is the sweetest thing in 
the world? Many replied: jaggery (brown sugar). One said 
honey. Like that, there were varied replies. 

The Emperor then passed on to the fourth question: Which 
leaf ranks highest among leaves? The assembled men gave 
different answers. Akbar was not satisfied. 

By this time, Birbal had entered the hall. Akbar then put 
him the four questions. 


Which is the best flower in the world? 

Birbal: The flower of the cotton plant is the best. From the 
cotton flower, we have cotton, out of which yarn is made and 
clothes are woven. The cotton flower is therefore of lasting use 
to mankind. Other flowers are only of temporary value and are 
useless when their fragrance is gone. 


Which is the best milk in the world? 
Birbal said, the mother's breast milk is the best, because it 
nourishes the child. 


What is the sweetest thing in the world? 
Birbal replied, Sweet speech. Through sweet words you 
can transform any person and give great joy. Men throw stones 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 58 


when a crow caws. But they listen raptly to the sweet call of 
the cuckoo. Sweetness in speech is sweeter than anything else 


Which is the best leaf in the world? 

Birbal said: The betel leaf is the best, Your Majesty. Betel 
leaves are offered on all auspicious occasions like weddings. 
The betel leaf is considered sacred and auspicious. Other 
leaves like plantain leaves have no special value at all. 


Everyone in the audience was amazed at Birbal's intelligent 
answers, which pleased the Emperor. Akbar told the gathering 
that none of their answers had satisfied him. Akbar expressed 
his appreciation of Birbal's replies. The courtiers realized why 
the Emperor valued so much the words of Birbal. 


18 March 1998 
Trayee Brindavan (address to students and staff) 


God is Omnipresent. So do not act differently when 
you are away from My Presence. Be always and 
everywhere conscious of the Presence. Be vigilant 
even while engaged in small tasks. Maintain si- 
lence in the recesses of the heart as well as out- 
side. 

— Baba 


8 


A new way of life 


Embodiments of Love! 


You cannot find in the entire cosmos any place or object in 
which God is not present. The Divine is present on the moun- 
tains. The Divine permeates the oceans. The Divine dwells in 
villages and cities. The Divine is omnipresent. 

Only those who recognize this truth can redeem their lives; 
they alone can achieve the goal of human existence. The pow- 
ers of the Divine are limitless. Every living being in the world 
is governed by some limitations. Birds, beasts, and insects are 
all taken care of by the Divine in respect of their essential 
needs like food and drink. Among all living beings, however, 
the life of human being is supreme, since it is governed by mo- 
rality and good conduct. The Divine has placed some limita- 
tions on the physical powers of man but has set no limits on his 
mental powers. Man can achieve whatever he resolves to 
achieve. He can even realise God. This divine power is given 
only to human beings. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 60 


Ignorant of his limitless divine potentialities, man suffers 
from various disabilities by considering himself as a human 
being. Man today is soaring in the sky like a bird and moving 
in the ocean like a fish. He has been able to land on the moon. 
But unfortunately he is not able to live like a true human being 
on earth. This is indeed a matter for shame. 


The power of surrender 


Man can accomplish anything if he surrenders to God. 
When he submits himself to the will of the Divine, there is no 
task he cannot accomplish. 

Kuchela, a boyhood friend of Krishna, approached Krishna 
for help on the basis of his old friendship. How did Krishna 
help him? The Bhagavatha bears testimony to what Krishna 
did for Kuchela. The Ramayana tells the story of what Rama 
did for Sugriva after the latter became a friend of Rama and 
sought His help. Sugriva was able to regain his kingdom. What 
did Vibhishana get after his constant remembrance of Rama 
and the ordeals he experienced in Lanka? Relieving him of his 
troubles, Rama crowned Vibhishana the ruler of Lanka. 

Once a devotee totally surrenders to the Lord, the Divine 
goes to any extent to help the devotee. An insignificant little 
stick, by association with fire, burns brilliantly. A drop of wa- 
ter held in your palm evaporates in a trice. But when it is cast 
into the ocean, it becomes one with it. If man wants to achieve 
highest human potentialities, he has to achieve proximity to 
God. He has to merge in the Divine. Then he can manifest his 
true nature. 

Not realizing the true nature of the Divine Principle, man 
wastes his time on rituals and religious practices of various 
kinds. God cannot be realized through such practices. It is only 
by loving God and getting close to Him that one can realize 
one's aspirations. Swami does not disapprove of sadhana 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 61 


(spiritual practices). They are good activities for using time 
sacredly. But without service to Godly persons, they are of no 
use for realizing freedom from the cycle of mundane existence. 


The significance of devotees’ offerings to the Lord 


In the field of devotion, there is room for making certain 
offerings to God. God utilizes the acceptance of such offerings 
to reward the devotee a hundred-fold. Devotees should recog- 
nize the significance of such acceptance by the Divine. 

For instance, the Lord asked Kuchela what he had brought 
for Him. The Lord as Vamana asked for three feet of land from 
Emperor Bali. In the Rama Avatar, He went to Sabari and 
asked her to appease His hunger. All that Sabari could offer to 
Rama were a few sweet berries collected from the jungle. In 
the Krishna Avatar, the Divine child went to the gopis (cow- 
herd maids) saying He was hungry. All that they could offer 
Him was some watery buttermilk. During the difficult days of 
their exile in the forest, Krishna went to the Pandavas and 
asked Draupadi for food. That day, all the food had been con- 
sumed and barely a leaf remained in one of the vessels. 
Krishna was more than satisfied with that one leaf and saved 
the Pandavas from the wrath of Durvasa, who had been sent by 
Duryodhana to subject the Pandavas to the ordeal of feeding 
Durvasa and his numerous disciples. When Krishna's appetite 
was Satisfied, Durvasa and his disciples felt fully appeased and 
did not turn up at Pandavas' hermitage. 

It is to shower His grace on the devotees that the Lord 
seeks small offerings from them. What does He need from any 
one when the whole cosmos is contained in Him? 

It is the Lord who protects one and all in innumerable 
ways. There is a simple way to secure the grace of God. You 
must get near to God. Surrender yourself to Him. Become one 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 62 


with Him. Instead of following this easy path, man today im- 
merses himself in petty desires and keeps away from God. 

Sanjay Sahani and Ruchir Desai (faculty members who ad- 
dressed the gathering earlier) spoke about God's love for the 
devotees. There is no trace of selfishness in it. But, because of 
their own selfish natures, they attribute selfishness even to 
God's love. This is merely a reflection of their own nature. 
God's love is not a reflected love. It is love pure and simple. A 
reflected love carries the taint of the original. That is not the 
case with the Divine love, which is pure and unsullied. 


The story of pure and unselfish love 


The nature of pure and unselfish love may be illustrated by 
the story of Laila and Majnu. Laila was the daughter of a very 
wealthy person. She fell in love with Majnu, but her parents 
did not approve of her marrying a poor young man like Majnu. 
Laila did not wish to displease her parents. She was a girl of 
noble character. She prayed to God to find out whether Majnu 
loved her. She sent two of her maids to Majnu to ask him 
whether he could offer his blood to save Laila from a grievous 
ailment. Majnu immediately cut an artery and sent a glassful of 
blood to Laila. Moreover, he sent word through the maids that 
he was prepared to give his entire life to save Laila. His only 
wish was that she should survive. When the maids conveyed 
this message to Laila she realized how much Majnu loved her. 
She observed, “I was thinking only about my love for him. I 
did not realise how much he loved me.” 

Devotees should realise that God also likes to test the depth 
and sincerity of the devotee’s love. He seeks to find out 
whether the devotee is filled with love of God, how intense is 
that love and so on. He tests the devotee's love in various 
ways. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 63 


One should not be content with making offerings to God. 
One should love God intensely. One should pine for Him. One 
should lose one's self in the love of God. 


The ultimate sense of liberation 


People aspire for liberation (mukti). They have no idea 
what constitutes liberation. Man seeks liberation from the ills 
of the body, the senses, the mind, the intellect, and the An- 
tahkarana (internal motivator). All these are no doubt neces- 
sary. 

But liberation in the ultimate sense consists in liberation 
from the cycle of birth and death. This means that one should 
redeem one’s present life so that one is free from rebirth. 

Most of the people's diseases today have their origin in the 
mind. Desires and worries are the cause of many ailments of 
the heart, the kidney etc. You can test the truth of this state- 
ment in a simple way. I have no diseases of any kind. I am hale 
and hearty. Lead a life of courage and you will be all right. The 
moment you start feeling your pulse out of suspicion that it is 
weak, you will find it weak. It is your mind that is the cause of 
the weakness of the pulse. Many diseases are allowed to grow 
entirely due to mental factors. Men should pray to God for 
freedom from rebirth so that they will not have bodies that are 
bound to be afflicted with diseases. 

There is no need for rigorous spiritual exercises to secure 
freedom from rebirth. Pure love of God is enough. This is ex- 
emplified by the gopis (cowherd maids). Immersed always in 
the love of Krishna, they were always happy and contented. 

We are today celebrating Yugadi, the beginning of yet an- 
other New Year. Many new-year days have come and gone. 
Do you expect the New Year to bring you new happiness? Are 
you imagining what New Year portends for you? New years do 
not offer you prosperity and pleasure. This New Year day will 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 64 


be like any other day. Many people eagerly expect something 
to turn up on this day. This is utterly futile. The calendar 
merely tells you that a New Year has begun. 

What we should be concerned about is not a New Year but 
a new way of life. We must seek to secure a new source of joy. 
But unfortunately we do not think about this. We speculate on 
what the new year signifies. We have to look to ourselves and 
not to the succession of years for changes in our lives. Think 
within yourself about your condition. Turn your thoughts to 
God. Then you will realize what you desire. 


The way to surrender to God 


No one tries to find out how to surrender to God. The 
whole world belongs to you. You must declare to God, "I am 
yours". This is the truth you have to understand. You must be 
ready to offer to God whatever He asks of you. What does God 
ask from you? First of all, He says, “Give up your desires.” 
You must give them up immediately. He calls upon you not to 
immerse yourself in worldly pleasures. Cultivate love for all. 
That will redeem your life. That is the sacred path you have to 
follow. That is the essence of the four goals of life. People 
have no clear idea of what dharma, artha, kama, and moksha 
(the four goals) mean? They think that moksha (liberation) is 
something that you attain after death. But, in fact, liberation 
can be attained here and now. Moksha means moha-kshayam, 
the elimination of moha (attachment). People are not ready to 
give up attachment to wife, children, property, etc. You have a 
duty to protect your family. But you must not be immersed in 
concerns about them. 

What is dharma? Not the obligations relating to the various 
stages in life or the various vocations. Dharma means harmony 
in thought, word, and deed. People equate charity with 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 65 


dharma. That is not correct. Dharma calls for sacrificing your 
bad thoughts, feelings, and actions. 


Understand Swami’s life and message 


Embodiments of love! Realize that love is the most impor- 
tant quality in human life. It is not love for kith and kin that is 
precious. It is love for God that is most valuable. 

Swami’s life and message are not properly understood. 
Swami has no worldly desires. Whether you believe it or not, I 
am always “positive” from head to foot. There is nothing 
“negative” in me. 

Devotees suggested to me that they should be allowed to 
organize “poor feeding” on Yugadi. Should this be done only 
on one day in a year? You must feed the poor on all days. You 
must have the broad outlook. With a broad heart you can do 
many superhuman things. Strive to get close to God and sur- 
render your all to Him. 

The name of the New Year is Bahudhanya. This name 
suggests that the year will witness an abundance of food 
grains. There may be an abundance of food grains. But are you 
consuming them properly? No. Are the food-grains distributed 
to the poor and the needy? No. 

Our ancients gave the different years good names such as 
Prabhava, Vibhava, Sukla, and so on. [Swami went on reciting 
almost all the 60 names in quick succession]. Sometimes, the 
priests predict bad developments in a year. This is intended 
only to make the people undertake propitiatory ceremonies that 
will bring in income to the priests. Can the mere expenditure of 
money ward off evils? No. Your troubles will go when the 
heart is purified. Your sincere prayers will help to relieve your 
troubles. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 66 


There must be a transformation in the hearts of the devo- 
tees. They should not continue to remain in the same rut for 
years. They must benefit from the grace of God's love. 


Happiness is union with God 


People talk about the new year but do not care to develop 
new feelings and new attitudes. They must develop new ideas 
and new enthusiasm. If they are all the time depressed, when 
will they learn to express the joy of good living? They must 
exude happiness. That is the mark of the Divine within. Happi- 
ness is union with God. God is eternal bliss. Get rid of your 
evil tendencies and fill your hearts with love of God. You will 
become one with God. 

I am ready to give you all happiness. Are you prepared to 
receive what I wish to offer? Banish all worries. They are tem- 
porary like passing clouds. Do not allow any one —whether it is 
the father, the mother or the preceptor— to come between you 
and your duty to God. This is the lesson taught by Prahlada, 
Bharata, and Emperor Bali. Their allegiance to the Lord tran- 
scended all other obligations. God takes care of such devotees. 
Surrender yourselves to God and dedicate yourselves to the 
service of mankind. You have my blessings. Foster love and 
serve society. 


29 March 1998 
Sai Ramesh Hall, Brindavan 


Potency of Rama's name 


Sweeter than sugar, 

Tastier than the cream from curds, 

Growing in sweetness like honey, 

As the name is chanted, 

Verily it is nectar itself. 

Meditate, all ye, on the sacred name of Rama! 


Embodiments of Love! 


Rama is the friend of the universe. He is its protector. He is 
its patron saint. To comprehend the nature of such a unique 
ideal personality is not quite easy. It is easier to count the 
waves of the ocean than to describe the qualities of Rama. 

Ramachandra is the Indweller in all beings. The cosmos is 
one vast mansion. Humanity is one family (or community). 
Only the person who recognizes this relationship between the 
cosmos and mankind can understand the Rama Principle. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 68 


The earth lies at the feet of every human being. It is the 
same firmament that is above every person. All breathe the 
same air. The water that people drink is the same for all. Only 
those who recognize this unifying principle will seek to under- 
stand the Rama Principle. 


Two kinds of dharma: pravritti and nivritti 


The Vedas taught two kinds of | dharma (codes of right 
conduct). One is termed pravrithi and the other is termed 
nivrithi. Pravrithi (the outward path) is related to worldly ac- 
tivities. It prescribes the qualities needed for leading the life in 
the mundane world. Nivrithi (the inward path) teaches knowI- 
edge of the Self (Atma-jnana). One who knows the difference 
between the two is dauntless. 

Pravrithi indicates how any particular task should be per- 
formed. Nivrithi (the inward path) indicates in what state of 
mind the work should be done. 

For example, when a person is hungry, pravrithi tells him 
to eat food and appease his hunger. Nivrithi teaches what kind 
of food he should eat, what is good for his health and what is 
injurious, and how it should be consumed. Pravrithi and 
nivrithi are thus related to what is external and what is internal. 

All that you see, all that you hear, all that you think is re- 
lated to the pravrithi path. The pravrithi path creates confusion 
in the mind, disturbs the intelligence, and prevents one from 
pursuing the right path. Pravrithi tends to turn man away from 
God. 

Life is a kind of struggle. You have to face conflict of 
opinions. But Ayodhya is a place free from strife and contro- 
versy. No enemy could enter it. The human heart is the symbol 
of Ayodhya. All conflicts and divisions arise in the mind. It is 
the mark of pravrithi (the outward path) that it generates con- 
flict and brings about alternatively union and separation. Be- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 69 


cause of this fact, man today is a prey of unrest and is bereft of 
peace. Ravana is an example of such a person who ruined his 
life in this way. He was perpetually following the pravrithi 
path. Unable to conquer his desires he sacrificed his sons. Un- 
able to subdue his desires (vanchalu), he ultimately ruined his 
entire clan (vamsa). With no control over his passions, he for- 
feited his kingdom itself. 


Ravana’s lesson to the world 


In the final reckoning, this was the lesson Ravana gave to 
the world: "Oh people of the world! Failing to control your at- 
tachments like me, unable to limit your desires like me, do not 
ruin yourselves as I have done. Ultimately, I am also leaving 
the world. What remains in the world? Only infamy. All the 
renown goes to Rama. Therefore, strive to earn good reputa- 
tion. Do not give room to ill-fame." That was the lesson Ra- 
vana taught. The Rama Principle destroys all sins and redeems 
life. Everyone should seek to realize the Rama Principle. 

Rama moved about in the world as an ordinary human be- 
ing. He exemplified the ideal life. Yet all considered him as an 
ordinary human being. But, do ordinary people live like Rama? 
Rama was one who, while appearing to lead the life of an ordi- 
nary man, led the life Divine. He demonstrated the ideal life of 
a spiritually realised person. 

Today, the world needs the message of the Ramayana. 
Why? Because children do not heed the words of their parents. 
Parents do not set worthy examples to the children. Preceptors 
do not teach the right course of conduct to the disciples. The 
disciples do not offer the due respect to the teachers. 

Today, businessmen, administrators, rulers, and citizens are 
all tarred by the same brush. The world is replete with discord. 
People have forgotten the great message of Rama. They have 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 70 


poisoned life at its source. They have forgotten the Divine, 
with the result that they are immersed in misery. 

How do people address their prayers to God today? They 
pray for bodily comforts and mental peace. These desires are 
natural. But there is something unnatural about the way it is 
done. Prayers are offered to the image of the Lord of Serpents 
in stone! They pray, “Oh Lord of Serpents! Remove my trou- 
bles.” But when the serpent appears before them as a live co- 
bra, they use the stone idol to kill it. 

Today this is the plight of the Divine. Who can determine 
what is the nature of Divinity? None can do it. The nature of 
the Divine can be determined only by the Divine and not by 
anybody else. 

Thyagaraja recognized this truth in his song, "Oh Lord! 
How can anyone decide what you are?" Thyagaraja went on to 
derive the name "Rama" from the two letters Ra and Ma in the 
two mantras associated with Vishnu and Siva (The two man- 
tras are: Namo Narayanaya and Namah Sivaya). The two 
mantras, without the syllables Ra and Me, become meaning- 
less. Ra and Ma are thus the life-giving letters in the two man- 
tras. 


Power of Rama’s name 


Rama’s name is thus the life-giving essence of the two 
great mantras. The term “Rama” has another esoteric signifi- 
cance. It consists of three syllables: Ra + Aa + Ma. Ra signi- 
fies Agni (the Fire-god). Aa represents Surya (the Sun-god). 
Ma represents Chandra (the Moon-god). The combination of 
the three letters constitutes the Rama name. Ra, representing 
the Fire-god, burns away all sins, Aa, representing the Sun- 
god, dispels the darkness of ignorance. Ma, representing the 
Moon-god, cools one’s temper and produces tranquility. The 
name Rama has the triple power of washing away one's sins, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 71 


removing one's ignorance, and tranquilizing one's mind. How 
is the profound meaning of this sacred name to be imparted to 
mankind? This can be done only by the Divine coming in hu- 
man form and demonstrating to mankind the power of the Di- 
vine. Rama’s name signifies the harmony in thought, word and 
deed. Rama demonstrated this harmony by his thoughts, 
words, and deeds. 

The Rama Principle embodies numerous powers and po- 
tencies. The Ramayana is not a sacred text to be used only for 
ritualistic reading (parayanam). The Rama Principle is all-per- 
vading like the Cosmic Spirit. In olden times people used to 
say that their inner secrets are known only to the Indwelling 
Rama Spirit (Atma-Rama). The Self is called "Rama". Rama 
means "one who pleases". How can you give a specific form to 
one who pleases or delights? 


The human destiny 


In the Divine epic of the Ramayana, there is a special pro- 
found message. That message is: man must lead the life of a 
human being; men must seek oneness with the Divine. Man 
should harmonize the three qualities in him (satwa, rajas, 
tamas). In every human being, all the three natures —-human, 
divine, and demonic-— are present. But most men today ignore 
their humanness and divinity and foster only their demonic 
nature. 

Man, in fact, should strive to manifest his divinity, and not 
display his weakness or his demonic qualities. 

Rama chose to go to the forest to fulfill the pledge of his 
father, and thereby subjected himself to many difficulties. It 
may be asked: Did he go to the forest under any compulsion or 
out of his own resolve, or with a sense of dissatisfaction, or 
merely to comply with his father's pledge? No. Rama set out 
for the forest with the same sense of serenity and joy with 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 72 


which he looked forward to his coronation. Rama demon- 
strated the spirit of equanimity. He showed that pain or pleas- 
ure, profit or loss, victory or defeat, were the same to him. In 
human life, pleasure and pain, happiness and sorrow alternate 
all the time. It is not a good quality to welcome pleasure and 
turn away pain. You must welcome sorrow in the same joyous 
spirit in which you greet happiness. Happiness has no value 
unless there is also sorrow. That is why it is said, "Pleasure is 
not secured by pleasant measure." Pain is needed to secure 
pleasure. Rama demonstrated to the world the truth of this 
concept. 

In every act, Rama set the example. In individual conduct, 
in the discharge of duties to the family, and in fulfilling the 
obligations to society Rama demonstrated the ideals to be fol- 
lowed. 

All should begin with fulfilling the obligations of the indi- 
vidual. The duty of the individual is to manifest the divinity 
within him. As an individual, Rama revealed the divinity in 
him by his ideal conduct. 


Brahma’s benediction 


When Valmiki completed his Ramayana, Brahma declared 
that his epic would last as long as the mountains stand and the 
rivers flow. The inner meaning of Brahma's benediction is that 
the Ramayana will be cherished as long as men (mountains) 
and women (rivers) exist on earth. The Ramayana will last as 
long as human society exists. People should acquire the capac- 
ity to comprehend the eternal truths embedded in the Rama- 
yana. Ignoring the eternal truths of the Ramayana, Bharathiyas 
(Indians) are wasting their lives in the pursuit of worldly con- 
cerns. 

We celebrate this day as the birthday of Rama. How are 
people celebrating the day? They perform some special puja 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 73 


(worship). They adorn themselves with sacred marks. But, for 
doing these things should you wait for the birthday of Rama? 
No. Whatever your age, at all times and in all places, you must 
be engaged in thoughts of Rama. 

Valmiki, after completing the composing of the Ramayana, 
summoned the sages in his ashram and asked them who was 
capable of propagating the immortal and sacred epic to every 
nook and corner of the world. The sages were nonplused. They 
declared, "Guruji, we are old men. We are at the end of our 
span of life. We are incapable of conveying the Ramayana to 
the length and breadth of the world." Valmiki was downcast. 
At that stage, the twins Lava and Kusa arrived on the scene. 
They told Valmiki, “Guruji, we have been listening to what all 
has been spoken here. We are prepared to convey the Rama- 
yana to every place.” The sage was immensely happy. 


Be prepared for any sacrifice for the sake of the Divine 


Lava and Kusa were princes of royal blood. They carried in 
their hands tambourines. They set out on the great task of 
propagating the Ramayana, chanting the slokas (verses) all the 
way. Are there any today who will undertake such a task? 
Many will fear being mocked by the public. Even persons who 
may wish to do bhajans in public are afraid of being jeered at. 
Devotees should be able to transcend such considerations. 
Why should anyone who is doing something holy be afraid of 
public ridicule? 

People should be prepared for any sacrifice for the sake of 
the Divine. The joy to be derived from chanting the Lord's 
name is ineffable. Without the constant remembrance of God, 
there can be no experience of the Divine. 

Whatever the name that may be chanted, when it is done 
wholeheartedly the fruits of it will be certain. Everything 
should be done with a pure heart. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 74 


Three mothers and Rama 


The Ramayana story is replete with ideals. During my re- 
cent visit to Madras, I spoke about the story of three mothers 
—Kausalya, Rama's mother; Anjanadevi, the mother of An- 
janeya (Hanuman); and the mother of the sage Agasthya. 
When the three met, Kausalya asked Anjaneya's mother, 
“Mother! Who are you?” 

She replied: “What! Don't you know? My son Hanuman is 
well known to the whole world. Hanuman is present wherever 
Rama's name is uttered. Rama and Hanuman have inseparable 
attachment to each other. They are one soul in two bodies. I am 
the mother of that Hanuman. He leapt over the mighty ocean to 
Lanka.” 

On hearing these words, Agasthya's mother observed, 
“Whatever your son did is not anything so great. Your son 
leapt over the ocean. My son drank the ocean in a gulp. I am 
the mother of Agasthya.” 

Both then told Kausalya, “You are the mother of Rama, 
whose name enabled Hanuman to leap over the ocean and 
Agasthya to drink the waters of the ocean.” 

As they were engaged in this conversation, Rama came 
there and remarked innocently, “How is it you mothers are 
waxing eloquent about me?” Though he was the incarnation of 
the Lord Narayana Himself, he moved about as if he was sim- 
ple son. He told them: “Hanuman could cross the ocean be- 
cause of his intense devotion. Agasthya could drink the ocean 
because of his intense penance. I was in no way responsible for 
their accomplishments. I am not so great as all that. I am an 
ordinary human being. The name given to me is the source of 
all power. I am only an instrument. It is my name that helps to 
accomplish everything. This name is filled with all potencies. 
This body of mine moves because of the power of the name. 
Therefore, regard me as only an instrument.” 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 75 


After Rama left, Kausalya observed: “Mothers! My son 
speaks as if he is an ordinary being. But he is the reservoir of 
all knowledge and there is nothing he cannot accomplish.” 

Kausalya, who had this opinion of Rama, felt differently 
when Rama came to tell her that he was about to leave for the 
forest to fulfill the pledge given by his father to Kaikeyi. The 
mother was full of joy at the prospect of the coronation of 
Rama. Rama told her, “Mother! I have come to give you some 
happy news. I am not only the Lord of Ayodhya; I am now the 
Lord of the whole jungle in the country. I am getting ready to 
reign over the forest.” 

Kausalya could not understand the implications of Rama's 
statement. While she was wondering what it was all about, 
Lakshmana came there. Lakshmana always followed Rama 
like a shadow. Likewise Satrughna always accompanied Bha- 
rata. Lakshmana and Satrughna were the children of mother 
Sumitra. But they were full of humility and attached them- 
selves respectively to Rama and Bharata. 


Rama's advice to Lakshmana 


Lakshmana was greatly agitated as he entered. Addressing 
Rama, he said, “Brother! Your calmness is no doubt a great 
virtue. But not in affairs like this. The whole world is looking 
up to you. For the sake of one individual you are embarking on 
this undertaking. I cannot accept this. I shall destroy Dasaratha 
and Kaikeyi and crown you king this very moment.” 

On hearing this, Rama said, “Lakshmana! Don't get agi- 
tated. Calm yourself. This calmness (santham) will protect 
you. It is your glory and greatness Forbearance is the supreme 
virtue. It is the crowning quality of the sages. Therefore, calm 
yourself.” 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 76 


Kausalya and Sita 


Lakshmana then related to Kausalya what had happened. 
Hearing the whole story, Kausalya collapsed on the spot. 
When she recovered consciousness, she declared, “Rama! I 
cannot live for a single moment without you. You are prepared 
to carry out your father's words. I cannot stand in your way. 
But I appeal to you to take me with you.” 

Rama then told her, “To a wife, her husband is verily God 
himself. You cannot leave your husband in any circumstance. 
Your husband is everything for you. As long as he is alive, you 
cannot leave him. He is now plunged in sorrow over my im- 
pending departure. You cannot leave him. You must serve him 
and offer him solace.” 

Sita came there soon after. She was no ordinary woman. 
Daughter of Emperor Janaka, she was known as “Vaidehi’, a 
person with no attachment to the body. Listening to Rama's 
advice to his mother, Sita burst into laughter and remarked: 
“You teach one thing to your mother and the opposite to me. 
When I said I wanted to follow you, you tried to dissuade me. 
You advised me to devote myself to the service of your aged 
parents. But, when you met your mother, you asked her to treat 
the husband as God. Are you not then a God for me? Is there 
one rule for one woman and another for another woman? 
Moreover, you are called Ramachandra. Chandra means 
moon. I am the moonlight for you. How can the moon be in the 
forest and the moonlight be in Ayodhya? The moonlight must 
be with the moon. Therefore, you must take me with you.” 


Rama’s dilemma in destroying Rakshasas 


Rama had to pacify the demand of the mother and the wife 
in the softest manner. After pacifying them, Rama set out for 
the forest. In his wanderings in the forest, seeing the demonic 
atrocities of the Rakshasas (Demons). Rama felt that he had 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 77 


been ostensibly sent in exile really to deal with these evil 
forces. “The Rakshasas are hindering the sacred activities of 
the ascetics. I must destroy the Rakshasas so that these sages 
will be left in peace to practice their austerities,” thought 
Rama. 

One problem arose in his mind in this context. In destroy- 
ing the Rakshasas, is it proper to kill women? Rama had re- 
ceived the answer to this question from Viswamitra when, as a 
young lad, he had been taken by the sage to guard his yajna 
and he wanted to know whether it was right on his part to kill 
Thataki, a demoness. Viswamitra assured him that there was 
nothing wrong in killing a wicked person even if she happened 
to be a woman. To protect the pious, the righteous and the holy 
persons engaged in sacred activities there was nothing wrong 
in destroying even women. 

When Rama asked the sage whether there had been any 
precedent in this respect, Viswamitra related the case of Prah- 
lada's son Virochana, who killed the demoness Mantra who 
was committing many wicked deeds against the rishis (sages) 
and their families. 

There is nothing wrong in repudiating one’s mother, father, 
husband, or preceptor if they come between the devotee and 
God. When Kaikeyi came between him and his devotion to 
Rama, Bharata utterly denounced her. One must be prepared to 
sacrifice everything for God. 

The Rama Principle is infinitely potent. The powers of the 
Divine are immeasurable. God comes down in human form to 
redeem mankind. Birds and beasts act according to their natu- 
ral instincts. Man alone tends to violate the laws of nature and 
act against the laws of dharma (right conduct). It is to teach 
and punish man who goes astray that the Divine comes in hu- 
man form. He teaches the highest ideals and leads an ideal life 
to set an example. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 78 


Role of the Avatar 
Embodiments of love! 


God incarnates for the sake of redemption mankind and not 
for His own sake. He needs nothing. He has everything. He 
comes down to tell humanity its divine origin and to exhort 
men to return to God by following the Love Principle. Through 
love you can achieve anything. It is this message that has to be 
understood today: the role of the Avatar in leading mankind 
through love to a Godly life. 

There is no use in observing Sri Rama’s birthday once a 
year and being satisfied with a good feast. Every moment 
marks the Lord's advent, because human beings are being born 
continually. Every human being is an incarnation of the Di- 
vine. The Divine dwells in every being. Therefore, dedicate 
every moment to the thoughts of God. When you do this, in 
due course you experience the Divine. You will be free from 
delusions and you will be divinised. Man is born to merge in 
the grace of the Divine and not to immerse himself in mundane 
pleasures. 

Let each one carry on his or her duties. Dharma protects its 
protector and destroys it destroyer. Strive to proceed from the 
human to the Divine. 


Embodiment of love! 


It is not possible to describe the boundless attributes of the 
Rama Principle. The name of Rama has been adored for aeons. 
Humanity has been in existence for many lakhs of years. Un- 
fortunately, humanity is yet to realize its true nature. What is 
this nature? It is the Principle of Love. Human life should be 
suffused with love and rounded off with love. Life should be 
given up with tears of joy and not tears of sorrow. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 79 


This is a sacred day. Remembering its sacredness, you 
must all make your lives sublime. 


5 April 1998 
Sai Ramesh Hall, Brindavan 


No one can shake truth; no one can install un- 
truth. No one can understand My mystery. The best 
you can do is get immersed in it. The mysterious, 
indescribable power has come within the reach of 
all. No one is born and allowed to live for the sake 
of others. Each has their own burden to carry and 
lay down. 

— Baba 


10 


The path of Nirvana 


There is no place without 'God, and there is no 
form without the Divine. 

Whether one is in a forest or in a town, on a 
mountain top or in a valley, wherever one may 
be, one is not helpless. 

[Telugu Poem] 


Embodiments of Love! 


Men today strive in various ways to acquire knowledge of 
the Self (Atma Jnana). But this is not true knowledge. It may 
well be called ignorance. Whatever one's scholarship or one's 
spiritual practices or one's quest for gurus, one cannot acquire 
spiritual wisdom without understanding one's true nature. 

Men today cannot understand their humanness; how can 
they recognize their divinity? Only after comprehending his 
humanness can a man recognize his divinity. Recognizing this 
truth, Buddha embarked on his spiritual quest. He studied all 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 81 


the extant scriptures of different faiths. He met many holy 
men. He visited numerous holy shrines. All these exercises 
gave him no satisfaction. What was the reason? All external, 
physical and ephemeral activities are valueless. 


Your vision must be pure and sacred 


The first requisite is purity in the use of the five senses of 
perception given to man. Buddha declared that men should 
cultivate at the outset samyag-drishti (the right vision). This 
means that the eyes should not be misused for looking at all 
sorts of things. Your vision must be pure and sacred. See no 
evil; see what is good. A sacred vision is that which looks only 
at divine and sacred objects. Your vision must originate from 
the heart. Bad thoughts and bad feelings pollute the vision. 

Man today has lost the fear of sin, the love of God and ob- 
servance of social morality. This accounts for all the ills of so- 
ciety today. 

Pure vision leads to pure thoughts. Pure thoughts result in 
pure actions. Purity in action is essential for human existence. 
Purity in thoughts and purity in speech must lead to purity in 
deeds. This is the triple purity hailed by the sages. When this 
purity is manifest, human life gets redeemed. The principle of 
“Help ever, hurt never” becomes the governing principle of 
daily life. 

Pure vision naturally begets Purity in speech by the re- 
finement of the heart. Pure words must come out of the depth 
of the heart, which is a fountain of compassion. Constant ex- 
amination of the purity of one's vision, speech and action is a 
spiritual exercise. It is this that helps to refine the heart. 

Once, Buddha had an encounter with Ananda, the son of 
his stepmother. Buddha had attained the state of Nirvana (Self- 
Realization). Watching Buddha in this state, Ananda burst into 
tears. Buddha was about to give up body. Ananda was in grief 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 82 


over the thought. “What will happen to us? What is our fu- 
ture?” 

Buddha summoned Ananda to come near him and said: 
"Ananda! This is not a time for grief. I am about to achieve 
Nirvana. You should also seek Nirvana. Looking at the dead, 
the living lament over death. But who are the dead? Death 
awaits the living in due course. Where there is birth, there is 
also death. 


Only the Divine is free from birth and death. 
He is eternal, with no beginning, middle or end. 
He is the Eternal Witness. 

[Telugu poem]. 


Except for the Divine, birth and death are natural to all 
human beings. Why then do you weep? You also must strive to 
achieve liberation." 


Sanctify the senses 


Man today is ignoring the state of his heart. He abuses the 
five senses without regard to the consequences. 

The result is he is a prey to all kinds of sufferings. If the 
five senses are used properly man will experience only what is 
good. All rituals and spiritual exercises are of no avail if the 
five senses are not used properly. 

Moreover, men must seek what is permanent in life and not 
cling to what is transient and perishable. The body is imper- 
manent. The Atma is eternal. People should realize the infinite 
divine potencies in man. The Divine is present in man as con- 
science, which is a spark of the Cosmic Conscience. The con- 
science transcends the five senses. When the senses are sancti- 
fied, the conscience manifests its divinity. It can then experi- 
ence its oneness with the Universal Consciousness. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 83 


This was the path pursued by Buddha. He began with con- 
trol of the senses.. He was filled with pure and sacred feelings; 
with a pure heart, he achieved Nirvana. Purity of the heart is 
more important than all rituals and penances. Develop a vision 
that will broaden your heart and enable you to help others and 
not hurt them. Dedicate all actions to God. Thyaga (sacrifice) 
is real yoga (oneness with the Divine). To enjoy things (bhoga) 
without sharing with others is a disease (roga). The Vedas 
have declared that immortality can be attained only through 
sacrifice and not by any other means. 

Good speech is as essential as good vision. Avoid all kinds 
of gossip. Keep your speech confined to what is godly and sa- 
cred. Engage yourself in service to others. Pay no attention to 
other people's defects and faults. 

Listen to pure and sacred words. People misuse their ears 
listening to scandal and gossip. This evil tendency should be 
eliminated by listening to the glories of God. Such listening 
(sravanam) has been accorded a primary place among the nine 
paths of devotion. 


Purify your heart 


What is it that you should observe on this New Year day? 
Many such days have come and gone. But how far has there 
been a transformation in the heart? Many years have come and 
gone. But your hearts remain unchanged. The first task is to 
purify the heart. You should not be content with celebrating 
the New Year as a festive occasion. To enjoy a feast you do 
not need a New Year. The New Year should be marked not by 
a feast but by the awakening of new and pure thoughts in the 
heart. Of what use is it to be concerned only about eating from 
dawn to dusk? 

What is the purpose of life? It is not eating, sleeping and 
dying. You must control the senses and use them for sacred 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 84 


purposes. The power of the senses is derived from the Divine. 
The small human eye enables to look at stars billions of miles 
away. Where from is this power got? It is from the Divine 
within you. Hence, everyone should always think of God, 
whatever one may do. Then, one will be free from bad 
thoughts. Man must manifest his humanness by transcending 
the animal nature. 

Realize your inherent divinity. Regard the whole world as 
your field of action. You have come as a pilgrim to this world 
of action- Ensure that your pilgrimage proceeds on right lines. 


14 April 1998 
Sai Sruthi, Kodai Kanal 


The most beneficial thing that can happen to a 
person is that he should draw God’s love to him- 
self. His love for God is of less importance, be- 
cause it is an imperfect mixture of divine and 
worldly love. The most important action whereby 
to gain God’s love is Rightousness. 

— Baba 


11 


Man, truth, love, and God 


It is only from Truth that the entire creation has come out. 
There is nothing in the world without the basis of Truth. 
This is pure goodness (suddha sathwa) 

Behold, ye people! 


God is Sathya Swaroopa (Embodiment of Truth). You find 
that human nature is a combination of sathya (truth) and 
dharma (right conduct). When man is not able to comprehend 
his own human nature, how can he know the Divine? Everyone 
should, therefore, make efforts to know the human nature. It is 
nirmala, nischala, nisswartha (blemishless, unwavering, and 
unselfish). 

God is in every human being residing in his spiritual heart 
which is on the right side of the body while the physical heart 
is on the left. It is only a single seat sofa, and not a double 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 86 


seated sofa or musical chair. So, God is close to everyone, be- 
ing seated in the spiritual heart. When you realize this, you will 
have the feeling of blissful happiness. The heart is the seat of 
compassion, and God is embodiment of compassion. While so, 
man cannot have hatred toward any being at all. Man has to 
make efforts to progress on the path of Truth and Righteous- 
ness. 

God has no consideration of caste, age, sex or nationality. 
Take the elements earth, water, fire, air and ether. Have these 
elements any distinction of caste or nationality? They are em- 
bodiments of the Divine. You should never misuse the ele- 
ments or waste them. 


Never separate God from you 


Names and forms are many, but the Azmic Principle is one. 
You should understand this. This is the fundamental law of 
Nature. Though names and forms vary, there are some com- 
mon features in all. Hunger is common to all, though the types 
of food are many. In a hospital, there are many different types 
of patients. All are not given the same food. For instance, dia- 
betics will not be given sugar or sweet preparations. The world 
is a hospital. Humanity is suffering from different diseases 
—physical, mental and psychological. Three-fourths of the 
diseases are only psychological. What is the treatment needed? 
It is only daiva chintana: filling the mind with the thought of 
God. 

Never separate God from you. A man with dual mind is 
half-blind. You should practice the principle of oneness. There 
is only one God spoken of as many. Unity in diversity should 
be comprehended. Human quality should reflect Divinity. You 
should curb animal thoughts and breed Divine thoughts. 

There are two types of persons. Those with animal and 
human qualities always show hatred, jealousy, greed, and an- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 87 


ger. The other type with human and divine qualities will al- 
ways be happy, peaceful and full of love. They will always ad- 
here to Truth. Without such quality, spiritual pursuits will be of 
no avail. You should always say to yourself, “I am human, I 
am not animal.” 


Jealousy is contrary to human nature 


Jealousy is rampant to a considerable extent amongst peo- 
ple today. This is the root cause of anger, hatred, and other evil 
qualities. If a person owns a car and travels in it, don't be jeal- 
ous. Satisfy yourself that you have your legs to help you walk. 
If one is in a big house, don't get jealous. Be contented and 
happy with the dwelling place you have, though small. You 
should thus kill jealousy. 

Jealousy is contrary to human nature. It is artificial and not 
pertaining to heart which is natural. Virtues and vices are re- 
flections of your good and bad thoughts. Physical heart is on 
the left side while the spiritual heart is on the right. This will 
help you in the right direction. It is compassionate. But man 
breeds desires, which contaminate the heart. These should be 
checked and restrained to a limit. The body and all the sense 
organs have limitations, like the temperature, BP, capacity to 
see, hear etc. Veda says “Na sreyo niyamam vina (we should 
observe discipline in life.)” 

Limitations should be observed in everything. If you have 
enough minimum resources like food, shelter, and raiment, you 
should be satisfied. To maintain bodily health and get enough 
energy for your day-to-day activities you should take food. 
You should not indulge in overeating causing indigestion. If 
you exceed limit in anything, it may lead to dangerous conse- 
quences. 

If you realize that God is residing in your heart, you will 
not dare to indulge in bad activities at all. The evil qualities are 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 88 


only acquired and are not in you. You are the embodiment of 
only love and compassion. The bad influences are just like 
passing clouds that obstruct the vision of the sun. Though the 
vision is blocked the sun is always shining. When clouds clear 
you can see the sun in its full effulgence. Similarly, the veils of 
ignorance covering the heart must also be cleared. One should 
cultivate patience, which is not commonly done in the present 
day life. Haste makes waste; waste begets worry. So one 
should develop patience to avoid worry. 

Our mind is compared to the moon; when thoughts arise, it 
is eclipsing the real nature just as the moon is eclipsed by the 
shadow of the earth. If you keep the heart pure of the malaise 
of evil qualities, you will have no worry at all. You should not 
allow wicked thoughts to stick to you. In a pond, along with 
lotus flowers that bloom, you have leeches also thriving, which 
suck your blood. Lotus cannot sustain without water. So also, 
human life cannot sustain without love. But you should not let 
the leeches of worry breed in your heart of love. You can 
travel in a boat on the surface of water but should not allow 
water to enter into the boat. You should not allow attachment 
to worldly objects enter into your boat of life. 


All are embodiments of God 


You are all embodiments of God. God is all-pervasive. 
You cannot classify some as divine and some others as not di- 
vine. All are reflections of the same Atma, which is common to 
all. This Atmic Principle is also Sun-principle and Truth Prin- 
ciple (Surya Thathwa and Sathya Thathwa). When one follows 
sathya, prema (love) will be the reflection. 

When you walk on the road, your shadow may fall on bad 
patches like drains, garbage, etc., but you are not affected by it. 
You should proceed unmindful of the path of the shadow. So 
also, you must follow your heart with good feelings unmindful 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 89 


of obstacles that may appear to come in the way. You should 
practice truth. You should be grateful to a person that came to 
your rescue in times of crisis. You should not forget the help 
done by others. There are two things that you should forget. 
Forget the harm done by others to you; otherwise you will be 
harboring vengeance to retaliate. Secondly, forget the help you 
did to others as that will make you expect reward from them 
and result in disappointment when it is not forthcoming. By 
observing these two norms, the purity of your heart will be 
maintained. 


‘“T am Atma, You are Atma” 


Adi Sankara said, “There is no mother, father, no relatives 
or friends. The only reality is “you”. Therefore, be careful and 
awake to the Reality.” You should not worry about the family, 
since these are passing clouds. Vyasa was a great sage who 
gave the eighteen Puranas, Ithihasa, and Brahma-Sutra. But 
when his son Suka left the house in pursuit of Brahmajnana, 
Vyasa ran after him shouting, “Oh son! Stop. Do not go away.” 

Suka stopped and told his father, “I am not your son. You 
are not my father. I am Atma, you are Atma. Why are you un- 
der illusion?” So, you must gradually give up all attachments 
and turn only to God. Having love in your heart, when you put 
on the divine glasses everything will be divine! 

You are filled with worries throughout your life. Birth is a 
worry, life itself is a worry, family, child, failure, sickness, old 
age, death, mystery are all worries. These are all imaginary and 
psychological. 

You say, “My body, my mind, my hand, and my worry.” 
Does this not mean that you are separate from worry? It is your 
own creation. You are only one. You are Atma, the Truth. 
Truth is God. There is only one God who is described in many 
ways. Everyone should realize this Truth by spiritual sadhana 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 90 


(spiritual exercise). This involves sacrifice. The Vedas declare 
that you can attain immortality, not by any means other than 
sacrifice. You have to develop the spirit of sacrifice. Thyaga 
(sacrifice) is yoga. Doing your duty efficiently is yoga. 

Throughout life you should go on doing your duty without 
aspiring for results. When you give to others, you should have 
the attitude you are not the giver and the other is not the re- 
ceiver. It should be considered as an opportunity that is offered 
by the Divine. 

Develop love. Follow truth and right conduct (sathya and 
dharma). You will shine as the Trinity of Brahma, Vishnu, and 
Maheswara. You should not feel that you have no powers. You 
should have self-confidence, which will lead to self satisfac- 
tion, which in turn encourages self-sacrifice, resulting in Self- 
realization. You must ensure that your self-confidence is un- 
shakable. 

What is self-confidence? Self is Atma. This is conscience. 
Because of the senses, it is not realized. It should be associated 
with higher consciousness and not the consciousness that per- 
tains to the senses. Man should try to realize the supreme 
heights of consciousness. Consciousness is uniformly present 
in all. It is “chaithanya”. When people turn toward worldly 
objects, which are transient, they pursue the negative path. 
When they turn toward the Self, it is positive path. 


Realise the human values 


The human body is composed of the five elements, five 
sheaths, and five vital airs (pancha bhootas, pancha koshas, 
and pancha pranas). Man has also got five faculties: sathya 
(truth), dharma (righteousness), santhi (peace), prema (love), 
and ahimsa (nonviolence), which are termed human values. 
Having been born as a human, it is a pity that one does not re- 
alize these values. Anger, hatred, and lust are not human val- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 91 


ues at all. These are animal qualities unbecoming of a human 
being. With truthful thoughts one can become a good person. 
But one without thoughts becomes a sadhu (wise person). He 
will always be in peace. Thoughts are the root cause of asanthi 
(lack of peace). 

First of the human values is sathya or truth. If this is ab- 
sent, you lose one part of human nature. If you don't follow 
dharma, you lose two parts. If you lose santhi, you lose three 
parts. And when you have no prema, you have lost the entire 
human nature and the body will be one with all limbs ampu- 
tated. 

Sathya, the first value, is like the head, and one who fails to 
follow truth will be a headless torso. Dharma is like the shoul- 
der, and one without this will not be able to do anything, hav- 
ing become handicapped. He loses bhuja-balam. One without 
santhi is akin to a man without stomach. How can one take 
food, which is essential to provide energy for living, when 
there is no stomach? If you lose these three, the life is without 
love and becomes valueless. Love is essential for life. One 
without love is only a living corpse! 


Spiritual heart is the seat of love 


Nowadays, you find hatred rampant everywhere. There is 
no love. The seat of love is the spiritual heart, on the right of 
the body. Nobody bothers to recognize this. The absence of 
love leads to absence of unity. When there is no unity, there is 
no purity and without purity, divinity cannot be realised. 

Now what people generally do is to breed enmity and nar- 
row feelings of community. If there is love, the divisive feel- 
ings of community and enmity will not be there. Even when 
one greets another with “Hello”, it is of low caliber and is only 
artificial and superficial, not coming from the heart. If you 
want to develop love, you must go on adding to your circle of 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 92 


friends, loving and serving all. It should be expansion and not 
contraction. It may extend to cover the entire humanity. 
“Ekatma Sarvabhoothantharatma (the one Atma is there in all 
beings).” This is the basis of the Brahma thathwa, (Principle of 
Divinity). When love is lost everything is lost in life. 


Love in speech is Sathya. 

Love in action is Dharma. 

Love in thought is Santhi. 

Love helps in the consummation 
of these three values. 


Embodiments of Love! You are struggling only to acquire 
ephemeral worldly attainments such as wealth, fame, status, 
and position. 

To foster human values, you have to control your senses. 
Merely studying scriptures, undertaking pilgrimages, and 
meeting saints will not help you to achieve realization. Buddha 
did all these spiritual exercises could not achieve the goal. Fi- 
nally, he learnt that one has to turn his vision within with the 
help of the eye of wisdom to attain nirvana. 

Buddha proclaimed that the word “man” should be inter- 
preted thus: 


M stands for Maya, which has to be controlled 

and got over. 
A stands for Atma (understand the Azmic Principle). 
N stands for Nirv”na (attain liberation). 


When you get over the illusion of maya and understand 
Atma you get nirvana (liberation). Therefore, Buddha preached 
sense control and eradication of desires as of primary impor- 
tance. He advocated good vision, good speech, good hearing, 
good action, and good thoughts as essential for human beings. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 93 


Whatever sadhana (spiritual exercises) one may do, it will 
be wasteful if there is no sense-control. You should know the 
divinity that is immanent in everyone. Though many are aware 
of this truth, they do not follow this in practice. For example, 
though everyone knows that one should speak the truth, they 
tell lies to escape from a problem or to have success in busi- 
ness. If you tell a lie to escape from a temporary problem, later 
on you will have to face a bigger permanent problem. You 
should control this temptation of telling a lie to get over a tem- 
porary situation. 

Take the example of Harischandra. He sacrificed his king- 
dom, wife, son, and everything and he himself served as a 
slave in a crematorium. When Viswamitra gave an offer to 
Harischandra that he would give all his possessions if he told 
just one lie, Harischandra flatly refused to deviate from sathya 
even if it cost his life. That is why Lord Siva appeared before 
him and blessed him, giving him back his throne, reviving his 
dead son back to life, and restoring his wife, and makiing him 
rule the kingdom with renewed fame. Because of his extraor- 
dinary adherence to Truth, he is even now remembered as 
“Sathya Harischandra”’. 


Do not be afraid to speak the truth 


Nowadays, people resort to telling lies, fearing that they 
may get into trouble otherwise. Why should you fear to speak 
the truth? You have to fear only when you commit mistakes. 
Today, there is fear rampant everywhere. Life is fear-stricken! 
Practice sathya (truth) and dharma (right conduct). If you 
practice these, you need not fear. When you aren’t able to utter 
the truth, you may desist from speaking and keep silent. 

Once, a sage was doing penance in quest of Truth. One 
day, Lord Siva wanted to test this sage. He came in the guise 
of a hunter who was chasing a deer. The deer passed through 
the place where the sage was seated. A while later, the hunter 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 94 


approached the sage and asked him whether he had seen the 
deer that passed in that direction. The sage was in a dilemma. 
If he spoke the truth, the deer would be slain by the hunter. If 
he did not speak the truth, he will be infringing the code of 
conduct. So he prayed to the Lord to show him the correct path 
to save him in such a situation. Suddenly, vibration occurred in 
his mind and he told the hunter, “The eyes see something. But 
they can’t speak. The tongue speaks but cannot see. Under 
these circumstances, what can I say?” Lord Siva appeared be- 
fore him in his true form and blessed him with liberation. 

So you should not utter untruth simply to escape a situa- 
tion. If there is difficulty, be silent. 


Conscience and conciousness 


Conscience is limited as an adjunct of the body. How does 
this merge with Consciousness ? You have a balloon with air 
inside. It you go on blowing more and more air into it, the 
walls become thinner, and finally it bursts. Then the air inside 
merges with the air outside. This is merger of the limited air, 
finite with the infinite. 

You go on expanding your love. Don't confine it to your 
own circle of kith and Kin. Then finally the merger with the 
infinite will occur. This is liberation. 


Start the day with love, 
Fill the day with love, 
End the day with love, 
This is the way to God. 


Just as sugar, which is sweet, when mixed with water, tea, 
coffee, or anything, imparts sweetness to the dish, prema 
(love) also is sweet (madhuram) and will impart its sweetness 
to your words, actions, and thoughts. Love is the foundation, 
truth is the wall, santhi (peace)is the roof of your life's man- 
sion. Truth based on love is the best dharma (righteousness). 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 95 


Love is there in everyone naturally. Instead of directing it 
toward your wife, children and relatives, direct it toward God. 
By this diversion, you will get whatever you want. The heart is 
given by God. Offer it to Him. You need not have any fear. 
Surrender your body to Him, since this is also a gift of God. 
Every action should be underlined by prema (love). Do seva 
(selfless service) with love. You must cultivate the feeling that 
you belong to God. 


God is your old friend 


You need not glorify God because that may keep you at a 
distance from God. God is not new. He was there before your 
birth and He will be there eternally. Where is the need to glo- 
rify Him? You must take Him as your old friend. When you 
acquire friendship newly with a person, you speak to him with 
respectful words. When he becomes an old friend you treat 
him with liberty and privilege. Consider God also as an old 
friend, so that you can enjoy the liberty and be free with Him. 

Devotees think that they can please God by describing His 
glory. This is not true. You can melt His heart only with love. 
Plant the seeds of love and let the water of good qualities flow 
on the dry land so that the seeds will sprout and be fed by rain 
of love and grow into a tree sheltering all. 

Embodiments of Love! You are all basically embodiments 
of love only. There is no one in the world without love. One 
will love at least his own kith and kin and another may love 
money. Anyway, the basis is love, which is divine. You are a 
combination of love, peace, truth, and God. You are mutually 
related to one another through the bondage of love in spiritual 
path. You must uphold dharma by truth and Love. 


A seed to sprout should be sown in earth or field. 
Sow the seed of love in the field of your heart. 
It will grow as a tree and yield fruit of bliss. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 96 


Prema thathwa is Jnana thathwa and Dharma thathwa. 
Understand and practice it. 


4 April 1998 
Kodaikanal 


One of the principles of straight living is the prac- 
tice of silence. For the voice of God can be heard 
in the region of your heart only when the tongue is 
stilled and the storm is stilled and the water is 
calm. There will no temptation for others to shout 
when you talk to them in whispers. Set the level of 
your tone yourself; as low as possible, as high as 
necessary to reach the outermost boundary of the 
circle you are addressing. Conserve sound, since it 
is the treasure of the element akasa (ether), an 
emanation from God Himself. 

—Baba 


12 


Render service with divine 
awareness 


God shines with effulgence in the universe, 
And the universe shines in God. 
This is the friendship between 
The Creator and the creation. 
[Telugu Poem] 


The universe is the effect and God is the cause. No one can 
fully understand the relationship between the Creator and the 
creation. The whole world is a combination of cause and ef- 
fect. The universe is a manifestation of Divinity. Viswam 
Vishnu Swaroopam (All animate and inanimate objects of the 
world are divine). Though the forms are multifarious, all are 
essentially divine. We are not able to understand divinity, be- 
cause we are carried away by the external physical appear- 
ances. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 98 


Because of unlimited desires, man is suffering from unnec- 
essary anxiety and gets frustrated with disappointment due to 
unfulfilled desires. 

Divinity is the mixing of positive and negative. The world 
iS positive and man is negative. What the modern man wants is 
good results having done bad deeds. How can you get mangoes 
when you have sown the seed of lime? As the seed, so is the 
tree; as the tree, so is the fruit. 

When a child is born there is no chain of gold or diamond 
or gems around the neck. But Brahma provides the invisible 
chain (kantha mala) of results of past actions —good and 
bad— though no one may be aware of this. Human quality has 
become rare amongst people now; and animal quality is pre- 
dominant. Man is wasting the precious gift of human life in 
unworthy pursuits. 


The basic alphabet is to know the human quality 


Many people undertake spiritual sadhana (spiritual exer- 
cise) in order to realize divinity. If they don't understand hu- 
man qualities, all these efforts become exercises in futility. 
Without learning the alphabet, how can one pick up the mean- 
ing and usage of words, phrases and sentences? Develop hu- 
man values and unflinching faith in the Divine. 

The basic alphabet is to know the human quality. Only af- 
ter mastering this can you do other sadhanas. Even great 
saints, poets, and seers don't understand divinity and tread on 
the wrong path. They subject themselves to selfish pursuits and 
blame God when their aspirations are not fulfilled. 

Even the great saint composer Thyagaraja, when he was 
once subjected to misery and suffering, doubted whether the 
sakthi (power of the Lord) had diminished. On reflection, he 
realized that the defect was only in his devotion and not in the 
power of the Lord, who had helped even a monkey to cross the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 99 


ocean, the army of monkeys to build a bridge across the sea 
and Lakshmana to serve Rama for 14 years and Bharata to 
worship Rama's divine sandals (padukas). 

People should understand that there is no pleasure without 
pain and pain is only an interval between two pleasures. 
Whenever you get a painful experience you should have the 
firm faith that it is the foreboding for something good that you 
will be enjoying in the near future. 

Manickavasagar, a minister with the Pandyan King, was 
sent on a mission to buy horses but was so influenced by a 
saint that he turned his attention Godward, resulting in spend- 
ing his time and money in renovating a Siva temple. When the 
king summoned him and put him in prison, Manickavasagar 
was not at all sorry but started composing poems on Lord Siva, 
which were appreciated by the Lord Himself. These are still 
shining as “Thiruvachakam’, the most famous prayer to God 
sung even today in all Siva temples of Tamil Nadu. 

When you spend your time thinking of God and chanting 
His name, you will never come to grief. Follow the dictum, 
"Sathyam vada, dharmam chara (speak the truth, practice 
righteousness).” You are bound to have success always. Truth 
is common to ail countries and all times. If you follow truth, 
which is God, you will invariably do only righteous work. Di- 
vine love will flow to such persons. This will ensure your do- 
ing sacred work. There cannot be love without dharma and 
dharma without love. 


Follow the conscience 


God is in your heart. Wherever you go and whatever you 
do, it is known to God even if you think none has noticed it. 
People start worrying about petty temporary things that are 
passing clouds and sometimes falter in faith and devotion. This 
is not correct. You should never give up devotion. Your good 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 100 


work will beget God's grace without fail. Sin or merit comes 
only from your own deeds, not from outside. 

God is in you only in the form of conscience. Follow the 
conscience. Some do not do so because of bodily attachment. 
Gayathri mantra starts with “Om Bhur Bhuvah Suvaha.” Bhu 
represents materialization — body. Bhuvah represents vibra- 
tion or prana (life force). Suvaha represents radiation — Pra- 
jnana or Atma. All these three —radiation, vibration, and ma- 
terialization— are in the human body itself. Prajnanam is con- 
stant integrated awareness. You are all Brahman. 

From ancient times, this sacred Bharat (India) has been 
proclaiming to the world the universal prayer “Loka samasta 
sukhino bhavanthu (let the people all over the world be 
happy.)” Just as the same electric current passes through all 
electric gadgets of various types and sizes, so also Atma is 
common in all beings. Stars are many, sky is one; cows are of 
many colors, milk is one; jewels are many, gold is one; beings 
are many, breath is one; countries are many, earth is one. 
Therefore, comprehend the One in many, the unity in diversity. 


You have only to do good deeds 


Stop worrying. Discriminate between good and bad. Do not 
harm anyone. Then you can have peace. 

Follow the conscience. That is the Divine in you. You are 
endowed with the precious gift of body with the sense organs 
and limbs. It is given to you to discharge your duties in the 
world. You have only to do sathkarma (good deeds). You 
should do things that are acceptable to God and not to please 
humans. Sath means God. You should have the company of 
God or proximity to God. Chith is awareness. The combination 
of Sath and Chith gives Ananda —divine bliss. 

Sath is sugar and Chith is water. If you mix them, the 
names of sugar and water go away and you get syrup. Sath is 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 101 


Atma and Chith is body (deha); both combine to make up the 
person. Sath is Sivam and Chith is Parvathi. So, the combina- 
tion is Ardhanareeshwara (half male and half female). Every 
one of us is Ardhanareeshwara. 

Fill up the tank of heart with love. This will flow through 
the taps of all sense organs and also the five pranas (vital airs). 
We refer to humanity as mankind. Does this not imply that as a 
human you should radiate kindness? 


The essence of the Puranas 


Sage Vyasa gave the essence of all eighteen Puranas as, 
"Paropakaraya punyaya, papaya Parapeedanam". In this, we 
generally take it that paropakara means helping others. Para 
means God, upa means near, kara means do, make efforts. The 
import is that you should make efforts to be near God. It is 
meritorious. 

Papaya Parapeedanam means to see the many in One is 
sin. How can you avoid this? You have to see the One in 
many, or unity in diversity. This is the correct thing to do. That 
is to say: help ever, hurt never, perceiving Atma in all. If you 
are not able to do any help, sit down quietly and do no harm. 

See Divinity in all and do sacred activities. Don't waste the 
elements or misuse them. Being bound to the world with at- 
tachment to worldly objects is the negative approach. Make the 
positive approach: turning toward Divinity. The difference lies 
only in turning your mind. Turn to world, you get bound; turn 
to God, you get liberated. 

God is without birth and death and is an eternal witness; 
you must strive hard to earn the love of God. One who receives 
the love of God will be earning the love of all. If you realise 
Love is God, you will not get attached to worldly things. 

No one can take the wealth of the world with him when he 
dies. This is a truth we have seen throughout the history of 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 102 


mankind. Many great kings, emperors, saints and seers have 
left without taking anything. When you are born you don't 
bring anything with you. 

Render service in divine awareness. In order to lead a fruit- 
ful and meaningful life, render service to mankind, which will 
take you nearer to God. In a football game, the six players on 
either side go on kicking the ball till it is sent to the goal. The 
goal of life consists of two posts: secular and spiritual. You 
must see that the ball does not go beyond the posts. It should 
be hit within the two posts. You are born as human with the 
goal that you should not be born again. You must live within 
the frames of secular and spiritual pursuits. Then only you will 
be attaining liberation. 

The six bad qualities —lust, anger, greed, desire, pride, and 
jealousy— are on one side and good qualities —truth, right 
conduct, peace, love, nonviolence, and sacrifice— are on the 
other side. The game is between these two teams. Another les- 
son we learn from this game is that the football is kicked as 
long as it is inflated with air. If it is deflated, you take it in 
your hands. 

You should say to yourself, “I am not man, I am divine; I 
am not body, I am Atma.” The body is like a dustbin of all foul 
matter and flesh and bones. You are Chaithanya or “aware- 
ness”. The instruments are negative and work through positive 
divinity. Tread along the divine path so that you can get peace. 
Let us experience peace and share it with others. Then we will 
be liberated, and the world will be happy. 


18 April 1998 
Kodaikanal 


13 


Glory of womanhood 


In this country of Bharat was born Savitri, 
the woman of chastity, 
Who could fight with Yama, the God of Death, 
and bring back to life her dead husband. 
In this country of Bharat was born Chandramathi, 
the paragon of virtue, 
Who suffered the terrible ordeals 
of her husband, Harischandra. 
Sita, the devoted consort of Rama 
and the divine daughter of Mother Earth, 
Who demonstrated her chastity by coming out of 
blazing fire unscathed, was born in this Bharat. 
Damayanthi, also a woman of pristine purity and 
chastity, who stood by her husband Nala 
Through thick and thin, was born in 
the sacred land of Bharat. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 104 


Embodiments of Love! This Bharat is the land of sanctity and 
chastity, which has given birth to such great women of excep- 
tional character, who lent glory to Bharat as a nation of heroic 
women. 

From ancient times, the presiding deity of Gayathri man- 
tra, Gayathri Devi, has been worshipped as the Mother of the 
Vedas, which are held as the most ancient and authoritative 
scriptures of wisdom. Gayathri mantra originated in this holy 
land. The glory of this mantra has spread all over the world. 

The people of Bharat have worshipped Gayathri in several 
ways and have redeemed their lives. Gayathri has been wor- 
shipped in four forms: (1) Sathyavathi, (2) Angavath,i (3) An- 
yavathi, and (4) Nidhanavathi. All the four are equally sacred, 
and elicit limitless grace of the Divine. 

The first one, Sathyavathi, signifies the existence of Atma 
in every being, just as butter is present in every drop of milk. It 
proclaims, “Ekatma sarvabhutantaratma (One Atma is present 
in all beings).” There is one Sath (truth), which is spoken of in 
many ways by the wise. 

The second one is Angavathi, which signifies the five ele- 
ments present in all beings and also the five senses of hearing, 
touch, vision, taste, and smell. There is nothing in this world 
that is not composed of the five elements. This Angavathi is 
pancha bhuta swarupa (the embodiment of the five basic ele- 
ments). 

The third one, Anyavathi, refers to the attributes of the dif- 
ferent forms of the Divine. For example, Lord Siva is associ- 
ated with trident, three eyes, etc. Vishnu is always described as 
having conch, discus, mace, and so on. We call him Sank- 
hachakragadapani. 

Ganapathi is identified by his elephant face and big belly. 
He is first to be worshipped in all rituals. Saraswathi is de- 
scribed as one with veena in hand, through which she is 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 105 


teaching the Divine sound principle as Nadabrahma. Thus An- 
yavathi signifies the different constituents of the forms of the 
Divine. 

Nidhanavathi, the fourth, teaches the nine types of wor- 
ship, namely, sravanam (hearing), keerthanam (singing the 
glory of God), smaranam (thinking of the names of God), pada 
sevanam (service), vandanam (prostration), archanam (wor- 
ship), dasyam (servitude), sakhyam (friendship), and atmanive- 
danam (surrender). 

The world is symbolised by these four forms of Gayathri. 
That is why it is described as Nature (Prakriti), a female form 
(Sthri). We refer to our native country as motherland. 


The importance attached to women in Bharat 


Bharat (India) has always accorded a high place to women 
as the upholders of all social virtues. The very fact that in 
mentioning the names of the divine couples like Vishnu and 
Lakshmi, Siva and Parvathi, the name of the consort is given 
the first place, as in Lakshmi Narayana, Uma Maheswara, 
shows what importance Bharatiyas (people of Bharat) attached 
to women. 

People generally speak of women as the weaker sex. At 
last, now Bharatiyas recognize that women cannot be consid- 
ered as weak. The woman in charge of the home plays the 
main role in bringing good name and fame to the home. Not 
only in respect of individual homes but also in the good name 
of the country and the world the woman plays the main role. 
From ancient times, woman has been accorded a high place in 
the society. 

The scriptures have ascribed seven virtues to women as a 
class: sathya (truth), prema (love), dharma (righteousness), 
santhi (peace), sahana (tolerance), ananda (bliss), svanubhuti 
(spirituality). 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 106 


The woman at home has been held in high esteem as Gri- 
halakshmi, the goddess of prosperity of the home. When her 
husband faces difficulties, the wife readily shares the burden 
and is prepared to do anything, to undergo any suffering or 
even sacrifice her life for the welfare of her husband and the 
family. It is the woman of the home who is behind the good 
reputation of the home. The woman is the embodiment of sac- 
rifice. Though the male counterpart may also do sacrifice, it 
will be with a selfish tinge, while the woman's sacrifice is ab- 
solutely selfless. Therefore, we should be proud of our women. 


High status of women in ancient India 


If Bharatiya culture and morality have survived despite 
long periods of foreign rule, it is to no small measure due to 
the courage and fortitude of the nation's women. As the earlier 
speaker, Dr. Geetha Reddy, has pointed out, women shine as 
soldiers with the weapons of sathya and dharma. They will not 
normally tell lies. There may be occasions when a few of them 
may do so unknowingly. But, by and large, they as a class up- 
hold truth and righteous conduct. They follow the Vedic in- 
junction, Sathyam vada, dharmam chara (speak the truth and 
practice righteousness). 

Once, King Janaka conducted a discussion regarding the 
most suitable person who should confer honour on him as a 
scholar. Even though there were great sages and highly learned 
scholars like Yajnavalkya in the assembly, he decided that 
Gargi was the fittest person from whom he should receive it. 

This is an example to prove how women have been held in 
high esteem from ancient times by ordinary citizens and kings 
too. While women were held in high esteem in ancient times, 
in later years there was a decline in their status, and even as- 
cetics denied proper recognition to them. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 107 


For instance, when sage Mathanga wanted to admit the 
great woman devotee Sabari into his ashram, many of his dis- 
ciples who were renunciants raised objection. But the noble 
Mathanga recognized the extraordinary merit of Sabari's chas- 
tity, sincere devotion, and dedication toward pursuit of libera- 
tion and admitted her to his ashram. She finally proved to the 
world how devoted she was to Rama and how she got liberated 
after worshipping Him true to the teachings of sage Mathanga. 


Women's role in home and society 


Because of the evil influence of modern education, people 
consider women as toys and tend to treat them as puppets. The 
women have very auspicious and noble qualities. But men con- 
sider them as cooks to be confined to the kitchen and the four 
walls of the house. What they forget is that women not only 
manage the affairs of the family but also look after the health 
and well-being of all the members of the household. 

The Government has now started conferring the honorific 
titles of Padmashri, Padmabhushan, etc,. on its chosen citizens. 
But women have had more respectable and valuable titles of 
Grihalakshmi (the goddess of prosperity of the home), Dhar- 
mapathni (devoted wife), Ardhangi (the better half), etc. They 
had these titles because of their good qualities and spirit of sac- 
rifice. 

Questions are raised like who will look after the home if 
women go to offices and who will teach her children if the 
mother goes to school to teach other children, and so on. Some 
say that though the woman goes to work to solve the financial 
problem, bigger problems may have to be confronted by her 
going to work. But, in the modern world, it is necessary for the 
women to share the burden of maintaining the family with their 
husbands, so the women should also pursue studies as much as 
possible and take up suitable jobs to share the burden of the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 108 


family. It would smack of selfishness if the males prevent them 
from going to work for which they have acquired the requisite 
qualifications. 

Women can control the whole world by themselves by 
virtue of their inherent qualities of love and spirit of sacrifice 
(prema bhava and thyaga bhava). Anger is alien to women, 
and it is more rampant in men. Though there may be instances 
when a woman may give vent to anger, such occasions are few 
and far between while in men the reverse in the case. 

Savitri fought with the God of Death (Yama) and suc- 
ceeded in getting her husband back to life. Can you find any 
instance in the scriptures or history where a husband was pre- 
pared to do sacrifice for his wife? If the wife is dead, he is 
ready to have a second marriage. Such unfair things are hap- 
pening in the world in respect of women. That is why it was 
decided to celebrate not only 19 November but the 19th of 
every month as Mahila Day. 


Women are heirs of our ancient culture 


Women devotees in the Sai Movement are participating in 
large numbers enthusiastically in service activities such as 
helping the women of weaker sections to learn some useful 
trades like tailoring, etc., so that they can earn some money for 
the family and also spend their time usefully. If such activities 
are taken up all over the country, the country will prosper. This 
sacred work is typical of the culture of our ancient country. 

Women are the heirs of our ancient culture. Culture means 
refinement. Women are the torch-bearers of refinement and 
they are toiling for the emancipation of the nation. 

Geetha Reddy spoke about the exploits of great women in 
the battlefield like Rani of Jhansi, who fought a terrific battle 
and gave up her life rather than surrendering to the foe when 
she was overpowered. She lived up to the teachings of the Ve- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 109 


das that only through sacrifice can one attain liberation. Even 
in this Kali Age, there may be some exceptional cases where 
women may not be following sathya and dharma. But mostly 
they live up to these ideals. 

However, they are not encouraged to show their ability. 
Even in the family, they have to face obstacles and confron- 
tations. If women are given due recognition and encourage- 
ment, they will shine with brilliance in all fields and will serve 
the house, country, and the entire world gloriously, contri- 
buting to the welfare of the entire humanity. 


Women show dedication and sincereity in work 


No doubt, there may be a few who may not be having good 
qualities characteristic of a woman. But in any class of society, 
this is inescapable. Take, for example, the orange fruit. In or- 
der to enjoy the juice you have to peel out the bitter portions of 
the outer skin and seeds. Even so, the fruit of human life has 
much bitter portions as outer skin. You have to remove this 
and weed out the seeds of bad qualities, so that you can taste 
the sweet juice inside. 

If man follows the example of the woman to imbibe sacred 
and sacrificial qualities, the world will definitely improve. 
They say “Udhyogam purusha lakshanam (a man is known by 
his job)”, as though only males can do jobs. It is a misnomer. 
Women are also doing all types of jobs equal to men. In fact, 
women work more sincerely and with dedication. 

Recently, Swami questioned a director of the Indian Tele- 
phone Industries when he came to see Swami about the per- 
centage of women employed in the industry. He said 99% of 
the employees were women and added that women did ten 
times better work than men. They don't stop or step out until 
the allotted work is completed. They have the work culture 
better than men. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 110 


Nowhere in any sacred text is it stated that women should 
only cook and not do work like men. 

As a matter of fact, even man has to learn cooking and 
house-keeping to help his wife in times of need. Awareness is 
life. Awareness means total knowledge and not partial knowl- 
edge. This enthusiasm is full in women. Even men should 
make effort to learn everything. 

Women have hidden power immanent in them. You have 
to encourage them to exhibit their talents. An army com- 
mander, who makes all sepoys in the army shiver before him, 
shivers before his wife when she confronts him after he 
reaches home. Similarly, the principal of an institution, before 
whom the students may shiver with fear, may himself feel 
shiver going down his spine when confronted by his wife for 
an explanation why he came late. 


God makes no distinctions 


Generally, the term Purusha is taken to mean only males, 
basing on physical form. It is not true. Purusha represents the 
Atma or Chaitanya in all, which is in the body from top to toe. 
Purusharthas (prime goals of life) are four, namely, dharma, 
artha, kama, and moksha (right conduct, wealth, desire, and 
liberation). This does not apply only to males. It is common to 
both males and females. 

Actually, women follow the fundamental Dharma truly, 
while men act selfishly. One who realizes divinity is Purusha. 
Swadharma means Atmadharma, not the dharma pertaining to 
the body. This is explained in the Bhagavad Gita. This was the 
ideal followed by the ancients. 

Artha does not merely mean wealth or money. It means 
wealth of wisdom. Both men and women have the right to ex- 
perience non-duality, which is real wisdom. 

Kama is the desire not for worldly objects but for God. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 111 


Moksha (liberation) is the fourth objective of life. Desire 
for moksha is common to all, whether men or women. Moksha 
is moha kshaya or shedding of bodily attachment. Without 
following the senses or mind, if you follow conscience, you 
can progress toward moksha. 


Women should be encouraged to play their roles 


In order to teach the subtleties of the scriptural texts, and 
encourage women to play their role in society, 19th is fixed as 
Mahila Day. Dharma can be made to occupy its position in 
society and restored to its pristine glory only by women. But 
men also have equal right and they should participate in this 
mighty and sacred effort so that the country will prosper. Even 
if men don’t actively participate, they should at least let the 
women do the work without interference. 

Krishna said in the Gita, “Ananyaschinthayantho maam ye 
Janah paryupasathe (whoever worships me: to the exclusion of 
all others),” “thesham: nithyabhiyukthanam yogakshemam va- 
hamyaham (I look after the welfare of such unwavering devo- 
tees).” This is an assurance to one and all with no distinctions 
of any kind. Everyone should cultivate a similar sense of uni- 
versality. 

The Divine is omnipresent. Differences based on caste, 
creed, sex, or nationality have to be given up. God has no dis- 
tinctions. You should also practice this principle of equality. 

God is everywhere. You cannot restrict Him to your nar- 
row limits as though He is confined only to the form contained 
in your small picture frame. It is a folly to think so. He has 
thousands of forms and names. When you are doing Sahas- 
ranama archana (worshipping the thousand names of the 
Lord) you mention each of the thousand names and offer a 
flower. All are offered to only that one picture and not to thou- 
sands of pictures. All may refer to one God only. You may say 
Allah, Jesus, Rama or Krishna and so on. But all refer to only 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 112 


one God. If you say the form you worship is the only God, you 
are limiting the Infinite to a narrow finite entity. 

Give up all religious differences. There is only one relig- 
ion, that of love, There is only one caste, that of humanity. 
There is only one language, that of the heart. I spoke earlier of 
the four parts of Gayathri and five elements. All are divine. 
They have no caste or creed or any such difference. 

If you realize the unity, you get purity and divinity. You 
are forgetting this and breed feelings of enmity and commu- 
nity. God has no such distinction of community, nationality or 
sex. In ancient times, they did not have such differences. Do 
not give room for any such feelings. God is one and everyone 
in this world has equal right to enjoy His Grace. 


19 April 1998 
Kodaikanal 


14 


Going beyond the mind 


Discard bad company 
Associate with good people, 
Do always meritorious deeds, 
Discriminate between what is eternal and 
What is transient. 
[Sanskrit sloka] 


Embodiments of Love! 

Today people are making efforts to know what happiness is 
and are inquiring only about the external objects of the world, 
but no one attempts to know himself. It is of no use knowing 
about everything in the world without knowing about oneself. 
The whole world is based only on “I”. When you ask someone, 
whether a millionaire or a pauper, “Who are you?”, the answer 
will invariably commence with “I’, I am so and so will be the 
usual answer. On further questioning one may say, I am a 
doctor or I am a businessman. The doctor refers to the work he 
does and the businessman refers to his profession. If you ask 
the name, the reply may come as Ramayya or Krishnayya. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 114 


These are names assigned to the body. These are all tran- 
sient. These do not represent the real “you”. You are a perma- 
nent entity. 

Without understanding this truth, man is carried away by 
ephemeral things. He indulges only in selfish pursuits. He is of 
no use to the world. Everyone is born in society and brought 
up by society and is a limb of society. Only when one works 
for society can one be prosperous. Today everyone tries to live 
for himself without caring for the society. 


Seek the source of bliss 


You should not forget that self-confidence is the founda- 
tion of life. Just as you cannot build walls without foundation, 
you should lead a useful life based on self-confidence only. 
When this is firm, the superstructure of self-satisfaction and 
self-awareness may be raised, leading to self-realization or 
bliss, which is the goal of life. When man has forgotten the 
foundation, how can he expect happiness or peace? 

Self is Atma. One must know this reality and discard at- 
tachment to the body, mind, and intellect. Atma is the master, 
recognize this and be the mastermind. Don't identify yourself 
with your instruments. All the organs or the instruments of the 
body are propelled by vibration, which originates from Atma. 
But for this, man can't survive. 

It is a pity that man forgets this principle of Atma and is be- 
reft of happiness. Men only pretend to be happy and smiling. 
But they are not really happy. God is the master of happiness, 
and unless you identify with the Divine, you cannot be happy. 

When you think of God and pray to Him, you should not 
ask for trivial things. You should ask for a thing that is not in 
you and is in God. It is bliss that isn't in you, and God is the 
embodiment of bliss. So, you should pray only for this. 

People call themselves devotees and pray for fulfillment of 
their petty desires. They are not true devotees. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 115 


God is described as, Nithyanandam Paramasukhadam, 
Kevalam Jnanamurthim.” So, you have to pray only for this 
bliss. If you inquire deeply, God is not away from you. 

Good and bad experiences emanate from you only. As you 
sow, so you reap. All resultant effects arise only from the 
cause of your actions. One who understands this truth alone 
can understand the Divine Principle. 

In spite of many efforts and sadhana (spiritual exercise), 
one is not able to attain realisation of divinity because the vi- 
sion is not good. Buddha investigated into this very deeply and 
found out in the end that mind is the stumbling block for pro- 
gress toward realisation and became “Amanaska’’,, that is, he 
eliminated the obstacles of the mind and attained Nirvana (lib- 
eration). He realized the Atma. 

How to get rid of this mind? You can do this only by di- 
recting your attention to the intellect and start discriminating as 
to what is eternal and what is ephemeral. 


You should be beyond feelings and desires 


Discarding the pursuit of bookish knowledge, which is su- 
perficial, you must pursue discriminatory knowledge. In this 
pursuit, you should not discriminate for your own self interest. 
You should have fundamental discrimination for the welfare of 
all. This is broadmindedness and expansion of love. You 
should not have a narrow outlook, which is contraction of love. 
You say, “hello,” while greeting a friend. It is not reflecting 
your love. You should be hollow inside, that is beyond feelings 
and desires. You should proceed beyond mind. 

Buddha contemplated for six years before he could achieve 
this: “Buddhigrahyam Atheenathriyam.” He went beyond the 
body, mind, and intellect to realise the Atma. 

Today man is only acting as actors do in a cinema. Every- 
thing is only pretension, tantamount to hypocrisy. The term 
“manava’, referring to “man”, when analyzed gives the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 116 


meaning that man is one who overcomes illusion (ma is maya; 
na is no; va is conduct). What is maya? it is to consider a non- 
existing thing as existing. 

When you walk, your shadow is following you. Every ac- 
tion has reaction, resound, and reflection. Even your feelings 
and thoughts are reflected in your behavior. As long as you are 
filled with thoughts, you cannot make any progress on the 
spiritual path. 

As [ have explained in an earlier talk, the term “man” itself 
has to be interpreted as M (Maya), A (Atma), N (Nirvana), that 
is, only when you overcome maya you can realize the Atma 
and attain nirvana (liberation). This can be attained only by 
self-confidence, meaning confidence in the Atma and not in the 
instruments thereof. 


Man is creestfallen because of his attachment to body 


Today, man is beset with worries and appears crestfallen 
because of his attachment to body and worldly objects. He is 
devoting all his attention to his family, acquisition of wealth, 
and fame. If he just devotes a small fraction of this attention to 
God, he can get everything. Why don't you have this faith in 
the All-powerful Divine? 

You are prepared to sacrifice for the sake of petty worldly 
things. If you do this for the sake of the Divine, you can get 
unlimited grace, by which you and your family and those for 
whom you care will have peace and happiness. 

Bharatiyas (Indians) have always said their prayer for the 
happiness and welfare of the entire world. This is the correct 
prayer thaat you should make to God. You are also part of the 
world and you will also enjoy peace and happiness along with 
others. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 117 


Cultivate divine thoughts 


The term Bharata has a very sacred significance. Bha rep- 
resents self-effulgent light. One who strives for seeking the 
self-effulgent Atma is a Bharatiya. In music also, the term 
Bharata has a unique significance: Bha indicates bhavam 
(feeling), ra indicates ragam (tune), and ta indicates talam 
(beat). The combination of bhava, raga, and tala in harmony 
makes music pleasant to hear. Similarly, in all aspects such as 
moral, ethical, and spiritual, divine thoughts should be per- 
vading. This is the characteristic of the Bharatiyas. 

God is Sath-Chith-Ananda. With the Sath (eternal feeling), 
you should seek Chith (spiritual wisdom). Then you get 
Ananda (bliss). You can get Ananda only from Ananda and not 
from a state of depression. 

You should worship the Lord with love, since love is God 
and God is love. This gives you real happiness. Today people 
pretend as if they love while their inner feeling is not filled 
with love. “Yad bhavam thath bhavathi. As your feelings, so 
will be the result.” Now we find that feelings are different from 
expression. 

You do not know when this body will cease to function 
—in childhood, boyhood, youth or old age. Death is certain. 
Though the body is like a garbage dump full of fecal matter, 
we have to maintain it in good condition because it is also the 
temple of God, who resides therein. 

The body by itself cannot help you to cross the ocean of 
life. You have to surrender to the Lord. From dawn to dusk, 
one is engaged only in pursuit of ways and means to fill the 
belly. People waste their life in this way without making effort 
to have a vision of the Divine. They stand in queue for a long 
time to buy a ticket for a movie or for travel in bus, but they 
don't like to stand in the queue for darshan of the Divine, who 
can confer such great bliss on them as nothing else can. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 118 


Take the example of trees, which bear sweet fruits for oth- 
ers but do not themselves take; cows, which give milk to others 
but do not taste even a drop; rivers, which provide copious 
supply of water for the people and animals and birds too but do 
not take even a bit of it themselves. Man is only enjoying eve- 
rything himself and is not doing anything for the society at 
large. Dharma protects those who protect it but will destroy 
those who attempt to destroy it! 


Knock at the correct door 


Embodiments of Love! 

You have got this precious human life as Divine gift. Do 
not waste it by seeking worldly pleasures. Pray to God and 
serve God by serving humanity. 

Adi Sankara was propagating advaita jnana (wisdom of 
nonduality) all through famous Bhaja Govindam verses. He 
said mere scholarship will not come to one's rescue at the time 
of death. One has to pray and worship God in order to get re- 
leased from the bondage of birth and death. Devotion based on 
Prema Thathwa (Principal of Love) is essential for the eman- 
cipation of every human being. Advaita (Nonduality) is to see 
unity in diversity. [Swami held a silver tumbler in His hand.] 
This is a silver tumbler. The silver in this will be retained even 
after it is melted and made into a plate. The forms vary but sil- 
ver is constant. 

The Primordial Principle of Supreme Power is one. You 
may go on giving examples like jewels are many, gold is one; 
flowers are many, pooja is one; and so on. Though you offer 
different types of flowers to God, He likes only one flower that 
can never fade, that is the flower of your heart (hridaya push- 
pam). Since hridaya is the altar of the Lord, this is what he 
relishes most. You need food, clothing, and shelter for living. 
But you should not forget that the basis for all these is the Di- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 119 


vine. Think constantly of the Divine even when immersed in 
worldly work. 

Pray to God with pure heart with a mind bereft of desires. 
Do not pray for the fulfillment of petty desires. Love God with 
a desireless heart. How did Sabari get the grace of Rama, who 
gave her liberation? How did Jatayu enjoy the privilege of dy- 
ing on the lap of the Lord? They did not pray for petty things. 
Instead of asking for a particular type of jewel like aring or a 
chain, ask for gold. You can make any jewel out of it. 


Pray for love of God and you will get love 


Forgetting the declaration and assurance given by the Lord 
you behave contrary to His direction. God proclaimed, 


Ask and it shall be given, 
Search and you will find, 
Knock and the door will be opened. 


You are not asking the right source. You are asking the 
world and not God, the Creator of the world. How can you get 
a response? You are also not searching for the right thing. You 
are searching only for wealth and position, which are unworthy 
and transient. At what door are you knocking? The door of 
grief. How can you get ananda (bliss)? If you comply with the 
directions of the Divine correctly, you will get appropriate re- 
sults. If you open the door of your heart and love God, you get 
what you need. Do not ask for any petty boon. Ask for God 
Himself. He can give you anything and everything you need. 
Pray for love of God. You will get love. Through Divine love 
you will have prosperity here and hereafter. 


20 April 1998 
Kodaikanal 


15 


We are all One 


The company of good people will be very hard to get 
While you have a lot of wicked ones all around the world 
There are pebbles available in plenty 

But precious gems and diamonds are extremely rare to get. 


Embodiments of Love! In this universe, there are lakhs of 
species of living beings, but the human is the noblest and the 
highest species. If man loses money, he can it get back; if he 
loses a friend he can get another; if he loses his wife, even then 
he can re-marry and have another wife; if he loses his share of 
land, he can get another, but he cannot get back the body once 
it is lost. Man does not realize the high value of precious hu- 
man life and is misusing it in many ways. 

You must realize that once a night is passed, it won't come 
back. Once the river merges in the ocean, it cannot come back. 
When you eat a fruit, you cannot get it back in its original 
form. Man does not know his own value. He has several ca- 
pacities and faculties. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 121 


The first gift that a man possesses is mathi (intellect). The 
second is sthithi (position). The third one is paristhithi (cir- 
cumstance), and the fourth is gathi (destiny). These constitute 
his sampathi (possessions). 


Maintain mental balance to act properly 


All things that are happening to man depend on his destiny 
alone. The mind is based on our own conduct, and it shapes 
our destiny. Mathi should be sound. Everything else depends 
on sthithi and sampathi. When one understands this, one can 
know one's destiny. Everyone has to maintain mental balance 
to act properly. 

Suppose a person has a knife in hand. They can cut vegeta- 
bles, cook food, and consume it to appease hunger. On the 
other hand, if the person cuts the throat of another person it 
will lead to disastrous consequences. You must know the 
proper method to use any material. You must be aware of the 
different types of sakthi (power) with which you are gifted. 

Human life can be compared to a big clock containing 
three needles (since the clock has hour, minute, and second 
hands) representing years, months, and days. They are moving 
in perfect union, and they decide your life span. 

In spite of having these three regulatory factors, man is not 
leading a good life. Thirty days make a month, and 12 months 
make one year. You must know how to pass every day in the 
best possible way without wasting precious time. You must 
also know that everything happens according to the Divine 
Will. 

The Divine cannot be expected to act according to your 
thoughts or desires. God is fully aware of the needs of the 
family, country, and world at large and confers the requisite 
benefits at the appropriate time. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 122 


Let us take an example of how one gift of nature proves 
beneficial to some people, while it is not so for some others. 
Suppose a marriage function is being celebrated in one house, 
the family prays for the rain to stop to facilitate them. At the 
same time, a neighbor who has cultivable land, which is dry, 
prays for the rain to continue to pour in torrents to facilitate his 
cultivation of the land. God is impartial and will not submit to 
a particular individual's needs. He weighs the needs of all and 
maintains a balance. 


>The common malaise of all humanity 


Generally all people are suffering from an incurable dis- 
ease. It may be to a lesser degree in some while more severe in 
others. The difference is only in the severity, but all are suf- 
fering from this. It cannot be cured even by expert medical 
treatment by experienced doctors. This disease is “ego”. 

Where is the need to be egotistic for an ordinary mortal? 
When you consider your position in comparison to the entire 
world you are just an infinitesimal speck. In the world map, 
India is a small country, and Tamil Nadu is a part of this. In 
Tamil Nadu, Kodaikanal can be spotted only as a tiny dot. In 
this, what is your position as an individual? 

When you analyze in this manner, you will find you are 
one of no consequence at all. If you think you are so big, in- 
flated with ego, it is only sheer ignorance. If one identifies 
themself with divinity, there will be no room for ego. All are 
divine in this world, and you are also one of the several bil- 
lions of people. When you realize this truth, where is the scope 
for ego? It is due to ignorance that one feels egoistic and faces 
lots of problems because of this. 

Thoughts lead to karma (action) and create feelings, which 
contribute to sheelam (character). Character makes a man de- 
serving to be termed really human. So, one must develop char- 
acter by having sacred thoughts and good deeds. For this, the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 123 


primary requisite is control of the mind, which is the source of 
thoughts. 


World is the effect for which God is the cause 


The term for thought in Sanskrit is sankalpa, which means 
it is arising from heart, the seat of God (Sam). Salokhya sa- 
roopya, sameepya and sayujya are all related to this “Sam”, 
which is synonymous with Sath. Sath is changeless Truth 
(Saswatham). 

When thoughts are good and based on the Divine, the stithi 
or state of man will be good. Sampathi does not mean worldly 
or physical comforts. It comprises sath vichar and sath san- 
kalpa (good inquiry and good thoughts). Such good thoughts 
based on the changeless Truth will come only from merits ac- 
quired in previous lives (poorva punya). 

This human birth itself is attained after innumerable lives 
of lower species. Since this is so, why should you venture to 
commit sinful deeds? It is your bad vision of the external 
world that makes you commit sins. So, you should develop 
samyak drishti (good vision). You should look upon the world 
as the manifestation of the Divine (viswam Vishnu swaroo- 
pam). The world is the effect for which cause is God. 

The whole universe is a phenomenon of cause and effect. It 
is foolish to look only at the external world considering it as 
mere jada (matter). You must see the reality behind the entire 
creation. If you see with divine vision, everything will be di- 
vine. (Sarvam Vishnumayam Jagath) 

You see Anil Kumar wearing glasses (spectacles). They 
appear to be an obstacle to his eyes but they help him to see 
more clearly. Similarly, if you wear glasses of love, you will 
be able to see the Divine in everything, though they may ap- 
pear to be obstructing like the spectacles. 

The main life principle is prema (love), without which 
there will be no love between mother and child, between hus- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 124 


band and wife, or between friends. Love elevates the individ- 
ual from human level to divinity. Now, man limits his love to 
his own kith and kin and other possessions, thus making it nar- 
row. It should be expanded to cover all fellow beings. If love 
occupies the single seated chair of heart, there will be no room 
for jealousy, hatred, and other such evil feelings. 

The great queen Madalasa used to sing a lullaby to her 
children inspiring them to realize the Atma, which was their 
reality, and cast off attachment to body. Even while the chil- 
dren were in the cradle, she taught them Atmajnana. She sent 
her three children to the forest to learn scriptures when they 
came of age. By the time she was about to send her fourth son 
also, her husband intervened and prevented her from doing so, 
pleading that if he also was sent away there would be no heir 
to the throne. 

She pleaded with her husband that she was only teaching 
them the Principle of Atma based on Omkara, the Primordial 
Sound, to make them aware of its greatness, which is hailed by 
people of all the seven worlds. She said she was singing not a 
lullaby of world, which was negative, but the Truth related to 
God, which is positive. 


How to realise Divinity 


You have to stick to Daiwathwa (Divine Consciousness) 
even while you are engaged in worldly activities. In spite of a 
lapse of millions of years, man is not yet able to understand his 
reality. How can he realise Divinity? If you develop human 
qualities, you can easily realise Divinity. 

The Veda teaches "Sathyam vada, dharmam chara (speak 
the truth, adhere to righteousness).”’ Now, people kill truth and 
ignore righteousness. Santhi (peace) and prema (love) are re- 
duced to narrowest limits. All four —sathya, dharma, santhi, 
and prema— must be put in unison for the world and humanity 
to thrive. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 125 


If you study how these lights here are functioning, you will 
find that the current passes through the wire and illuminates 
the bulb. Sathya (truth) is the current, dharma is the wire, and 
santhi is the bulb; when the current flows to the bulb it burns 
brightly. This light is love (prema). You will see that sathya, 
dharma, and santhi together form the constituents for prema. 


Food, water, and energy are the three aspects of God 


In ancient days they used to say, before taking food, annam 
Brahma (food is God), raso Vishnu (water is God), and sakthi 
Eswara (energy is God). They used to offer such prayers on 
conceiving food, water, and energy as the three aspects of God 
—Brahma, Vishnu and Eswara. 

The gross portion of the food nourishes the body (kaayam); 
the subtle portion nourishes the mind (manas); and the more 
subtle portion nourishes the power of speech (vaak). Thus, all 
three constituents mano, vaak, kaayam —mind, speech, 
body — are sustained by food. All these three combine to make 
the full personality of man. Harmony in these three —thought, 
word, and deed— makes one a mahatma. Disparity in these 
three makes a man duratma (wicked person). 


Manasyekam vachasyekam 
Karmanyekam mahatmanam 
Manasyanyam vachasyanyam 
Karmanyam duratmanam 


In the latter, the current of sathya is absent, so it will not 
shine. When there is harmony, current will not fail. You have a 
main switch in a house, which controls all other switches. If it 
is put off, the lights will go off. In the body, the main switch is 
the heart; when one has love in the heart, all one's thoughts, 
words, and actions will shine brightly with love. 

Therefore, you should fill the heart with love and share 
with others. When you fill the tank of heart with truth and 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 126 


righteousness, all limbs of the body and sense organs, func- 
tioning as taps, will radiate the same truth and righteousness. 
Love is selfless and self is lovelessness. Love gives and for- 
gives; self gets and forgets. When love underlies your activity, 
everything will be perfect. 


Love is the essential basis for the spiritual path 


Embodiments of Love! Develop love in the main switch 
—the heart. That is real sadhana (spiritual discipline). This 
Prema Sakthi will achieve anything. Love is the essential basis 
for the spiritual path. The other sadhanas, like meditation, japa 
etc., are all good, but without love they are of no use. 

What is meditation? It is required for every action — 
walking, talking, writing, reading, and even sleeping. You 
have to concentrate for everything. 

Life is a race. The saying is, “slow and steady wins the 
race.” This is quite apt for the race of life. Haste makes waste 
and waste makes worry. So you should go slow and steady 
without faltering or wavering. Whatever you do, and even 
when you talk to someone, consider it as doing God's work. If 
you practice this way, you can have peace. 


Shreyohi jnanam abhyasath 
Jnanath dhyanam vishishyate, 
Dhyanath karmaphala thyagah 
Thyagath santhir anatharam. 


Lord Krishna says in the Gita that the sacrifice of the fruits 
of action is superior even to jnana and meditation. From sacri- 
fice comes peace immediately. 

People talk of yoga. Patanjali defined yoga as control of 
mind and senses. Water has the nature to flow down, while fire 
in a pit goes upward. Worldly desires are like water and pull 
you down. They are negative. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 127 


Brotherhood of man and Fatherhood of God 


Positive wisdom is that of Atma, which is like fire. If you 
understand this truth, you will not be after worldly desires. The 
body is given to you to do karma (action) and realise God. By 
subjecting body to pain by fasting, etc., you cannot gain any- 
thing. You have to keep the body trim to realise the Divine. 

You must practice the sadhana of unification of thought, 
word, and deed. If you achieve this with love in your heart, it 
itself is a good penance. Do everything as an offering to God 
and to please God. There is no greater worship than doing your 
duty with love, as an offering to God. God is infinite and vast. 
Do not limit Him into a small frame. Widen your vision. Make 
your love expand to cover the whole humanity. Realise all be- 
ings as divine. Then you realize all are one. 

Go on adding “I plus you, I plus you,” and it will become 
“We”. Then go on adding “We plus W” —we are all one. All 
are children of God. This is brotherhood of man and father- 
hood of God. 

The Gita says: “All beings of the world are part of My 
Eternal Self.” All beings are therefore eternal. All are mani- 
festations of the Divine. Though forms are different, Atma is 
one. The Prema Thathwa (Principle of Love) should be devel- 
oped. God is Trigunarahitha (Nithyanandam Paramasukha- 
dam). Why attribute qualities to God? Love is the most essen- 
tial nature of the Lord. It is not an attribute. Practice love in 
speech, feeling, and action. If everyone practiced love, there 
will be no agitation in the world. Hatred will be eliminated. 


21 April 1998 
Kodaikanal 


16 


Love of God with service to society 


Without charitable disposition 

Not following the principles of righteous conduct, 
Devoid of compassion and love, 

Man is ruining himself. 

[Telugu Poem] 


Embodiments of Love! In this wide world amongst the vast 
humanity, we find three types of people: pushti jivas, samashti 
jivas, and pravaha jivas. 

The first type, pushti jivas, are those who, because of 
meritorious deeds in past lives enjoy the grace of the Divine, 
though they do not engage themselves now in auspicious rites, 
study of scriptures, contact with saints, undertaking pilgrim- 
ages, etc. The merit of past lives makes them always happy in 
the company of the Divine. They dance in delight, experienc- 
ing divine bendiction. Just as you don’t need firewood after the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 129 


cookng is finished, these people don’t need any spiritual sad- 
hanas (spiritual exercises), since they have already attained the 
goal of all sadhanas. You may not find this type of person do- 
ing any spiritual exercises. Be they are leading a true life and 
experience Brahmananda, Nityananda, Advaithananda, and 
Paramananda. There is no need for such a person to undertake 
any spiritual pursuit. 

The second type, samashti jivas, read a lot of scriptural 
texts and are keen on earning name and fame a scholars. Since 
they become proud of their scholarship, they do not make 
themselves fit to be recipients of divine grace. When they go 
on reading till the end of their lives, where is the time for prac- 
tising the ideals? They may participate in seminars and meet 
noble souls, but they are far away from God’s grace because 
they have no time to think of God and enshrine him in their 
hearts. This is the plight of this second type of person, the 
samashti jivas. 


Pravaha person has no chance of realising the Divine 


The third type, classified as pravaha jivas, are always en- 
gaged in mundane activities in pursuit of physical comforts 
and worldly pleasures. They do not think of God and think that 
they are capable of achieving whatever they want. At least, 
wicked people think of God in difficult situations. The pravaha 
persons have no chance of realising the Divine at all. They are 
born again and again. They have no chance of liberation. Some 
may have good feelings latent in them. But they don’t join sat- 
sang and don’t adhere to good conduct and righteous action, 
though some may be conscious of the Divine residing in their 
heart. There is a small story to exemplify some exceptional 
cases of this type of person. 

There was a family of wife and husband, of whom the wife 
ws very devoted to God and was always in thought of the Di- 
vine. She worried that her husband never uttered the name of 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 130 


God, even once. She believed in the truth that uttering the 
name of God was the best way to get liberation and it was a 
boat to cross the ocean of life. She was praying to God, en- 
treating Him to show mercy on her and make her husband utter 
God’s name. She even questioned the Lord as to whether it 
was her misfortune to have such a husband, and as Compas- 
sionate One, could He not transform her husband into a devo- 
tee like her? 

The same night when she was contemplating on such en- 
treaties to God, she heard her husband suddenly utter, “Rama, 
Rama,” in his sleep. Her joy knew no bounds when she heard 
her husband utter Rama’s name, which he had never done be- 
fore. She thought her prayer to God was answered. 

She got up ealier than usual in the morning and decorated 
the entrance to her house with rangoli and arranged for Man- 
gala Vadya to be played. When the husband got up, he was 
surprised to see the decorations and hear the auspicious music, 
and he was wondering whether it was a festival day. When he 
asked his wife the cause for these extraordinary arrangements 
made by her, she said that all along he had never uttered God’s 
name, but the previous night he said “Rama, Rama,” in his 
sleep. So, she was profoundly happy and decided to celebrate 
this event in a befitting manner. 

On hearing this, the husband got perplexed and exclaimed, 
“Have I let out the Lord enshrined in my heart so carefully all 
along? What a pity!” So saying, he breathed his last. 


Start sadhana at an early age 


In this way, pravaha persons may not be uttering God’s 
name or doing external worship, but they may have the thought 
of God enshrined in their heart. Some among the modern youth 
are singing bhajans and participating in nagarsankirthan. 
Looking at this, some elders are questioning, “Why should 
these youth take up this sort of activity in this age? They 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 131 


should do this only after they retire from service, in their old 
age.” This is totally wrong. Remembering God and chanting 
His name should be done without break always, at all places 
and in all situations —Sarvada Sarvakaleshu Sarvatra Hari- 
chinthanam. There is no restriction of time or place for chant- 
ing the divine name. 

You cannot say when, where, and how the end will come 
and the mortal coil will have to be cast off. You will not be 
able to chant the name at that moment. 

(Swami sang a song to convey that it was impossible to 
think of God when the messengers of death were tightening 
their noose around your neck, the body was taken out, and the 
wives and relatives were crying. Only the good deeds that you 
have done previously would come to your rescue. So, you 
should start doing meritorious deeds from the early part of 
your life.) 

There was a priest in a temple who, by virtue of his long 
experience, used to hold the Arathi in one hand and ring the 
bell with the other hand. When he passed away, a new priest 
succeeded him. But this priest could not do both things simul- 
taneously. If one hand was handIng the bell to ring, the other 
hand could not wave the Arthi. If Arthi was done properly, the 
bell could not be made to ring. This was due to lack of prac- 
tice. So, the practice of chanting of God’s name should be 
started from an early age. 


Undertake love of God and service to society 


You may be aware of the way a soldier in the army has to 
take training in all aspects before he can be fit to take part in 
active service at the front. Anyone joining the armed forces, 
whether a dhobi, cook, or sepoy, has to qualify compulsorily in 
two things. One is handling a rifle and the other is marching 
drill. Whatever may be one’s avocation in the army, one 
should have to undergo these two parts of the training. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 132 


Similarly, in the spiritual field, one should compulsorily 
undertake two things, namely, love of God and service to soci- 
ety. These are the two prime components of divine life. They 
help in the realisation of the Divine. 

You have to take up the practice at an early age so that you 
can have the realisation before you leave the world. You do not 
know when the end will come. You should be prepared for it at 
all times. The photographer asks you to be ready when he 
snaps your picture, and he gives you time to ready yourself. 
But the divine cameraman will not give you any notice. You 
should always be ready to meet the situation. 

If you engage yourself in bhajan and daivachintanam 
—keerthanam and smaranam—you will not be caught un- 
awares. Suppose you have a master who has an Alsatian dog at 
the gate and he himself is at the first floor. There are two ways 
of reaching him. One way is to befriend the dog and enter the 
house; the other way is to call out to the master from the 
ground in a loud voice so that he will come out and allow you 
to come in by controlling the dog. Maya (illusion) is the dog. 
God is the master. You either control the maya or chant His 
name and sing His glory so that He will come down. You have 
to treasure Him in our heart, since the heart is His altar. 


God is Hridayanivasa 


Draupadi prayed to Krishna when she was humiliated in 
Duryodhana’s court. She said, “Oh, Dwaraka Vasa, Brindavan 
Sanchara, help me!” She could not get a response, and she be- 
came tired. Finally, she pleaded in a faint voice, “Oh Hriday- 
anivasa (Resident of my heart)! Will you not come to my res- 
cue?” Immediately, Krishna saved her from her trouble. 

On a later occasion, she asked Krishna why He took such a 
long time to respond when she was in distress and prayed to 
Him sincerely. Krishna responded, “You said, Dwaraka Vasa, 
Brindavan Sanchara, etc. I had to respect your words, so I had 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 133 


to go from your heart all the way to Dwaraka and Brindavan, 
which are so far away, and I don’t have a plane to go fast. 
When you said, Hridayanivasa, where I am actually residing, I 
came to your help instantaneously. 

So, everyone should install the Divine in the heart in full 
faith. It is not correct to think that He is only in a mosque, 
church, or temple. The seat of God is the devotee’s heart. That 
is why the Gita says, “Pasyanapicha na pasyathi (though he 
sees, yet he is not conscious of God in the heart). 

Everything you see outside is a reflection of the inner be- 
ing. “Sarvathah Panipadam thath Sarvathokshi Siromukham.” 
All feet, hands, eyes, heads are all His. What does this mean? 
It means that He is in every being. 


God manifests according to your feeling 


One devotee was asking God, “You say You are in me, 
above me, below me. How is that You are not protecting me?” 

God answers, “I am always in you, around you. Don’t look 
for Me externally.” 

The devotee asked, “Are You behind me really?” 

Replied the Lord, “My shadow is your body.” 

When the devotee turned around to see whether God be- 
hind, he could not see Him. He asked, “Are You speaking the 
truth? I don’t find You.” 

God replied, “When you turn back, I too have to turn back, 
So, you could not see Me. You have not understood the Truth.” 

Suppose you stand before a chair; the chair is in front of 
you. If you turn around, the chair is at your back. God mani- 
fests according to your bhava (feeling). When you pray, “Can’t 
you hear my prayers?”, you visualise Him hearing with His 
ears. When you pray, “Can’t You see my suffering?’”, you see 
only His eyes. When you pray, “Why don’t you stay with 
me?”, you hear His footsteps. You have to maintain perfect 
silence. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 134 


Listen to the sound of “Om” from within 


The ancient seers spent their time in listening to the voice 
of God, which is Pranava. Even now, you can experience this. 
Close your ears gently. You will hear the sound Om from 
within. 

God proclaims, “Oh devotee, you are seeing with physical 
eyes and listening with physical ears. Be in utter silence. You 
can listen to the footsteps of God.” Such holy paths have been 
shown by great devotees. One who doesn’t understand this is 
in ignorance. 

Surdas, a great devotee of Krsihna, once went after a 
womand and follwed her to her home. Her husband chastised 
him, saying, “Why have you been given eyes? Is it for this un- 
holy pursuit of another man’s wife? Why don’t you concen- 
trate on God?” 

Immediately, Surdas got enlightened and pierced his eyes 
with thorns of a lime tree close by. He proceeded to Dwaraka 
to Krishna’s temple. On his way, he was about to fall into a 
well. Krsihna came in the form of a cowherd boy and caught 
hold of his hand and asked him, “Where are you going?”. 

Surdas said, “I am going to Dwarka.” 

Krishna said, “I will show you the way and lead you.” 

Next day, they rested in a wayside hut. Krishna wanted to 
go, but Surdas wouldn’t leave him. Surdas put his hand over 
the boy while sleeping and asked the boy to put his hand on 
him. Sparshanam papanasam. Because of this divine touch, he 
was released from all his sins. 

Then Krishna told Surdas, “I am Krishna, to whom you al- 
ways pray. I played this drama to show you My form.” He 
touched Surdas’s eyes, and Surdas got back his sight, beheld 
the divine form, and got into blissful ecstacy. When Krishna 
asked him to retain his vision, Surdas said, “I have seen You; I 
don’t want to see anything else with these eyes. I don’t want 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 135 


my sight. Many people have eyes. Have they seen you? Many 
have ears; they are not fortunate to hear your melodious music. 
I want only jnanachaksus (eyes of knowledge). 

Krishna kept His hand on the head of Surdas, and Surdas 
merged with the Divine. 

No one can know when God will bless! You must consider 
everything as God’s gift and take with pleasure. There was a 
king who cut his finger, and the minister said, “It is for good.” 
The king got annoyed and ordered the minister to be sent to 
prison. The minister accepted it with a smile, saying, “It is also 
for my good.” Later on, it was proved true because, when the 
king went alone to a forest for hunting, he was caught by tri- 
bals to be given for sacrifice. Because the king’s body was not 
perfect, with a portion of a finger absent, he was saved. Later, 
the minister said that if was not in prison, he would have ac- 
companied the king and could have been sacrificed. 

Whatever God does is for the good of the devotees. He is 
selfless. When you have the wish-fulfilling tree in your back- 
yard, why do you go in search of fruits? Pure thoughts of love 
should flow from you to God. Then, love of God will flow to 
you. When you post a registered letter to another person, the 
proof of this letter having reached the addressee is the ac- 
knowledgement slip you get. The proof of sincerity of your 
love will be the flow of God’s grace to you. 

With intense longing for God’s grace, you must wait pa- 
tiently, chanting His name ceaselessly. You will surely per- 
ceive God’s form manifesting before you. 


22 April 1998 
Kodaikanal 


17 


Love and surrender 


The Vedas, sacred texts, and other scriptures 
Cannot help man to cut off the curtain of illusion. 
While man is in front of the curtain, God is behind it. 
The cause is behind and the 
Effect is in front of the curtain. 
[Telugu Poem] 


Embodiments of Love! 


From ancient times, Bharat (India) has treasured the spiri- 
tual wealth and spread the message of Loka samastha sukhino 
bhavanthu all over the world, praying that all people in the 
world should be happy. Today, man has attained considerable 
progress in science and technology, but moral values and 
righteous conduct are on the decline. He has become the slave 
of selfishness. Whatever one thinks, speaks, or does is based 
only on self-interest. Human quality has become rare among 
men, and animal quality is predominant. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 137 


Value of discipline 


Human life is extremely sacred, and it is a matter of shame 
that man is not living up to his ideals. Man today lives as he 
likes without following any discipline. Discipline is needed in 
every aspect to maintain the right course of life: “Na sreyo ni- 
yamam vina.” A river has two banks. Without the banks, the 
river may flow in all directions, flooding the fields and villages 
and causing untold hardship and disaster. If it has banks to 
regulate the course of flow, it will be useful for irrigation. 

In the similar manner, the river of life has to be contained 
between the two banks of eight-lettered axioms. One is 
“Sraddhavan labhate jnanam’ and the other is “Samsayatma 
vinasyathi’’. Both declarations are made by Lord Krishna in the 
Bhagavad Gita. The first one means, “it is only by faith that 
one attains wisdom,” and the second one means, “one who 
doubts will perish.” As long as one has doubt, one cannot 
achieve anything. He who has no doubt and has full faith can 
achieve anything. The river of human life flowing between 
these two banks reaches the goal successfully. 

A tree that needs water is provided water only at the root. 
Though the root cannot be visible to your eyes because it is 
buried under the earth, it is the basis for the tree to thrive. If the 
root is dry, the tree becomes dead. So, you have to safeguard 
the root. 

Similarly, you have to safeguard the root of life, 1.e. you 
need firm faith in the Self. Therefore, these two eight-lettered 
axioms are the essential needs of life. “Samsayatma vina- 
syathi” is comparable to the root, and “Sraddhavan labhate 
Jnanam’” is comparable to the tree of life. You have branches, 
leaves, and components of a tree. The purpose of planting a 
sapling is to get fruit from the tree. The goal of human life is 
purna jnana (perfect knowledge). Total faith is needed to 
achieve this goal. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 138 


Three aspects of Divinity 


One should expand the broad feelings of the heart to foster 
the tree of life to grow and retain its vitality. That is why an- 
cient teachers used to pray, “Annam Brahma, Raso Vishnu, 
Vak Maheswara.” This was the prayer chanted by the ancient 
seers before taking food. Food maintains the energy of the 
body by its essence getting distributed to all parts of the body. 

To safeguard the functions of all the limbs and sense or- 
gans, the mind has to be in fine fettle. For this vak (speech) 
should be truthful and purposeful. Therefore, these three im- 
portant requisites for human life, i.e. body, mind and speech 
(mano-vak-kyam) are treated as the three aspects of divinity 
Brahma, Vishnu and Maheswara. 

Vishnu is all pervasive; so also mind is all-pervasive. It is 
said "Manomoolam idam jagath". Maheswara represents sabda 
or vak (sound). That is why God is described first as Sabda 
Brahmamayi, then Characharamayi, Jyothirmayi, Vangmayi, 
Nithyanandamayi, Parathparamayi, Mayamayi, and Srimayi. 
By expansion of love, we acquire all eight types of divinity. 
Everyone should realize the divinity within. Only then may 
they be considered to lead a true life. 

The body is not just the physical one consisting of all the 
limbs and organs. God has gifted this body to man to discharge 
his dharmic duties. The mind creates the bhavam (feeling or 
thought), which is expressed through the tongue in words and 
done by the limbs in action. Human life is a combination of the 
functions of thought, speech, and action. The Divine is mani- 
fest in man, though many do not realize this. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 139 


Can you limit the One, who created the universe, 
within a frame of picture? 

When even demi-gods cannot understand Him, 
how can a mere mortal understand? 

What name can you give the One, 
who manifests in all names and forms? 

What can you offer to the supreme power 
who has the universe as His stomach? 

One whose effulgence is equal to crores of suns, 
what light can you use for illuminating Him? 


The entire world is a combination of ‘seer’ and ‘seen’ 


We cannot worship such a supreme power in narrow ways. 
Even though He is so vast, you can still comprehend Him in 
the human heart just as you see the outside world in a small 
mirror. He is Hridayavasi. Who are you? Who is He? If you 
enquire, 'I' ,the inner self, is the seer and all this is the seen. 

The entire world is a combination of seer and seen. Many 
people are sitting in this Hall. 'I' am the seer. All the people are 
seen and My body itself is seen by Me. So, 'I' the seer is differ- 
ent from the body that is seen. 'I' is the eternal witness. Let us 
not be carried away by the 'seen’. 

We must make efforts to perceive the 'seer'. We cannot do 
this with physical eyes. We have to develop the 'wisdom eye' 
(Jnana Chakshu) in order to see the 'seer'. It is only through 
inner vision that you can attain liberation and not by your 
physical vision. The Chaithanya (Awareness Principle) is 
prevalent all over the world. But we ignore the Chaithanya and 
visualize jada (inert). 

To understand the truth of spirituality, you may take the 
example of the animals, which get sanctity and become objects 
of worship when they are associated with the Divine. The 
snake, when it is around the neck of Lord Siva, is worshipped 
by all. When it is encountered elsewhere, people do not hesi- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 140 


tate to kill it. Similarly, the mouse, which is the vehicle of Vi- 
nayaka, is an object of worship when it is with Vinayaka, but 
when it is seen in your house, you trap it and try to do away 
with it. When we see the bull made of stone in a Siva temple, 
we worship it. But when we see a bull in daily life, we do not 
hesitate even to beat it. This teaches the lesson that when we 
are in the company of God, we are held in high esteem. 


Develop strong faith that all forms are His 


Sahasraseersha Purushaha sahasraksha sahasrapad (just 
as the limbs are a part of our body, we are all the limbs of the 
body of cosmic form). The cosmic form is of thousands of 
heads, feet, hands, and eyes. All forms are His. If we develop 
strong faith in this, we can understand divinity in its true spirit. 


Is it possible to describe You 
with the limited human intellect? 
You are minuter than atom and 
mightier than the macrocosm. 
You are present in a subtle form 
in all the 84-lakh species. 

You are pervading everywhere. 
Who can describe You? 


There is no question of your searching for truth. It is eve- 
rywhere and in everyone. When you have light in your own 
house, where is the need for going to your neighbor to borrow 
a lamp? Develop the infinite light of love within yourself. 

The light of life is shining with effulgence within you. In 
order to see a light, you do not need another light. In order to 
see the moon, you do not need a torch. Similarly, there is no 
need for any other light to realize the self-effulgent Atma 
within. The light of life is divinity. God says you are a frag- 
ment of His Eternal Self. Every individual is the spark of the 
Divine. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 141 


The three aspects of Saranagathi 


Sachithanandam, who spoke earlier, mentioned about sa- 
ranagathi (surrender). Surrender involves three entities: one is 
the person who surrenders the other the one to whom he sur- 
renders, and the third is the act of surrender. If we analyze 
carefully in the spiritual sense, you have a person, mirror, and 
reflection. When you remove the mirror, the reflection is 
automatically gone. So, you find three minus one becomes one 
only. It is the person only that remains. 

Similarly, prakriti (world) is the mirror, and jeeva (in- 
dividual) is the reflection of the Divine. When prakriti, the 
mirror, is removed, what remains is only one, that is, the Di- 
vine. The individual is only a reflection. When your vision is 
towards prakriti (world), you have duality. When your vision 
is turned inward; you are One, that is, God and nothing else. 
Even Prakriti is the creation of God. When everything is di- 
vine, there is no second. 

This divine is nothing but love, which is in all beings. Love 
is God, live in love. It has no beginning and no end. It is infi- 
nite; you cannot fragment it. All spiritual paths are paths of 
love. The goal is also love. It is that which always exists in this 
world. Never give up love at any time. 

In earthly parlance, jealousy, pride, etc. are evil attributes. 
But if you see them all with love, you will never have hatred. 
There is no question of hatred when there is only one and not 
two. The current of Atma is flowing in all beings as love; you 
have to develop the spirit of love and expand it. 

You should not care about names and forms. See only the 
unity in the diverse forms and names. You will realize the Di- 
vine. Just as the bhramara (humming butterfly) injects the 
humming sound in the insect and turns it into its own form, 
you should concentrate on the Divine and become divine. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 142 


Significance of offering bilva leaf to Lord Siva 


You are Brahma, Vishnu, Maheswara, as already said. Par- 
ents have given you the physical body and name. But the heart 
(spiritual) is given by God. No one else can give this. To have 
a compassionate heart is the attribute of human nature. It is 
giving and forgiving. It is not at all keen on getting anything. 

Develop oneness with love. People do several types of 
sadhana (spiritual exercise) like turning the japamala (rosary 
beads) and meditation. While the body may be still, the mind 
goes about wandering all over! Even a little mosquito disturbs 
you and you strive to kill it while engaged in dhyana (medita- 
tion). 

You should cast off the attachment to the body. Body is the 
temple of God. But God is the indweller. This truth you should 
never lose sight of. Nature is also a manifestation of God. 

The ancients saw the truth that food is Brahma, mind is 
Vishnu, and vak (sound) is Maheswara. Man is a combination 
of these three. That is why when we pray to Siva we say we 
offer the three-fold body to Him just as we offer the bilva leaf 
with three parts. This is the principle of surrender (sa- 
ranagathi). 

Lakshmana is a superb example of the attitude of surren- 
der. When Rama, Sita, and Lakshmana went to the forest and 
reached Chitrakoot, Rama told Lakshmana, “I am feeling tired 
and Sita is also tired. It is better we stay here for some time. 
So, I would like you to put up a cottage in which we can stay 
for a longer duration, if necessary for the whole period of 10 
years. You can put up the cottage in any place of your choice.” 

Hearing these words, Lakshmana felt hurt and bent down 
his head with grief. Noting this, Sita asked Lakshmana, “Why 
are you perturbed, Lakshmana? Your brother did not speak 
anything harsh. Why do you feel so?” 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 143 


Lakshmana said, “Have I ever had any choice of my own? 
I left my mother; wife, and all comforts of life and accompa- 
nied you both to serve. I have surrendered myself to Rama. 
Where is the question of my choice? The command of Rama is 
what I want to carry out. While so, how can I withstand the 
impact of Rama asking me to put up the cottage at a place of 
my choice?” 

Rama realized the sacred feelings of Lakshmana and the 
true attitude of his surrender and pointed out the site himself. 


Shun bad places haunted by bad people 


Such an ardent devotee of Rama, with the attitude of com- 
plete surrender, once suddenly turned hostile and said, “Rama, 
I am leaving You and returning to Ayodhya. Why should I 
come with You? Only you were asked to go to forest. I shall go 
back to Ayodhya to join my wife and mother.” 

Rama was surprised at this unexpected turn in the mind of 
Lakshmana and asked him to wait for a while. Walking away 
some distance, he halted under a tree for shelter. Then 
Lakshmana repented for his lapse and said, “I am sorry, I don't 
want to leave You and go. I do not know why I got such an 
unnatural attitude all of a sudden!” 

Rama said,’ You were then in the region of Surpanakha, the 
demoness. So, your mind wavered. Now we have come out of 
her territory and you are normal.” 

This is a lesson to show that even a great devotee like 
Lakshmana could be upset by traversing the region of a de- 
monic person. Rama saw that Chitrakoot was the seat of rishis 
(sages) and so decided to stay there. 

That is why you should shun bad company and bad places 
haunted by bad people. Discriminate between what is good and 
what is bad, that which gives permanent joy and which is tran- 
sient. Do good deeds. If you surrender to the Atma and be con- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 144 


stantly in touch with it, God will be with you, around you, 
above you and below you. 


23 April 1998 
Kodaikanal 


My mission is to raise the consciousness of 
man to a level at which he neither rejoices nor 
mourns over anything. In that supreme state, one is 
going through rebirth and death each moment, for 
these acts are on and the same, emerging from the 
formless into form and merging from the form into 
the formless. Then, there is no success of adversity, 
no joy or pain. When the devotee attains this One- 
ness, his journey toward Me ceases. For he will be 
with Me endlessly. 


18 


Faith, love, and grace 


One may acquire scholarship in all forms of knowledge, 
and may win over others in any symposium, 
One can fight with great valour in a battle and 
emerge victorious over his rivals, 
One may enjoy all the comforts and convenience 
that the modern world provides, 
One may count the stars in the sky or spell out the 
names of all species of living beings in the world, 
One may master the eight-fold systems of knowledge, 
One can land on the moon. 
But to control the senses, steady the mind and 
turn the vision inward, is well nigh impossible. 
[Telugu Poem] 


In the modern world, every person tries hard to attain 
peace. Peace cannot be attained spiritual percepts nor can it be 
got from market as a commodity. It cannot be acquired even by 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 146 


knowledge of the texts, or a high position in life. Peace can be 
attained only by God’s grace. 

Though man is eager to attain peace, he confronts many 
obstacles in the path. Those who travel by train may be well 
acquainted with the slogan, “Less luggage, more comfort, 
make travel a pleasure.” Now, man is burdening himself with 
limitless desires. Because of this extra heavy luggage of de- 
sires, he finds it extremely difficult to carry on the journey of 
life. By such proliferation of desires, he loses his balance, 
moves far away from his goal, and even tends to go mad. 

It is for this reason that I have been stressing the need for 
ceiling on desires. By limiting your desires, you can attain 
peace to a certain extent. You have to exercise a check on your 
desires and make comforts to get the Grace of the Divine. 


Observe equanimity at all times 


In the modern world, praise and blame, exultation and hu- 
miliation, have become common. Man is elated by praise or 
gets frustrated by blame or criticism. To be elated by praise 
and distressed by blame reflects one’s weakness. To maintain 
equanimity in pleasure and pain or praise and blame is a diffi- 
cult proposition. It cannot be achieved by scholarship. To 
quote an example, sage Vyasa, who was the author of the 
eighteen great epics and the Ithihasas of Mahabharatha and 
who codified the Vedas, was restless and asked Narada for ad- 
vice as to how to overcome this sort of restlessness. Narada 
told Vyasa, “You should not get depressed by blame nor get 
elated by praise. In all situations, equanimity has to be main- 
tained.” One may wonder how this is possible for mankind to 
maintain such equanimity. 

You should ask who is the one that criticises and who 
is the one that is criticised. If you consider that it is the body 
that is criticized, then there is no need to worry because you 
know body is ephemeral and is bound to perish one day or the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 147 


other. It is the container of foul material like urine, fecal mat- 
ter, etc. Why should you get affected by this? You are not the 
body. If it is Atma that is criticized, the same Atma is present in 
both —the person who is criticising and the one that is criti- 
cised. So this means he is criticising himself! 

Both praise and blame pertain only to the body. If you re- 
spond to it, that means you are accepting the contents thereof. 
If he does not receive it, it goes back to the sender. So also, 
you do not react to the abuse or criticism leveled by some one 
else against you. Then it goes back to him. 


What you see is only your own reflection 


The accusation or abuse one makes against you is only a 
reflection of his mind, which is filled with hatred. Krishna 
asked Duryodhana for help. Duryodhana exclaimed, “How is 
it, Krishna, that you are asking for my help? It is only we who 
seek your help.” But Krishna told him, “I want you to go round 
the whole kingdom and find out if there is any good person.” 

Duryodhana set out on his journey and, after going round 
the kingdom, returned to Krishna’s place and informed him, 
“Krishna! I did not find even a single good person anywhere. If 
at all there is any one with some good quality, it must be only 
myself.” 

Krishna summoned Dharmaraja, the eldest son of Pan- 
davas, and asked him to go round the kingdom and find out if 
there was any bad man. Dharmaraja returned after his survey 
of the kingdom and said, “Swami, I could not find even a sin- 
gle bad person. If at all there is any bad quality, it is in me 
only.” This proves that what you see is only your own reflec- 
tion. Since, Duryodhana was essentially filled with wicked 
qualities, he could see the reflection of his own qualities in all. 
The condition of the world you see is dependent only on your 
vision. That is why Buddha said, you should have samyak 
dhrishti (good vision). 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 148 


Total faith is needed in obtaining Divine Grace 


There are so many Vedantins and self-styled scholars who 
preach many precepts but do not practise them. There is a story 
of a pandit who mastered all scriptures and was preaching to 
people. He used to get milk from a milkmaid who came from a 
distant village. Because she was not punctual in delivering 
milk, one day the pandit asked her why she was coming at 
8a.m. one day and at 9 a.m. another day, and not regular, 
which resulted in his puja (worship) being delayed. She said 
she had to cross a small river enroute, for which she had to use 
a boat, and the boatman was giving priority to the more afflu- 
ent customers, making her to wait for the second trip. She said 
this was the reason for her delay. 

The pandit mocked her apparent ignorance, and said, “if 
only you chant the name of God, Om Namo Narayana, you do 
not need the boat at all, and the river will part and give way to 
you. Why do you not adopt this easy method?” 

Because this upadesh (advice) was given by the learned 
pandit, she had full faith in his words and rehearsed God’s 
name as she returned home. Next day, she uttered the name of 
Narayana and got into the river and crossed without any diffi- 
culty, because it gave way. She repeated in the same manner 
every day, and was able to deliver milk in time to the pandit. 

After a few days, the pandit questioned as to how she was 
able to come in time daily. She told him the fact that she was 
following the pandit’s advice, and was able to cross the river 
uttering God’s name. 

The pandit himself had no belief, though he gave the ad- 
vice to the milkmaid. He wanted to test the veracity of her 
statement and proceeded to the river bank next day. He 
chanted the name, but without full faith and got into the river 
folding up his dhothi (lower garment) lest it might get wet, and 
was drowned in the river. This is the fate of a person who 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 149 


preaches but lacks faith in his own preaching. The illiterate 
woman had no doubt at all and had total faith. 

That is why the saying, “You can say a crore of things, but 
to practise is difficult.” 

Ravikumar was telling about his father being cured, though 
he could not get rid of the illness even after 21 operations. The 
cure is due to the total faith of this family. In the drama in 
which Ravi acted, the blind man was approaching Jesus, pray- 
ing Him to give him back his eyesight. Jesus asked, do you 
have faith that I can give you back the eye sight? He said, 
“Yes, I have full faith.” 

Immediately, people have lost faith and belief, which are 
like the two eyes. Some have faith in God but no belief in His 
teachings. Total faith is needed for getting Divine Grace. 


Dharma is one that cannot decline 


Ashok Singhal spoke about the incarnation of an Avatar, 
when there is a decline of dharma. Dharma is one that cannot 
decline. 

Krishna promised that He would protect the sadhus. Who 
are the sadhus? Those that are wearing ochre robes or those 
that hold Gita in their hands and preach are not sadhus. A 
sadhu is one who perceives unity in diversity. He will have 
unity of thought, word, and action. This is called education in 
human values, which is E-H-V. In my opinion, it is 3 H-V. It is 
the unity of head, heart, and hand. It is the combination of 
thought, word, and deed, which is the trinity of humanity. 

If you practise humanness, all obstacles will vanish from 
your path. You should make the positive and the negative 
combine to give an effective result. Divine current is positive; 
body is negative. Atma is positive and body is negative. 

Body is the temple, and the indweller is God. If the temple 
is dilapidated, even if God is inside, people may not visit the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 150 


temple. If the temple is very well kept and no idol inside, it is 
of no use. You must know well the relationship between posi- 
tive and negative. 


Peace is within; outside there are only pieces 


Santhi (peace) is not in external objects. It is within. No 
one can give you this on a platter. It cannot be got by the 
teaching of a preceptor. It has to come from hridaya, that is, a 
compassionate heart. Peace is within; outside there are only 
pieces. Any amount of searching outside cannot give you 
peace. 

Though Divinity pervades everywhere, only in some places 
is its effulgence explicit. Electric current flows through the 
wires. Though it flows through the wires, it is seen only 
through the bulbs or tubes that give light. 

None can deny the existence of Divinity everywhere. For 
example, you stand in front of Me. My form is reflected in 
your eyes and your form is reflected in My eyes. If you know 
the unity of these two, there is no difference. 

When you concentrate on Him you get His look in your 
eyes. If you want God to look at you, you must look at Him. 
People of Bharat (India) have lot of experiences of this type. 

We cannot have a direct perception of the Lord within us; 
we can only experience it. For this, you have to make efforts 
with full faith. If you have good thoughts, which are directed 
toward the Divine, you flourish well. If you entertain wicked 
thoughts, you become wicked. This is the truth that God 
teaches man. If you have good feelings within, the reflection 
will be good outside. You cannot get Peace from the external 
world. It has to come from within. 

When desires become excessive, Atmic conciousness can- 
not be realised. You cultivate desire for tea, coffee, playing 
cards, visiting clubs, watching television, etc. You have to curb 
such desires. Try to reduce taking coffee, tea, and other useless 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 151 


and wasteful pursuits like playing cards, etc. You will find 
within two days that you have become more intelligent and 
happy. Because of such unnecessary desires, you become mad 
and slaves of habits; thereby forgetting your human nature. 


The way to God is devotion and detachment 


Mathi (good sense), gathi (goal), stithi (position), and sam- 
pathi (wealth) are the valuable possessions of maya (illusory 
energy), but they are all lost because of excessive desires har- 
boured. The animal quality is predominant, and human values 
are absent. How can one attain peace with these drawbacks? 

When sage Vyasa requested Narada to advise him as to 
how to get over his restlessness, Narada told him, “You have 
composed so many epics, but you have not progressed in the 
path of realisation. Compile Bhagavatham, describing the 
glory of God and the greatness of devotion.” 

Bhagavathamu (Telugu pronunciation) has five letters: 
bha, ga, va, tha, mu. In this five-letter word, bha stands for 
bhakthi (devotion), ga stands for jnanam (wisdom), va stands 
for vairagya (detachment), tha stands for Thatwam (sacred 
principle), and mu stands for mukthi (liberation). 

The primary need for liberation is bhakthi. It gives shakthi 
(power, energy), and shakthi leads to rakthi, which in turn 
leads to virakthi. Virakthi is the gateway for mukthi (libera- 
tion). When you sow the seed of devotion, wisdom develops, 
which leads us to liberation. Vairagya is to shed raga (attach- 
ment). Bhagavatham shows the way to liberation through de- 
votion and detachment. 

The story of Prahlada occupies an important place in Bha- 
gavatham. His father put him to all types of suffering, like 
rolling him from a hill, throwing him in the deep ocean, tram- 
pling by an elephant, throwing him in a snake pit, and so on. 
He chanted Hari’s name constantly, and no harm could be 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 152 


done to him. His father, Hiranyakasipu, hated Hari and was 
annihilated by Hari. 

In the Ramayana, Ravana abducted Sita in Rama’s ab- 
sence. He hated Rama. By hating God you cannot achieve 
anything. By loving God, you can get everything. 

Prahlada’s heart was filled with Hari’s name. When Hiran- 
yakasipu, his father, sent Chanda and Amarka to teach him 
what is opposed to Divine love, they could not make any im- 
pression on the boy, who maintained his chanting of the name 
of Hari without a break. Since he loved God and was filled 
with devotion, he had no trace of fear; nor did he shed a tear. 


Faith is the basis for curing ailments 


If you constantly chant God’s name, you will get every- 
thing, namely, wealth, wisdom, health, bliss, etc. If you have 
total faith, God will bless you with everything you need. Ravi 
said he was given medicine. That was created by Bhagavan. 

You may question as why Bhagavan builds hospitals when 
He can create medicines and cure the patients. It is because of 
the faith of the people in the treatment. Even if a nurse or doc- 
tor gives an injection of distilled water, patients are happy and 
get cured, because of their faith. So, the Hospital is intended 
for people who have faith in hospitals. Cure is based mostly on 
the faith of the patient. 

God coming in human form is to facilitate people to have 
the proximity of the Divine, so that He can transform them and 
give happiness. Only a human can confer solace to the humans. 
Samepyam (coming closer to God) helps in the final merger 
with the Sayujyam (Divine). Conversation with Bhagavan 
solves problems. His darshan helps in the annihilation of sins 
— Papanasanam. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 153 


Love is God; live in love 


Man should have the three ideals: Daiva preethi (love of 
God), papa bheeti (fear of sin) and sangha neethi (morality in 
society). These ideals will help to uplift the individual, the 
family and the society. In this sacred land, sacred ideals are 
followed by several saints and seers. That is why, in spite of 
several challenges and obstacles, the cultural heritage of 
Bharat (India) is still maintained. It is mysterious, wonderful 
and immortal. 

We have become slaves to the Western culture and have 
neglected our own highly-valued culture. The Westerners are 
now showing respect for our culture and are adopting the cul- 
ture in large measure. It is their faith in Bharat’s culture that 
has stimulated them to adopt this culture. Bharathiyas (Indi- 
ans) should realise the merits of their own culture and stop ne- 
glecting it. 

Our culture teaches that there is one religion, the religion 
of love, and one caste, the caste of humanity. Our culture is 
based on love, which is latent in everyone, whether theist or 
atheist or nationalist. There can be no one without love. 

We commonly see how the cow licks the new born calf 
with so much tenderness that the calf gets up only after this 
maternal touch. It cleans the calf. Cleanliness is Godliness. Pu- 
rity should be developed, which encourages unity and leads to 
Divinity. But you have only enmity and community; these are 
animal and demonic qualities. 

Man must try to elevate himself to the Divine state and not 
descend to the animal and demonic states. “Sathyam vada; 
dharmam chara (Speak the truth; do righteous duty)” is the 
Vedic injunction. It is easy to speak the truth. It is very difficult 
to tell a lie and sustain it. By speaking the truth, you are laying 
the foundation for the wall of dharma. You can have swanthi 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 154 


(peace) through this. Develop the principle of love. Love is 
God. Live in Love. 


25 April 1998 
Kodaikanal 


If you must bring the power from the power- 
house to your residence to illumine your place, 
you have to put up poles at regular intervals 
and connect the house to the power-house with 
cables. So too, if you must win the Grace of 
God, do sadhana (spiritual exercises) at regu- 
lar timings and connect yourself with God by 
the cable of smarana (remembering the Lord). 


— Baba 


19 


Install Divinity in the heart 


In this world that you behold, 
there is the infinite awareness pervading everywhere. 
It is the Atmic principle. 
It is passing through the entire universe 
just like a thread passes through the precious gems 
to keep them together in the chain 
[Telugu Poem] 


“MAMAIVAMSO Jeevaloke Jeevabhoothas-sanathanah” 
declares Lord Krishna in the Bhagavad Gita. Thus the ideal is 
set for the entire world that all beings are sparks of the Eternal 
Divinity. Without understanding the import of this great truth, 
many aspirants are suffering from anxieties and worries, bereft 
of self-confidence. Those who are sparks of Divinity have no 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 156 


reason to get into grief at all. The Divine has no worry or grief. 
He is Eternal Bliss Himself! How then can His sparks be sub- 
ject to worries? It is only due to the non-realisation of their real 
nature that people get worried. They are carried away by the 
momentary and transient worldly comforts and ultimately 
plunge themselves into grief. 

This is nothing but sheer animal quality. A compassionate 
heart is the natural feature of human being. Therefore, what is 
the use of reading the scriptural texts? What is the use of 
studying the Bhagavad Gita without making any effort to put 
the teachings into practise? 


Smarana and Anusmarana 


Arjuna asked Krishna, “Why are you putting us to this har- 
rowing experience of fighting the battle, and why have you 
burdened us with family problems and other difficulties, while 
we have been always following the righteous path and are de- 
voted to You?” 

Krishna smilingly replied, “Oh Arjuna, you made me sit on 
your chariot as a charioteer. This chariot is after all susceptible 
to destruction. You have not made Me sit in your heart, which 
is the eternal chariot. That is mantra, whereas this physical 
chariot is yantra (machine). Yantra has no life, while mantra 
has the life force. You say that you think of Me. This is only 
smarana, and not anusmarana — smarana is time-bound, while 
anusmarana 1s constant contemplation, beyond time and space. 
If you do anusmarana, you will experience Divinity within.” 
Krishna said, “Maam anusmara! Youdhyacha” Think of me 
even in the battle-field and fight. You will have no trouble at 
all. 

Arjuna asked Krishna, “How can I constantly think of you? 
I have to perform my duties to my family and rule the king- 
dom.” Krishna said, “No doubt, these are your rightful duties. 
You have to take of your wife and children and discharge your 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 157 


responsibilities given by God. But when you do your duties 
thinking of Me, you will have no difficulties.” 


Desire is deadly, detachment is divine 


There are two ways in which you do your duties. One is 
apeksha, that is being desirous of results, which is worldly. 
Nirapeksha is doing duty without any desire for the result. 
Apeksha is marakam (deadly bondage), Nirapeksha is thara- 
kam (liberation). 

Man is traveling in these two paths. Let us take an exam- 
ple. The principal of a college is transferred to another place. 
As long as he was the principal of the present college, he was 
in charge of all the furniture, equipment in laboratories and 
other appurtenances. He cannot take any of these things with 
him, since they belong to the Government. 

But, when he vacates his dwelling place, which might be a 
rented house, he loads all the things in the lorry and takes them 
away to the new place. Even old chappals, broomsticks, and 
similar items he will not leave behind. While he delightfully 
leaves behind the equipment and things in the college, he takes 
away all his belongings from the house. The sense of “mine” 
makes him collect all these. 

What is associated with attachment is marakam ajnd what 
the principal leaves behind without attachment is tharakam. He 
is only a temporary trustee and custodian for the safe upkeep 
of the college property. 

Similarly one should do their duty in the world with de- 
tachment. If you go on doing with attachment to the object, 
you are acting under illusion. You must understand the princi- 
ple of tharakam. Use the gifts of nature to the maximum, but 
all the while do not forget that it is only temporary and you 
cannot claim permanent ownership of any. Living in the mun- 
dane world, you should not become a slave of attachment, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 158 


which will cause restlessness. All materials of creation belong 
to God. All beings are His belongings, as all are sparks of the 
Divine. With this attitude you have to discharge your duties. 


God’s gift is affluence; world’s gift is poverty 


Man is experiencing trouble because he is not contented 
with his lot. Thinking of the past and worrying about the fu- 
ture, man becomes restless. 

God is the embodiment of love. Love can be attained only 
by love. Love knows no doubt at all. Divine love is selfless. 
Where there is selfishness, there is fear. Love has no fear. It 
does not expect any reward. Love is in all. Tread the divine 
path of love. You cannot experience this as long as your heart 
is filled with selfishness. Love of God always gives and never 
receives. Worldly love always receives and never gives. Spiri- 
tual love gives, and goes on giving. Worldly love never gives, 
but is only ready to receive with full of greed. 

In my opinion, in the ephemeral world, it should not be a 
one-way traffic. You have to receive from God and give to the 
world. It is a pity that man never follows this. And always keen 
only to receive with no trace of giving. Hence man suffers. To 
receive from God is a true affluence. To get from the world is a 
symbol of poverty. 

Buddha stated that the richest man in the world was not the 
one like his father, who was an emperor, but one who is con- 
tented with what he has. You have to check your desires and 
put a ceiling on them. One who has multiple desires is poor. 
Only by controlling desire you can reach the goal. 

In the spiritual path, one may follow many ways. The state 
President, Krishnamurthy, mentioned about sravanam and 
keerthanam (listening and singing about God). Though these 
are different types of devotions, there are some stories per- 
taining to them that create doubts. We have so many names in 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 159 


the world. Brahma, Vishnu, Siva, Rama, and Krishna, and so 
on. No one has seen them in human form. This created some 
doubts in people from abroad. They are the qualities in every 
one. Vishnu represents the sathvic or pious quality; Brahma 
representsthe rajasic or passionate quality; and Siva represents 
the thamasic or negative quality. 


Silence is Easwara 


Siva is present in everyone as ardhanareeswara (half-male 
and half-female). He has his eyes opened partly. If the eyes 
open fully, it will cause the destruction of the world. If the eyes 
are closed, one gets sleep. So his eyes are half-open, concen- 
trating on the tip of the nose. You find that most of the pictures 
show Easwara (another name for Siva) in a meditative pose, 
seated in padmasana (lotus posture), with his partly-opened 
eyes concentrating on the tip of the nose. This is the right type 
of posture in meditation. 

Siva is described as the one with moon on His head, the 
river Ganga flowing through His ears, snakes being wound 
around His wrists as bangles, and so on. He is one who takes a 
form without human quality. He is in the form of a linga (egg- 
shaped form of Siva). “Leeyathe gamyathe ithi lingam (Linga 
is one that takes you to the goal and liberates you).” 

Vishnu is the sustainer. Man meets with a lot of obstacles 
in the devotional path. He helps you to overcome these obsta- 
cles and takes you to the goal safely. 

Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva are all-pervasive. They are eve- 
rywhere. They transcend time and the gunas (qualities). 

Vishnu has the shankha (conch), symbolizing sound, and 
the chakra (discus), symbolizing the wheel of time. Both 
sound and time come under the control of God. Sound comes 
from the navel. So, Brahma the primordial sound is depicted as 
born out of the navel of Vishnu. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 160 


Silence is Easwara. That is why you generally see Siva 
seated in the posture of meditation. You must discern the unity 
of the three different aspects of God. Sound, time, and energy 
are all under the control of God. Siva is described as Trinethra, 
Trishula, and Trigunatheetha (beyond the three gunas, three 
eyed, and with a trident). These have inner significance. 

Man has two eyes. But Siva is said to have three eyes. The 
significance is that man knows only past, present, whereas 
Easwara can see the past, present, and the future too. It does 
not mean that Siva has a third eye on his forehead. This is the 
artificial imagination of the people. God is one and but de- 
scribed in different ways. Jeeva, the individual being, and God 
are one. Daiva is Jeeva and Jeeva is Daiva. 


As you think, so you become 


When Swami says, “You are God,” many people may feel 
perplexed. When you tell yourself “I am God,” you will breed 
only good thoughts. You become what you think. Darwin 
thought of the form, which he propounded as evolution of man. 
Ratnakara (later hailed as Valmiki) thought of Rama and had 
Rama always in his heart. Prahlada constantly thought of Hari 
and had Hari’s vision. When you think you are good and have 
good thoughts, you will not do bad deeds. You will think good, 
see good, and do good deeds. If you think you are separate 
from God, you can never merge. God is Atma within you. He 
is the conscience. 

I often tell the students about four F’s: Follow the master 
(Conscience), Face the Devil (that is, desire for money), Fight 
to the End, and Finish the Game. Finishing the game is mukthi 
(liberation). You have taken human birth and you have entered 
the sacred human life. You have to attain divinity in your life 
time. There is nothing more valuable than this. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 161 


By making appropriate efforts, you can accomplish any- 
thing, and by contemplating on God you get divine strength. 
Because of the monkey mind, you entertain doubts. 

When Krishna was a child, once there was a heavy down- 
pour. Krishna asked all the people to come under the Govard- 
han Hill, which he would lift and make a canopy of. Some 
people doubted how the small boy could lift a hill and did not 
want to come under His shelter. All those who doubted and did 
not come under the shelter died, while all those under 
Krishna’s shelter survived duly protected by Him. 


Avatar’s pranks have an inner purpose 


Balarama once complained to his mother, Yasodha, about 
Krishna, that he was eating mud. The intention of Balarama 
was to make known to the world the Divinity of Krishna. It 
should not be construed as an action taken by him to get 
Krishna punished. 

Yasodha asked Krishna why he persisted in taking butter 
from other houses and went to the extent of eating mud, when 
she had so many delicious things at home for him. So saying, 
she gave a slap on Krishna’s cheek. Krishna questioned his 
mother, “why are you punishing me, mother? Am [ a fool, or a 
child to eat mud?” He asked her to look into his mouth, which 
he opened wide. 

To her astonishment, she saw the whole universe in his 
mouth. She exclaimed, “Is it Vishnu Maya? Is it a dream? Am 
I Yasodha? What I saw was amazing. Was it true?” she real- 
ised Krishna was not an ordinary child. 

On another occasion, when Krishna asked Balarama 
whether their mother was at home, Balarama retorted, “Is Ya- 
sodha your mother? No. She is fair. Nanda is fair, but you are 
dark in complexion.” 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 162 


Krishna complained to Yasodha and enquired about this. 
She said, “What Balarama says is true. You are the son of 
Devaki. I have no male child at all.” 

When God assumes human form, some people have to suf- 
fer. Without this, Divinity cannot be recognized. Sugarcane 
has to be crushed to get juice, and it has to be boiled and proc- 
essed to get jaggery or sugar out of it. Sugar can be used in 
coffee or tea or cool drinks or to make sweets of different 
types. When you consume it, you get joy. 

Parents of Avatars also have undergone suffering. Devaki 
was lamenting that though she was the mother who gave birth 
to Krishna, Yasoda was enjoying His childhood pranks. Simi- 
larly, Kausalya, the mother of Rama, was also lamenting over 
the separation of Rama, who had to go to the forest for 14 
years. 

Why did Rama go to the forest? He wanted to demonstrate 
to the world that one has to follow the words of his father, 
however difficult it may be. The Avatar (incarnation) has to do 
so many things, which may not be liked by some. 

Last night, showers came, and there were hailstones also in 
the rain. Though the hailstones may hurt people, they too con- 
tain only rain drops. They are not different. When you experi- 
ence some troubles, you should take them as hailstones which 
contain the water of love of God. Whatever tests that God 
gives you, it is out of love only. It is wrong to worry about 
them, as they are gifts of God. You should remember always 
that you are a spark of the Divine. You should resist the appar- 
ent obstacles and accomplish your tasks. 


Install Divinity in your heart 


Each person likes some types of sweets. One may like 
laddu, another may like burfi, yet another jilebi. Whatever may 
be the name and form of the sweet, the common thing in all 
these is sugar. Similarly, each one may do sadhana (spiritual 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 163 


exercise) in his own way. You have no business to comment or 
criticize them. It is his or her choice. But all lead to the same 
goal. 

You should approach everything with divine thoughts. We 
have a large number of devotees assembled here, many from 
different countries abroad. Their names and forms are differ- 
ent. Their languages and dialects may be different, but Divinity 
is common in all. You may choose the name and form of Jesus, 
Easwara, Rama, Krishna, and so on. Whatever the name, God 
is one. “Om Ithyekaksharam Brahma (Brahman is the one let- 
ter word “Om’’).” 

You hear the harmonium being played in the bhajan. The 
sruthi is one. When you press the different reeds, you get the 
different sounds, sa, ri, ga, ma, pa, da, ni — the seven swaras. 
But the air that passes through the box and causes the sound is 
one. Install the Divinity in your heart. As Krishna told Arjuna, 
make God sit in your heart, the inner chariot. There He is 
Mantra Swarupa, the form of sacred sound, and not yantra, 
which has no life force. Mantra is life. God is Mantra Swarupa 
and Hrudayavasi (indweller in the heart). If you want to see 
God outside, your effort is an exercise in futility. Outward look 
is that of the animal. You should develop an inward vision. 
Then you can realise God. 


“If you cannot oblige, speak obligingly”’ 


When you converse with others, you should do so with re- 
spect. You should not use harsh words. “If you cannot oblige, 
speak obligingly,” is the golden rule you should follow. When 
you salute others, it goes to God. When you criticise or abuse 
another person, that also goes to God. You must discourage 
and control the emergence of bad qualities. When you are in a 
bad or an angry mood, keep silent. Do not exchange words, 
which cause the anger to multiply. That is why we say, “Om 
Santhi, Santhi, Santhi” at the end of the bhajan. Why three 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 164 


times and not four times? It is to cover the three entities: body, 
mind, and Atma. You should have santhi (peace) in all the 
three levels. 


Love is Selfless 


If you do not keep your body healthy, you cannot have 
peace mentally. The ancient sages and maharishis have experi- 
enced the bliss of the Divine and gave us their wisdom, which 
they could achieve after penance without any break. They have 
said “Vedhaham Etham Purusham Mahantham, Aditya Var- 
nam Thamasah Parasthath.” They have described what they 
actually experienced, and addressed the humanity thus: “We 
have seen God with the effulgence of one thousand suns, be- 
yond the darkness of ignorance.” 

Thamas (laziness, inertia) represents body and mind. Only 
if you go beyond the body and the mind can you experience 
the Divine. He is the conscience. That is why I always advise 
you to follow the conscience. Body and mind are negative, 
while Atma is positive. 

Prema is positive. This is the most essential thing. Without 
this, life is useless. Live in pure and selfless love. Love is 
selfless. Self is loveless. You get light as soon as you put on 
the switch. You realise the Divine, once you put on the switch 
of love positively. 

When you recognise Divinity in everyone, that itself is the 
best sadhana (spiritual exercise). Modern spiritual preachers 
are not considering the welfare of the world. They seek their 
own welfare selfishly. Your prayer should be for the welfare of 
society. 

What is the form of society? It has no special form. The 
form of its members constitutes the society. When you pray for 
the happiness of all, you are also part of it. If you pray for 
yourself, that is selfishness, and you cannot survive without 
society. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 165 


If you purify your heart you can see the reflection of God 
therein, as you see your own reflection in a mirror. 


26 April 1998 
Sai Sruthi, Kodaikanal 


There are three types of karma: past, present and 
future. Present karma must continue. It is like the 
carriage behind which is a trail of dust. If the car- 
riage stops, the dust will settle on it. A doubt might 
be that the carriage cannot forever continue so as 
to be ahead of its dust. But the carriage need not 
always travel on a dusty road. It can get on the 
surfaced highway where there is no dust. The 
highway is equivalent to the grace of God. 

— Baba 


20 


Love is the essence of divine life 


The entire humanity wants to enjoy a trouble free life 
With a high standard of living and prosperous life. 
But they do not have the desire of wisdom, 
Good behaviour, and devotion to God. 
What more can I tell this august audience 
Of good seekers of Divinity! 

[Telugu Poem] 


Today, you see all over the world a variety of forms, mate- 
rial objects of various types and multifarious functions, and 
people in different conditions. 

There is a proliferation of scientists and scholars engaged 
in research and experiment in several fields. There is nothing 
that is not subjected to investigation. The person, who investi- 
gates and comprehends all external objects and happenings, 
does not know anything about himself. 

Winston Churchill once stated that man has conquered all 
but has not conquered himself. Man knows everything around 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 167 


him, but he does not know his own reality. What is the use of 
knowing all, if one does not know about himself? Having at- 
tained the sacred human life, if he does not sustain himself or 
maintain purity of the heart, his life becomes a waste. 

If tigers and jackals enter the stable where cows are shel- 
tered, what will happen? The human heart is a place where 
truth, love, and peace are reigning. If the jackal of hatred and 
the tiger of anger and jealousy enter this peaceful heart, what 
will happen to the pious cows of Love, Peace, and Truth? Man 
is deprived of his natural pious disposition of peace by the in- 
trusion of wicked thoughts. The wicked qualities of jealousy, 
anger, and hatred are increasing amongst men. While so, how 
can you expect good qualities and human values to be reflected 
in them? 

If a person builds a house, he provides door to facilitate the 
entrance of his friends and relatives. He will not like the street 
dogs and monkeys to enter through these doors. The body is 
the temple of God. It has several doors. It is described as the 
city of nine gates — Navadwara Puri. Merely because there 
are sO many entrances, you cannot allow all and sundry to en- 
ter inside. But man is allowing the evil qualities to enter, with 
the result, his natural good qualities are in peril. Love is the 
basic human quality. 


Three categories of love 


The love that a human being possesses can be classified 
into three categories. The first one is swartha or selfish love, 
the second one is anyonya, and the third is pavartha or su- 
preme love. 

The first category pertains to those who think only of their 
happiness, comfort, and pleasure, not in the least caring about 
others. The second category pertains to those who think of 
their own family and seek the welfare of those whom they con- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 168 


sider as their own. The third category pertains to those who 
wish that everyone in the society should be happy. “Lokas- 
samastha-sukhino-bhavanthu’ is the prayer of this category of 
people. This is the supreme love. 

The first category may be compared to the light in a single 
room, which will illumine only that room. The second one is 
comparable to moonlight ,which helps you see things, but not 
very clearly. It gives scope for doubt. For example, you may 
see a rope and mistake it for a snake or a stump for a person in 
the not-so-bright-moon-light. The third category is like sun- 
light, which helps you to see everything clearly without any 
scope for doubt. 

If you have a spiritual outlook, you will not have love re- 
stricted to yourself and your family alone. Anyonya love is 
love shown only to members of your family or relatives. In 
fact, all are your relatives, in the broader sense. If you follow 
the principle of Atma, you will consider all as yours since the 
same Atma is effulgent in all beings. All are children of God, 
and everything happens as per the divine command or will. 


God is the father of all; all are His children 


For example, suppose an elderly person travels in a train 
with his children, he has the tickets for all of them, and he tells 
them not to get down any where in the middle of the journey 
but want for him to get down, when they too can do so. 

The children get attached by the several eatables that are 
sold on the platform in some stations enroute, and have a 
strong desire to get down and buy them. But they restrain 
themselves from getting down, because they may be in trouble 
if the train starts and they are left behind since the tickets are 
not with them. The eldest of the children tells them, “As per 
father’s command, we cannot get down as we like. The tickets 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 169 


are with the father, so we will be in trouble if we get down and 
are unable to re-enter before the train starts.” 

God is the father of all. All are His children proceeding on 
the journey of life. God has told us, “Follow My command, 
and do not get down anywhere you like.” 

The pity is, no one follows His commands in the world. 
God has the tickets. So we are facing problems. Those who 
travel by train would have seen goods wagons bearing a 
painted mark like, “Return 5-98.” This indicates that the 
wagon should be returned to the workshop on the due date for 
attention. It is only the station master who knows this and takes 
action. 

In the case of humanity, God is the Master who knows 
when each one has to return (it is not painted here as in the 
case of goods wagon). Only the master has to worry about it. 

We start worrying about our return because of our weak- 
ness. God is the supreme authority, and everything happens 
according to His will. But man proudly says, “I have done it,” 
and hence he is in trouble. You must realise that nothing hap- 
pens without His Will. 


Cultivate good thoughts; do not slacken your efforts 


Those who believe in the Divine Will and carry on every- 
thing with the feeling that they are only instruments in His 
hands will find life happy, while those who do not believe will 
find life miserable. The former are punyathmas (people who 
earn merit) while the non-believers are to be deemed as 
apathmas (sinners). The merit or sin arises only out of our ac- 
tions. 

When wicked thoughts enter humans they become worse 
than wild animals. They will harm the soft heart, which is 
comparable to cows. You have to drive the wild animals of evil 
qualities out and safeguard the cow-like good nature that you 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 170 


are endowed with. There should be no delay in this. There is a 
saying that if there is long delay in consuming, even nectar be- 
comes poison. The moment wicked thoughts enter you should 
chase them out and cultivate good thoughts, good sentiments 
and good feelings. 

Sath is that which is changeless and is constant in all the 
periods of time — past, present, and future. You have to de- 
velop this sath. This is true sadhana (spiritual pactice). In 
spiritual practise you should never allow evil thoughts to gain 
entry into your mind. 

Suppose you are winding several meters of thread in a 
stick. As you continue to wind, the ball of thread becomes big- 
ger and bigger. If you slacken in your action and let the thread 
slip from your hands, the whole thing will unwind and spread 
all over, making all the efforts a waste and compelling you to 
start the process all over again. Similarly, a little lapse in con- 
centration in sadhana will thwart your effort. You should 
maintain equanimity at all times, whether you get pleasure or 
pain or profit or loss. 


Thyaga is yoga 


Man should practise devotion and sacrifice by which alone 
the country can prosper. Politics without sacrifice and devotion 
without love are practically useless. In order to be happy, one 
must pray for the happiness of all and should be prepared to 
sacrifice for the sake of society and the welfare of the world. 
The spirit of sacrifice is absolutely essential for liberation. 
Thyaga is yoga, and yoga is also doing one’s duty effectively. 
Pathanjali says that yoga is control of the, mind. One should 
know oneself first, before knowing about other things in the 
world. 

Annie Beasant said, “People say every seeker is searching 
for God. It is wrong. God is all-pervasive. Where is the ques- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 171 


tion of searching for that which is pervading everywhere? In 
fact, God is in search of a truly good devotee.” 

Who is a good devotee? One with sadachar (good charac- 
ter), Sath-bhavana (good feelings) and sath-pravarthana (good 
action) can be termed as a good devotee. It does not mean that 
one who sings bhajan is good. Even a tape recorder, when the 
bhajan tape is played, repeats the bhajans. But it is lifeless 
and is only a mechanical reproduction. One who sings bhajan 
should do so with full heart. Every word should reflect love, 
since the heart is the seat of love. Atma is prema (love). It is 
Brahman. It is within you. The whole Cosmos is Brahman. 
Where is the question of searching for God? 


Aspire to be good and not merely great 


Last evening, I was telling the boys that they should aspire 
to be good people and not great men. If you are good, all will 
respect you. If you are great, only those who are selfish will 
seek your favours. If you are great, goodness may not be there. 

Who is great and who is good? One who finds divine qual- 
ity in every one is good. One who finds only human quality in 
the Divine is great. Ravana considered Rama, the Divine In- 
carnation, as human. He saw only the human form and not the 
Divinity embodied in the form. But Rama saw Narayana in all 
creatures. The mirror of prithivi (world) reflects the Divine in 
every being. 

God has given the mirror of prithivi to humanity to correct 
themselves and perceive the reflection of Divine in all. But 
man keeps the mirror in front of another, and sees his reflec- 
tion alone. 

An innocent cowherd was sitting between two hillocks and 
played his flute and heard his own echo. He could not under- 
stand this and complained to his mother that another man was 
imitating his musical notes. His, mother accompanied the boy 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 172 


next day nd found the truth that it was only the echo of his own 
music that he heard. 


Vision of the true Self 


Sea is water, earth is mud, and the body is flesh. Every- 
thing is only reflection, resound, and reaction. This is the effect 
of nature. Body is prakriti (nature). You have to control it. If 
you control the body, senses, and the mind you will see the 
Atma (the true Self). 

If you only see the body, you become bestial and demonic. 
If you see body, mind, and Atma, you become human. When 
you see only Atma, you become Divine. You have all these 
three entities in human life. Gradually, you should give up at- 
tachment to the body and mind, so that you can realise Atma, 
which is the goal of human life. You must have full faith that 
everything is Daiva Sankalpa (Divine Will). 

You must resist all challenges and play the game of life 
and come victorious. :ife is a challenge, meet it; life is a game, 
play it; life is love, enjoy it; life is a dream, realise it. 

Do not be discouraged by obstacles. Never give up your ef- 
forts, nor even slacken. If you get confused, the fuse of heart 
will go. You have doubt only when you do not know the truth. 
Once you know the truth that you are Atma, there is no room 
for doubt at all. 

All truth is contained in the essence of Prema thathwa (Di- 
vine Love). It is the essence of all essences: It is Premasara. 
There is no room for doubt in this. 

Through love, you can resist any challenge. Seeing good, 
hearing good, talking good, thinking good, and being good is 
the best way of realising Divinity. Strengthen your faith. One 
with doubt can never progress. No one with faith in God has 
ever come to ruin. You should consider that whatever happens 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 173 


to you is for your own good and is a divine gift. If you have 
this full faith, there is no room for fear in your life. 


28 April 1998 
Sai Sruthi, Kodaikanal 


There is a difference between the benefit of grace 
and the benefit of bhakthi, of devotion. A patient 
with a pain is given a sedativ,e which dulls the 
pain. But grace is an operation that does entirely 
away with pain. Make no mistake; grace does en- 
tirely away with karma. It is like a medicine that is 
labeled, ‘good until 1968’. If used in 1973, the 
medicine is entirely ineffective. The body is the 
medicine . God puts a date on the ‘medicine’; so it 
is not effective. 

— Baba 


21 


Love is God’s fragrance 


From the time one gets up in the morning till one goes to 
bed in the night, one is struggling for one’s livelihood and is 
spending time studying various types of books, forgetting the 
Divine. What happiness can one derive from such a life? Oh 
man, have you ever thought of this? Man also strives in differ- 
ent pursuits in order to get blissful happiness. Can one get bliss 
from objects of the outer world, or is it available in a particular 
place or region, or is it possible to get it from some persons? 
Nobody seems to have pondered over this. Bliss is present eve- 
rywhere. What is the point in searching for it in a particular 
place or object or person. 

God is immanent in all living creatures, all objects, and all 
places, without exception. This is very well-explained in the 
Bhagavad Gita. Einstein, the famous scientist, has given a new 
name “psychotronic” for this. He said, “How can I call God, 
who is omnipresent?” 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 175 


God is hidden from the physical eye in all beings, in all 
places as Cosmic energy. We are in constant search of God, 
within the limitation of a compact form. There is bliss, but it 
has no form. Love is there but it has no form. How do we ex- 
perience that which has no form? 

Love may not have form, but you can see this love ex- 
pressed through a form, which exudes real love. Here we see a 
flower. Even without seeing the form, you are able to enjoy the 
fragrance of the flower. When we experience the fragrance, we 
can only surmise that the form of the fragrance is the flower. 


Experience love, the fragrance of God 


Ancient sages who experienced the fragrance of the Divine 
were searching for the form. Sages who had renounced every- 
thing made lot of sacrifices to search for the form of the divine 
fragrance, but they were unable to experience it. They enquired 
about this in forests and bushes. They could not find the 
source. Some have left it in the half-way stage, being satisfied 
with the fragrance that they had experienced. 

One must not give up in any pursuit, once one is deter- 
mined to take up the same. When you have asked for a certain 
thing, do not give up till it is achieved. When you have thought 
about a particular scheme of action, do not rest till it is com- 
pletely carried out. This was the type of determination that the 
sages adhered to in achieving the objective to the extent that 
the Lord should at last get “disgusted” and grant their request. 
To go back from the pursuit undertaken is not the quality of a 
true devotee. 

With such relentless determination, they were able to find 
out the flower from which the fragrance emanated. Thus, they 
experienced the fragrance of bliss. Some of the seekers could 
not experience the fragrance due to severe “cold”. Those who 
could not experience the fragrance were termed atheists. Even 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 176 


though they had the nose they could not experience the fra- 
grance of divine Bliss. They are unfortunate people. 

But those who were able to experience this bliss exclaimed 
in ecstasy “Vedahametham Purusham Mahantham (We have 
realised the supreme personality of the Godhead).” How to re- 
alise this? In every human being, the bliss of Ananda is ema- 
nating from the hearts, just as fragrance comes out of a flower. 
The heart is complete and full. “That is Full, this is Full, and 
when you take out the Full from the Full, what remains is also 
Full,” says Veda. What is the totality of Nature? 


Perfection is total and divine 


For example, you buy one kilogram of jaggery. From this 
you take a bit and put it in your mouth. This tastes sweet. Take 
some pieces and mix it in coffee or water, they become sweet. 
All the pieces are equally sweet. The balance left is also sweet. 
So the quality of sweetness is not reduced when you take bits 
out of the full piece of jaggery. Every bit is equally sweet. 

Totality relates only to one quality. There was one expert 
artist by the name Anthony who used to make violins. He used 
to take one year to make one violin. One of his friends asked 
him how he could earn enough to take care of his wife and 
children if he took one year to make one violin. He said, “God 
is the embodiment of totality. Therefore whatever we do 
should be totally perfect. On the selfish ground of carrying on 
a living, I cannot compromise on the quality of perfection. The 
only way to please God, who is the personification of perfec- 
tion, is to stick to the principle of perfection in its totality, so 
that God will confer Bliss on us.” 

This is how the artist taught his friend. Whatever little job 
we may undertake, we should do it with perfection. God is per- 
fection. We are part of the Divine. We should also stick to this 
principle of perfection in its totality. Because of his scrupulous 
adherence to his principles, Anthony earned great fame and his 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 177 


violins are famous even today bearing the reputation as An- 
thony’s Violin. 

In order to experience Divinity, we should have totality, 
which is unity and not multiplicity. We are considering the one 
as many instead of unity in diversity. We only divide and do 
not make efforts towards unity. 


All are one; be alike to everyone 


The tailor has got the instruments of scissors and needle. 
What does he do with them? You give him a single piece of a 
two metre cloth and ask him to stitch a shirt. The tailor takes 
the scissors and cuts the cloth into several pieces like those for 
collar, arms, etc. The single piece of cloth is cut into bits. The 
tailor joins them all and stitches them into a shirt. It is the pair 
of scissors that he uses to cut the cloth into pieces. Then he 
uses the needle to stitch them together. 

We divide the one God into many, like Rama, Krishna, Je- 
sus, Allah, Zoraster. But with love, we should bring them to- 
gether. We should say, “All are one, my dear son; Be alike to 
everyone.” This is the saying of Jesus. When he was put to suf- 
fering, the disciples were feeling very sad. But they went on 
accusing the head priest and the priest community. The gover- 
nor who placed that order was also criticised. To teach this 
principle of unity, Jesus said,“All are one. We should not criti- 
cise anybody or blame anybody.” It is love that will not deride 
or hate anybody. 

There is a gulf of difference between worldly love and di- 
vine love. Divine love does not ask for anything. It is selfless. 
It is not mindful of praise or blame. Love is desireless and 
continuous; you will not find even a trace of selfishness. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 178 


Worldly love and divine love 


Divine love always gives and never receives. Worldly love 
only receives and does not give. It is full of selfishness and ex- 
pects a reward in return. Divine Love does not desire any re- 
turn. Love is equal only to love. Nothing else can be equated to 
love. This unparalleled and incomparable Premathathwa (prin- 
ciple of love) is only divine love. 

How is worldly love? You all know about it. Suppose, a 
boy gets married and few days after the event, they go for a 
walk in the park. He sees a thorn in the path. Immediately, out 
of his love for his newly wed wife he shouts, “thorn! thorn!” 
and pulls his wife away, lest she hurt her feet by stepping on 
the thorn. At that moment, out of the consideration for his wife 
as his life, he pulls her out of the risk of stepping over the 
thorn. 

The same couple walks in another path six months later. 
The husband notices a thorn in the path. What does he do now? 
He warns her to watch her step and be careful. Some more 
months later, when a similar situation arises, the same person 
in an indignant tone asks his wife, “have you no eyes, can you 
not see the thorn?” 

Thus worldly love goes on diminishing in its magnitude as 
time passes. Divine love never diminishes but is constant and 
changeless under all circumstances, and after any number of 
years, even after several aeons and births. 

The Lord’s love is sweet love. His words are sweet. Eve- 
rything about the Lord is madhuram (sweet). That is why the 
gopikas (cowherd maids) of those days, sang “Madhurath- 
ipathe! Akhilam dadhuram’. They could not bear the pangs of 
separation from Krishna. They went round Brindavan asking 
even the flowers, Oh flowers! Did you see our beloved 
Krishna?” They were not mindful of the thought, whether a 
flower was capable of seeing Krishna. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 179 


What does this mean? Even the flowers, leaves, branches, 
and plants will see the Lord, who is all pervasive. But, 
Krishna was described as unique by the gopikas, who ex- 
claimed, “He is dark in complexion, with eyes comparable to a 
lotus flower; by any chance, have you seen Him? He has a 
peacock feather on his head, Oh creepers! Is He hiding in the 
bushes?” 

“God is full.” You cannot say, “He is only in this and not 
in that.” You have to love all. You should not love with the 
motive of getting any fruit or reward. You should love for 
love’s sake. 


Gopika’s love for Krishna 


A newly wed bride came to her father-in-law’s house in 
Gokulam (the village of cowherds). The tradition of that place 
in those days was that all the villagers should go to mother Ya- 
soda’s house and light their lamps every evening from the 
lamp in that house. This was because that was the house of the 
richest family of that village and because Lord Krishna was 
born in that house. He was God, in whom all Ashtaisvarya (the 
eight types of wealth) were enshrined. The villagers believed 
that, because the Lord of all wealth was there, by lighting their 
lamp from that hallowed house, they would also have the bene- 
fit of all wealth. 

This view was not shared by the father-in-law and mother- 
in-law of the newly married girl. They complained that all the 
women were going after Krishna, who was in Yasoda’s house. 
But this daughter-in-law was very eager to see the charming 
form of Krishna, which attracted all other young women of the 
village. In fact, she used to ponder over the infinite capacity of 
the God- incarnate and sing His glory as Shabdhabrahmamayi, 
Charaacharamayi, Jyothirmayi, Vangmayi, Nithyanandamayi, 
Paraathparamayi, Maayaamayi, Shreemayi (Supreme master 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 180 


of sound, master of movable and immovable things, one full of 
effulgence, one of good speech, full of eternal bliss, supreme 
power, creator of illusion and master of prosperity). She used 
to sing the glory of Lord Krishna in this way within herself, for 
fear lest her parents-in-law may reprimand her. 

As God’s Will would have it, one day, the mother-in-law 
had developed high temperature, so the daughter-in-law had 
necessarily to go to mother Yasoda’s house to light the lamp. 
She was allowed by her mother-in-law only for that day, as an 
exception. 

Yasoda used to keep a lamp outside. So, she had to light 
the lamp and go away. She was feeling sad that though she 
came to that house where the Lord had incarnated, she could 
not have even a glance of Him because the door was closed. 
She was lost in contemplation as she was lighting the lamp and 
the flame even started burning her hand. When her dress also 
started catching fire, on sensing the smell of burning cloth, Ya- 
soda rushed out of the house and asked the girl, “Are you mad? 
Are you not aware of your cloth getting burnt?” 

This daughter-in-law was smiling as though in bliss. She 
said that she was seeing the form of Krishna in the jyothi 
(flame). On hearing this, the other gopis (cowherd maids) who 
came to light the lamp started dancing in joy and ran through 
the streets. The lady’s name was Suguna, and they sang that 
Suguna burnt her hand but was smiling in joy as she saw the 
form of Krishna in the jyothi. 

The mother-in-law of Suguna heard this too. She got terri- 
bly annoyed and even beat her daughter-in-law. She was ex- 
claiming, “Because I took ill, you had to be sent to Yasoda’s 
house. You say that you saw Krishna there in the flame. How 
can we bear this haughtiness of yours?” So saying, she went on 
beating her daughter-in-law. But the latter never appeared to 
heed all this, and was in rapture. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 181 


The gopikas started singing, “In spite of her mother-in-law 
beating her and her husband becoming angry, Suguna never 
bothered. Nor was she afraid of anything. She was enjoying as 
though the picture is printed on a paper. Nobody can separate 
them.” In this way, the gopikas enjoyed the company of 
Krishna. Different people enjoy in different ways. But God is 
totally present in every heart. 


God is in every creature as love 


If you take a small vessel to fill water from the ocean, you 
can get only that much of water that that vessel can hold. If the 
vessel is bigger, it can hold a larger quantity of water. If you 
taste even a drop of water that is saline, whether the quantity of 
water is more or less, the quality is the same and total. Simi- 
larly, God is in the form of love in every one. The quality is the 
same, though the quantity may vary. That is why the Upani- 
shad declares, “That is Whole and this is Whole.” 

The Pandavas and Kauravas started the battle of Mahab- 
haratha. Vyasa came in a chariot to bring about a compromise 
and avoid a conflict, which would result in loss of lives. Vyasa 
composed several epics and codified the Vedas into four, 
though they were countless in number. With the view that the 
people cannot go through all the Vedas, he classified them into 
four namely, Rik, Yajur, Sama and Atharva Vedas. 

Vyasa had knowledge of the language of the insects, birds, 
and animals. When he was going in the fast-moving chariot, he 
saw an insect moving fast across. He asked the insect why it 
was hurrying so fast. The insect replied that the chariot of Ar- 
juna was approaching very fast and, before it approached, it 
had to reach safely its home where its family members were 
waiting. Vyasa realised that the attachment to wife and chil- 
dren was common not only for human beings but was for other 
beings as well, like the insect. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 182 


Of all creatures, the human being is considered the best. 
Because we do not know the language of lower beings, we are 
not able to realise that insects, birds, and animals also have 
such feelings of attachment. Only then did Vyasa declare that 
God is in the form of hands, feet, eyes, ears, everywhere. Di- 
vinity is everywhere. But love of Divinity is selfless; this is 
spiritual, while worldly love is selfish and transient. We must 
change worldly love into spiritual love. 


All are acts of God 


Ruchir narrated a story. An emperor arranged a very big 
exhibition. He said anyone could pick any article one liked. 
What was this exhibition? In the world of exhibition, the ex- 
hibits range from insects to human beings. It is full of different 
objects and creatures. The vast humanity visits this exhibition 
and takes whatever it wants. They show preference and take 
costly things. 

A woman entered this exhibition and saw sacred things, sa- 
cred wares, forests sacred to sages and saints, and all pertain- 
ing to the Will of God. “All are acts of God. God is the master 
of this world. I did not bring anything with me when I was 
born. Nor do I take anything when I depart from the world. We 
do not even leave behind the address.” So saying, she walked 
empty-handed. 

The king asked her why she was not taking anything. She 
said, “It is natural. I came empty-handed and I am returning 
empty-handed.” 

The king asked her to take at least one article. She asked 
whether he was prepared to give anything. She said, “I want 
only you. When you become mine, the entire property in the 
exhibition belongs to me.” 

Then God gave himself to her. She said, “This is the con- 
summation of my birth.” Out of all the time we spend on fam- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 183 


ily, wealth, food, etc., if only we spent a fraction of that time in 
contemplating on God, our last journey would be very safe. 

The gate of the God of Death is made very heavy material. 
In order to open the door we have to contemplate on the Lotus- 
feet of God. 


Every human is Ardhanari 


Who is the lady here? It is Prakriti. All are women! Simply 
because you wear pants and a shirt you do not become a Pu- 
rusha (male). The one who wears a body is a sthri (woman). 
The awareness that pervades the body is called Purusha — it is 
chaithanya (consciousness). The body is jada (Inert). Man is a 
combination of both. 

This combination of the awareness within, the Purusha or 
masculine aspect, and the inert body or feminine aspect is 
termed Ardhanaareeswara (half-male and half-female). Not 
only Easwara but every human is an Ardhanari. So, human life 
is not a single entity but the combination of Prakriti and 
Paramatma, or the feminine and the masculine aspects. 

In this drama of life, all are actors. Even Bhagavan is act- 
ing a role. The world is like a stage. God is the Director, and as 
per God’s directions, all are acting. Simply because a person 
wears the dress of a male, he cannot be termed masculine. 

Suppose the anniversary of a girl’s college is being cele- 
brated. They may enact a drama in which the girls may act the 
role of a king; minister, sepoy, watchman, etc. All the actors 
are girls. They have only taken the role of these males. The 
males should not pride themselves by saying “Udhyogam pu- 
rushalakshanam (to hold a job is the prerogative of males).” 
The Atmashakthi (Atmic energy) is common in all. 

Now you find many women going for work, and there are 
many males who do not work. Dharma is the characteristic of 
human — male or female. Truth is the characteristic. Truth is 
his characteristic. Truth is God. Love is God. Live in Love. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 184 


Surrender to the Divine within 


Divinity is total in everyone and everywhere. You cannot 
see Him with the physical eye, but you can visualise with the 
wisdom eye or inner vision. You have air, you cannot deny 
this, even though you cannot either see or catch hold of it. 
Similarly, god is in many forms. 

When it is hot, you can experience coolness either by a 
hand fan or an electric fan. Air has not come from the fan. 
Whoever uses the fan gets the air. The intellect is the fan. If 
you turn it toward Atma, you get Atmananda (Atmic bliss). On 
the other hand, you turn it toward the body, you get temporary 
bodily pleasure, which is momentary. 

The body cannot be depended upon to cross the ocean of 
life. It is perishable and transient. It is full of dirt and filth, 
flesh and bones. You have to surrender to the Divine within. 
Once you have Divinity to help you, there is nothing that you 
cannot achieve. 


29 April 1998 
Sai Sruthi, Kodaikanal 


22 


Greatness of mother’s love 


No one brings any wealth with him 
from his mother's womb. 

He carries nothing with him 
when he leaves the world. 

Even a millionaire can eat only ordinary food 
and cannot subsist on a diet of gold. 

One may wax arrogant over one's accumulated wealth, 
but nothing of it will accompany him, 

And in the end the wealth may fall 
into the hands of thieves or go to the State. 

Realise that the only thing that is permanent 
is the spirit. 

What else can I convey to you? 


From ancient times, it has been the practice in Bharat (In- 
dia) to revere the mother as God. From the outset, the Vedas 
have declared, “Revere the mother as God, father as God, and 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 186 


preceptor as God. If they are gods, for what purpose are they 
gods? In the ordinary course of daily existence, they are gods 
for worldly purposes. For the human body, the mother, father, 
and preceptor are to be deemed as divine. But, for the pursuit 
of life, the Divine is the only God, There is another Sanskrit 
saying that hails God as mother, father, kinsman, friend, 
wealth, knowledge, and in fact the Supreme Lord of every- 
thing. This means that for the spiritual life, God is everything. 

The mother and father are residents of the home. The pre- 
ceptor dwells in his ashram. But God is the indweller of the 
heart. 

Only God can reside in the heart. It is true that mother, fa- 
ther, and preceptor are divine, but they are not entitled to dwell 
in the heart. They have to be revered, adored, and made happy. 
God alone deserves to be worshipped. 


God is nearer to man than his mother, 
Closer than even the father. 

To give up such God is a heinous sin. 
This is the truth proclaimed by Sai. 


Importance of mother's blessings 


It was part of the ancient tradition that when the son 
wished to set out for the battlefield to secure victory or go to 
the forest to perform penance, he would first go to his mother 
and seek her blessings. Dhruva, a six-year-old child, took his 
mother's blessings, set out to the forest to perform penance, 
and realized the vision of the Divine. 

Arjuna prostrated before his mother to get her blessings 
prior to leaving for the battlefield. The mother told him, “May 
victory be yours.” 

Duryodhana also went to his mother, prostrated before his 
mother, and sought her blessings for victory in the war. The 
mother told him, “Where there is dharma, there will be vic- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 187 


tory.” This was Duryodhana's mother's blessing for her son. 
Duryodhana then went to his preceptor and sought his bless- 
ings. The preceptor said, “Where there is Krishna, there is 
dharma. Where there is dharma, there will be victory.” 

Therefore, victory can be ensured only where dharma and 
the Divine are present, according to the mother and the pre- 
ceptor. 


Mother’s blessing and divine grace are both necesssary 


In those days, what the mother declared proved prophetic. 
Whenever a mother conferred her blessings on her son, the Di- 
vine was present there to declare, “May it happen so.” Besides 
the mother's blessing, divine grace is also necessary. 

Hence, every son should make every effort to please his 
mother. Without keeping his mother pleased, the son cannot 
achieve anything in the world. The son should have those 
qualities that enable him to please his mother. At the same 
time, the son should also strive to win the Lord's grace. With- 
out earning God's grace, the mother's blessings alone will be of 
no avail. 

After the end of the Kurukshetra war, Krishna went to see 
Gandhari, the mother of the Kauravas. Dhritharashtra, the fa- 
ther of the Kauravas, was also in deep sorrow. Gandhari spoke 
to Krishna in great anger and anguish, “Krishna, the Pandavas 
and Kauravas are sons of brothers. What is the reason for your 
animus against the Kauravas and your partiality for the Pan- 
davas? You continually protected the Pandavas but you did not 
save even one of my hundred sons from death. Why this dis- 
crimination by you?” 

Krishna smiled at her and replied, “In your indignation and 
anger, you are using words recklessly. The fault is only yours. 
Although you had one hundred sons, have you seen any of 
them? How can children not at all seen by the mother hope to 
get the grace of God? 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 188 


The more one strives to give joy to the mother, the more 
the motherland will rejoice. The mother and the motherland go 
together. 

When Pandavas were about to leave for battle, Kunti pro- 
nounced a special blessing on them proclaiming that victory 
would always be on the side of those who stood for dharma. 
She said that great warriors who went to fight with valour were 
blessed by their mothers with a protective amulet (raksha 
kavach). In the case of the Pandavas, Kunti declared that the 
benediction “Sri Rama Raksha” may serve as the amulet for 
them on the battlefield. This shows how important a mother's 
blessing is for the success and welfare of the children. 

It is to demonstrate to the world the importance of rever- 
ence for the parents and the need to receive their blessings that 
Swami also makes it a point to visit the Samadhi of the parents 
of this body twice a year. In reality, Swami has no filial love 
for parents as such, but Swami adheres to this practice to serve 
as an example to the world. 


Mother Easwaramma's presence 


Now it is 30 years since the mother of this body passed 
away. But she is continuing to move about in her physical 
body around Swami. Three boys sleep in Swami’s room. They 
have also witnessed her presence. I am telling this today be- 
cause the life of ideal mothers has permanent significance. 

In Prasanthi Nilayam, Swami takes breakfast after bhajan 
and proceeds to His place in Poornachandra Auditorium. Early 
in the morning one day, mother Easwaramma was standing at 
the door in her usual form. I asked her, “Why did you come?” 

She said, “Swami, I have come here with a prayer to You. 
You are omnipresent and omniscient, but You have to control 
one thing!” 

“What is that?” Swami asked. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 189 


She said, “Devotees and students offer handkerchiefs to 
You. But, heeding my prayer, please do not receive handker- 
chiefs from everybody. The times are not good. The handker- 
chief may be tainted with poisonous stuff. In the usual course, 
You use the handkerchief to wipe Your nose and mouth. So, 
You may receive handkerchief only from those on whom You 
have confidence and trust as good devotees. Do not accept 
from all and sundry.” 


Easwaramma’s advice to Swami 


Mother's love lives on for all times, long after her passing 
away. Twice she appeared in the night. The boys sleeping in 
my room noticed her presence. Those boys had not seen her at 
any time. They wondered who the old lady could be. The key 
of the lift was in their hands and there was no staircase leading 
to the apartment. How did she manage to come here? When the 
boys asked this question, Swami woke up. I went near her and 
asked her why she had come again. She replied, “I cannot live 
without seeing You often. The moment I see You, I feel 
happy.’ After saying so, she gave me some piece of advice, 
“Swami, all persons describe themselves as devotees. But no 
one can tell who are real devotees and who are fake. Totally 
dedicated devotees will be ready to carry out anything You ask 
them to do, but there are others who come for their own self- 
interest. By coming to You they get their desires fulfilled and 
forget You thereafter. In this matter, You should be very care- 
ful.” 

Swami replied, “I shall take due care. There is no need for 
you to tell me.” 

After hearing this, she laughed and left the room. 

I am conveying to you this episode as direct testimony to 
the greatness of mother's love. She might have given up her 
body but she is always with Swami. She said, “I have per- 
formed many sacrifices for Your sake and have done many 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 190 


kinds of pujas. I realized the proof thereof. For 40 years I was 
with You. My life has its fulfillment.” 


Kondama Raju’s devotion 


Kondama Raju was the grandfather of this body. He was 
also like my mother. He had two sons. The father of this body 
was Pedda Venkapa Raju. His younger brother was Chinna 
Venkapa Raju. Two sons of his deceased brother, Subba Raju 
and Venkatarama Raju, also lived with him. 

When all four were together, the family was large and there 
was a desire to have division of property. At that time, this 
body was eight years old. Kondama Raju summoned the sons. 
They told him, “At this stage, you cannot live alone. So, you 
can stay with each of us by turn.” 

He replied, “I don’t want to stay with any one of you. You 
can take your share of the property. Leave Sathya with me. It is 
enough. If Sathya is with me, everything is with me.” 

From then onward, Swami was staying with Kondama 
Raju. He was a great devotee and lived up to 116 years. Due to 
his deep devotion, he recognized the truth about Me. Swami 
was entering His ninth year. At that time there was no one near 
us. He closed the door. I was then preparing food. Swami knew 
the art of cooking well. People from the neighborhood used to 
come to our house to take food prepared by Swami. 

While I was in the kitchen, Kondama Raju came uttering 
“Sathya, Sathya” and held both My hands. He said, “These are 
not hands. I consider them as Your feet. I have one wish to 
make to You. Before I pass away, You must pour water into 
my mouth at the last moment of my life.” 

Swami gave him this promise. 

After that, he lived for 19 years. He used to visit the new 
mandir (temple) after it was opened both morning and evening. 
Kondama Raju was in the habit of coming early in the morn- 
ing. Swami used to sleep outside the mandir on the sand. Ex- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 191 


pecting His grandfather, Swami would cover Himself com- 
pletely, including His face. I did not want him to know that I 
was awake. Assuming that Swami was asleep, the grandfather 
would touch Swami's feet and leave. He had an embarrassing 
feeling that others might have a mistaken impression on seeing 
a 116 year old man touching the feet of a young boy. As soon 
as Kondama Raju left, Swami would get up. 

Gopis (cowherd mainds) used to sing a song, “O Krishna, 
can anybody wake up a person who is pretending to sleep? 
How can anyone open the eyes of a person who has deliber- 
ately closed his eyes?” Like that, I used to keep My eyes shut 
and pretend to be fast asleep. This was one of the /eelas I used 
to perform. 


Swami keeps up the promise given to Kondama Raju 


The time for fulfilling the promise I had made to Kondama 
Raju was fast approaching. In those days, I used to drive the 
car myself. I was going to the city in Morris 200. Kondama 
Raju called Swami’s mother Easwaramma and said, “Come 
here. Swami is coming. He is coming for my sake. My last 
moment has come. Therefore, please bring a tumbler of drink- 
ing water.” 

He then asked her to put a few tulsi leaves in the tumbler. 
He asked Swami to sit on the cot. He said, “Swami, the sky 
may come down but You will keep Your promise. The ocean 
may dry up but You will not go back on Your word. To fulfil 
the pledge You gave 30 years ago, You have now come.” 

Swami broke into laughter. 

Kondama Raju said, “Don’t try to deceive me through 
Your laughter. Take this tumbler and drink a little of the water 
and pour the balance into my mouth.” 

Then he related a story. “Dasaratha performed Puthra- 
kameshti Yajna to get four sons. Lord Narayana Himself took 
birth as his son. Adisesha was born as Lakshmana. The conch 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 192 


and mace manifested as Bharata and Satrughna. Although he 
had four sons, no one was present to administer water to him at 
the time of his passing away. Swami, You have taken birth in 
my Ratnakara lineage in Apasthamba Sutra and Bhardwaja 
Gothra. All these are the signs of Divinity. This means that the 
Divine is born in my family. Now fulfil at least this prayer of 
mine. Do not refuse.” 

Swami replied, “I have come for this very purpose.” 

When I started to pour water into his mouth, he protested, 
saying, “You must first drink a little and then pour the remain- 
der in my mouth.” 

Swami drank a little and poured the rest in his mouth. 

Kondama Raju then turned to his daughter-in-law and said, 
“Easwaramma, the fame and power of your son will spread all 
over the world. The whole world is changing. Lot of people 
from foreign countries will come. Be on the alert. Do not give 
room for the delusion that this is my son and my child. He be- 
longs to all. Swami belongs to everyone. He is not related to 
one family only.” He placed his hands on Swami's feet and 
breathed his last. 

Even he keeps coming to me from time to time. He told 
me, “I have no further rebirth. By my association with You, 
my life has been redeemed. With Your Grace, I have become 
immortal.” 

He used to come from time to time and warn me against 
what was happening in the mandir (temple). “No one can 
touch You, and there can be no danger to You from any quar- 
ter. Because of my past physical association with You, I am 
saying this. It is more a prayer to You.” Even now, Kondama 
Raju and Easwaramma keep coming and talking to Me. 


A divine comedy 


In Prasanthi Nilayam, there was a devotee who had serious 
heart attack. Swami left the body to protect him and went out 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 193 


of His body at 2 a.m. and did not return to the body till 3 p.m. 
next day. The boys who were sleeping downstairs and those 
sleeping in Swami's room started crying. Along with them, 
Chiranjeevi Rao went and brought Dr. Alreja. 

The doctor has great devotion to Swami. He has been in 
Prasanthi Nilayam for the past 40 years. He came and exam- 
ined Swami’s pulse. There was no pulse at all, no movement in 
the body. He started weeping. He remarked that there was no 
sign of life in the body. 

Then Chiranjeevi Rao observed that it was not unusual for 
Swami to go out of His body now and then and that he had 
seen it. He told the six boys not to speak about it to anybody. 
The six boys were a good lot. These boys took M.B.A. degree 
in Swami’s institute and had training in Delhi. They did not 
want to leave Swami. Despite Chiranjeevi Rao's appeal, the 
boys could not contain their grief. 

At that moment, I got up with a smile and asked what the 
matter was. I asked them, “What is this drama you are enact- 
ing?” They replied, “Swami, who is playing this drama? Is it 
You or we?” 

There is a boy named Srinivas. He has passed Engineering 
and M.B.A. and is staying with Swami. He remarked, “It is not 
our drama, Swami, but it is Your drama.” 

Then Swami said, “Many people are waiting outside. I 
must go out for darshan.” 

From early morning till 3 p.m. in the afternoon I had not 
taken even a sip of water. They requested me to drink at least a 
cup of buttermilk or porridge. Swami said, “I am not used to 
it.” Swami took His bath and went out. This kind of thing used 
to happen now and then. All the boys staying with Me know 
about it. 

There are mothers who are worried when their children 
take to the spiritual path. They hardly realise that it is the fruit 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 194 


of many past lives that accounts for children taking to the 
spiritual path. Mothers should rejoice over such a development 
rather than worry about it. 

Many parents desire that after the education of their chil- 
dren is over, they should get married, get a good job, and 
achieve a high position in life. Out of their love, they want 
their children to achieve greatness. Swami's love is not like 
that; Swami wants them to achieve goodness. 

What is the difference between greatness and goodness? A 
good man sees divinity even in a human being. A great man 
sees the human even in God. 

Ravana was a great man who had performed great penance. 
He was very powerful. But seeing Rama in human form, he 
considered him as a mere human being. On the other hand, 
Rama was different. He saw the Divine in all beings. That is 
the mark of goodness. 

It is better to earn a reputation for goodness than be known 
as a great man. All that you find in a great man is only selfish- 
ness. But in a good man, you find total selflessness. Therefore, 
all of you should strive to become good men. Revere your par- 
ents. Give them joy. Show your gratitude to them. 


Students’ concern for Swami 


Some students prefer to stay with Swami. The students 
know that at Kodaikanal Satyajit made a declaration in public 
even when his parents were present there, “I am coming out 
with my doubt in the open. You must all forgive me. All sorts 
of officers are coming to Swami. They seek fulfillment of de- 
sires and go back. Many business people also come to Swami. 
They also refer to Swami about their difficulties and go back 
after securing relief. People with ailments come to Swami and 
they leave after getting cured. We students have come to 
Swami. Many of them benefit from the free education given by 
Swami and leave the Institute. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 195 


“Who is taking care of Swami? Nobody seems to be con- 
cerned about Swami’s well being. Many times Swami falls 
down. Once, when Swami slipped and fell down, a pillar fell 
on Him. Swami did not care for it. The boys were very much 
worried in the night. It is necessary that someone should al- 
ways be with Swami. Only when one or two people sit with 
Him does Swami take some little food. When He goes alone 
for lunch, He eats very little.” 

My attitude is to eat whatever the students eat. I don't want 
to eat separately. Swami came to Brindavan from Puttaparthi 
and took the students to Kodaikanal. Swami used to eat only 
ragi and groundnut chutney. At Kodaikanal all were eating to- 
gether. Swami also took His meals in their midst. 

If I were to take ragi, boys may not like it. If I want them 
to eat ragi, they are not used to it. So Swami started eating rice 
food which students take. Swami likes only ragi; because He 
stopped taking ragi, He lost 6 kg in weight during 20 days stay 
at Kodaikanal. 

In Puttaparthi, Satyajit was in the habit of taking My 
weight now and then. He used to plead to Swami to get on to 
the weighing machine. When Swami was in Puttaparthi He 
weighed 108 Ibs. At Kodaikanal, when weight was taken, it 
showed reduction by 6 kilos. Swami weighed less than 100 Ibs. 
Satyajit said that he was greatly worried. 

I told him that he should not speak about this in public. 

Satyajit said, “I offer my entire life to Swami.” 

Swami said that he should not say such things in public. 
But Satyajit spoke with courage and boldness. 

At that time, Indulal Shah, Chairman of World Council and 
others were present. All of them congratulated Satyajit on his 
speech. This is a point about which no one has cared for. In- 
dulal Shah said, “Even though I am a member of Central Trust 
I have not thought over this point. This is a grievous lapse on 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 196 


our part. Hereafter, we will bear this in mind and act accord- 
ingly.” 
God as Mother 


It is clear that each devotee has his own ideals and aspira- 
tions. But those who are imbued with a feeling of rever- ence 
for their mother will always have good feelings. One day 
Satyajit was concerned about surgery done for his mother's 
fractured leg. As far as I am concerned, all persons are good. 
But there is something special about this lad Satyajit. He used 
to take Swami's permission and massage her leg every day. He 
wanted to do this to relieve his mother of her pain. 

At Brindavan, I was lying in bed. He came and started 
massaging My leg. I said, “I have no pain in My leg.” 

He remarked, “Swami, if You have pain You won’t speak 
about it. You keep moving about irrespective of the pain.” 

Swami then observed, “I am used to this”. 

He said, “In massaging Swami's feet I am rendering service 
to my mother.” 

He left for Puttaparthi and was staying in the hostel. He 
closed his eyes. He experienced that he was massaging 
Swami’s feet. He observed, “With this experience, how can I 
be attached to the world?” 

Swami remarked to him, “Don’t speak in that way. Be si- 
lent and carry on your duty.” 

He passed his M.Sc. After that he joined the M.B.A. 
course. I told him, “You have already got a P.G.degree. Why 
do you want to join M.B.A?” 

He replied, I can stay with You, Swami, for two more 
years. That is the reason.” 

In this manner, each student has his own desires. There are 
any number of students imbued with such feelings. Those who 
develop taste of maternal love adore God as mother. Many 
boys go out into the world and get caught up in worldly affairs 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 197 


because of their actions in previous lives. Students should feel, 
“Having discovered God, we do not need anything else. God 
will take care of mother, father, and everyone else.” They 
should develop that firm conviction. Without that faith they 
can have no happiness. 

At Puttaparthi, a Reddy from Nellore brought the film 
Prahlada and showed it to the students. The actors were small 
boys. The film showed that, while drinking poison, Prahlada 
was chanting the name of Narayana. His father had Prahlada 
thrown from a mountain top by two rakshasas (demons), 
Chanda and Amarkha. As he fell, he chanted the name of Na- 
rayana, and Narayana held Prahlada in His hands. The father 
wanted him to be bitten by serpents. As he chanted the name of 
Narayana, the serpent did not bite him. The father tried to get 
him crushed under the feet of an elephant. As Prahlada uttered 
the name of Narayana, even the elephant became Narayana and 
did him no harm. 

All this was shown in the film; but Satyajit said, “I have 
experienced all this directly. I don't need to see a film. I only 
want Sai Narayana.” It is only because of merit done in previ- 
ous life that such experiences came to a person from child- 
hood. 

The other day, I asked him to participate in bhajans. He 
said he would sit under an Asoka Tree and participate in the 
bhajans. Swami does not impose His Will on anybody. He told 
Satyajit, “You may do what pleases you.” 


How Satyajit strictly adheres to Swami’s ideals 


In this manner, many students are imbued with noble feel- 
ings. Some students appear as supreme devotees as long as 
they are in the college, but the moment they leave the college, 
they go astray. Their speech and their actions are bad. Hence, I 
often tell them, as I did at Kodaikanal, “Cultivate good speech. 
Develop a good vision (samyag drishti). This leads to good 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 198 


thoughts. Good thoughts make a person listen to what is good. 
By listening to good thoughts one is impelled to perform good 
actions. Good actions lead to liberation.” 

Satyajit strictly adheres to Swami's ideals. He will not look 
at anybody. I asked him, “What is wrong if you see persons 
with good feelings or to see others.” 

He replied, “I have no use for such good feelings or to see 
others. I want only feelings about Swami within me.” 

Swami then said, “Please yourself.” 

Some students are like this. All the boys who came to Ko- 
daikanal this year were exceptionally good boys. How lucky 
they are cannot be described. I took care of everyone, of all 
their needs. If there are more such boys, the world will im- 
prove vastly. It is only when individuals improve that society 
can improve. When society improves, the country improves. 
Improvements must start with individuals. The individual, the 
collective, and the world together constitute the Divine. 


Offer your love to mother and enjoy life 


Noble mothers give birth to noble sons. Mothers should 
also feel lucky to have noble sons. Kondama Raju used to tell 
his daughter-in-law, “Easwaramma, you have no idea of your 
great good fortune. You are not an ordinary woman. The Lord 
Himself is with you. What a lucky woman you are!” Eas- 
waramma was the daughter-in-law of Kondama Raju. Has 
there been any instance of a father-in-law adoring his daugh- 
ter-in-law? He used to say, “Easwaramma, your name has been 
vindicated. Easwara’s mother is Easwaramma.” 

This was the way they praised Easwaramma. Kondama 
Raju was one of those rare persons who could perceive the 
Truth. Those who cannot recognize the Truth will never be 
able to understand it. They are like a blind man who cannot see 
the sun even during the day. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 199 


Those who are on the spiritual path and who have love for 
their mother can accomplish anything in the world. Many 
grown up men belittle the role of their mothers, saying that 
they might have done them some good in childhood. They feel 
proud about their job and position. But they forget to whom 
they owe their position. 

Adi Sankara got the blessings of Mother Parvathi as a 
young boy of seven years while doing worship to the goddess 
in the absence of his father. After getting the blessings of the 
goddess, he achieved great distinction in mastering all the Ve- 
das and scriptures within a short period. 

You have to offer your heart to God because He is the In- 
dweller of heart, while father and mother are only dwellers in 
home. Respect your parents with the Divine in your heart. 
Tasting the sweetness of your mother’s love, offer your love to 
her and enjoy life. 


6 May 1998 
Brindavan 


23 


The essence of Buddha’s teachings 


Firmament is the garment of the Divine, 
Stars are His eye, 

The melody of His laughter 

Fills the Universe. 


There are many non-believers in God who were ruined in 
life, but there are none who believed and failed in life. 

Embodiments of Love! In ancient times, many spiritual as- 
pirants went out in search of knowledge of the Self and studied 
scriptures and visited holy places to acquire experience of the 
Divine. But they could not get the wisdom they sought. Even 
though they recognized the distinction between the animate 
and the inanimate, they could not get spiritual illumination. 

True enlightenment is attained by the awareness of the 
identity of the One and many (Vyakthi and Samashthi). In spite 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 201 


of the passage of time, man has not been able to recognize his 
reality. Knowledge of the Self cannot be got by the study of 
scriptures or from preceptors or by the grace of great men. 
Brahman cannot be seen in the external world. It should be ex- 
perienced only in one’s heart. It is a mark of ignorance to seek 
the Self in the outside world. 


Seek the Self within 


For 26 years Buddha sought the realization of the Self by 
studying scriptures, meeting sages and saints and listening to 
their teachings. He found that by these means he could not ex- 
perience reality. He realized that the knowledge of the Self has 
to be gained through an inward search. He stopped the outward 
quest and gradually experienced knowledge of the Self from 
within. He then declared: 


Buddham Saranam Gachchami, 
Sangham Saranam Gachchami, 
Dharmam Saranam Gachchami. 


Through his enlightenment, he discovered the importance 
of Dharma and wanted to make it the basis of society. Buddha 
realized that self-realization cannot be attained through pen- 
ance or prayers or austerities. At the outset, Buddha empha- 
sized the importance of developing good vision (samyag 
drishti). Good vision leads to good thoughts, good speech and 
good action. 

Next he laid stress on association with good people. The 
company of the good leads to good deeds. The four rules to be 
observed are: cultivate good company, avoid association with 
evil persons, do meritorious deeds always, and remember what 
is transient and what is eternal. 

Good company does not mean merely association with 
good people. Sath refers to the Divine. What is required is to 
seek the company of God, who is the source of all bliss. When 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 202 


one’s thoughts are centered on God, one’s feelings, speech, 
and actions get sanctified —samyag bhavam, samyag srava- 
nam and samyag kriya. This leads to the purity of the inner 
sense organs. Purity in thought, word, and deed is the requisite 
for experiencing the Divine. This triple purity is considered the 
essence of humanness. 

Buddha recognised this Truth and experienced bliss. His 
mother Mayadevi had passed away nine days after his birth. 
After the death of his mother, Buddha was looked after by his 
stepmother Gautami. She fostered Buddha with boundless 
love. To perpetuate the name of his foster mother for the love 
she bestowed on him, he was called Gautama. 

Buddha relied entirely on his own inner quest to experience 
his reality because he found that scriptural texts and preceptors 
were of no use. 


Make your conscience your preceptor 


There are many in the world who preach spirituality but 
none of them has any experience. What is the use of studying 
books without personal experience or practice. Each one 
should make his conscience his preceptor. 

When the time of Nirvana was approaching, Buddha no- 
ticed that his step-brother Ananda was shedding tears. He 
beckoned Ananda and told him “Even till today, the world is 
not recognising the reality. There are thousands who experi- 
ence sorrow at the sight of dying persons. But they make no 
effort to find out what experience is in store for the dead. I 
know the Truth about it. I am merging in that Truth. To shed 
tears at this prospect is not justified. 

“It seems to me that you are grieving over the exalted state 
that is impending for me. No human being should shed tears 
over the moment of death of any person. Tears are associated 
with the Divine and should be shed only far the sake of the Di- 
vine and not for trivial matters. You should shed tears of joy. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 203 


Grief is not a proper state for man. Hence no tears of sorrow 
should be shed.” 

Here is an illustration from our daily experience. While 
going in a bazar, if a person sees someone crying he asks him, 
"Why are you crying?" Other passersby also question him. If in 
the same bazaar another person is going about in a jolly mood, 
no one goes to him to inquire the cause of his happiness. 

Happiness is considered to be natural condition of man. He 
seeks it all the time. Sorrow is repugnant to man. It is a weak- 
ness of man to give room to grief. By falling prey to grief in 
many lives, man is perpetually plunged in sorrow. 

For a person who has firm faith in God there will be no 
cause for sorrow. Those who give way to sorrow are persons 
who have not understood the Divine Principle. God is one. He 
appears to people in different names and forms. Failing to rec- 
ognise that God is one, people suffer from many difficulties. 
They worship God as Allah, Buddha, Rama, Krishna, Jesus, 
etc. These names have been given after their advent in the 
world and these are not inherent in them. The names are of 
passing significance. 


Happiness is union with God 


All that is connected with body is temporary and transient. 
What men should seek is enduring bliss. Happiness is union 
with God. 

Buddha prescribed five duties: good vision, good thoughts, 
listening to good things, good speech, and good actions. These 
five-fold duties constitute true sadhana (spiritual practice). 

Man is misusing the talents given to him by the Divine. He 
is giving free vent to the six cardinal vices like lust, anger, and 
greed. They are not the gifts of the Divine. They have been 
fostered by the food people eat. They are animal qualities 
which have to be got rid of. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 204 


People should speak the truth and avoid speaking what is 
unpleasant even if it is truth. The entire gamut of human life 
should be based on truth. 

Bharatiya (Indian) culture has placed the foremost empha- 
sis on “Speak the truth; act righteously.” Speaking truth is a 
supreme virtue for all people, anywhere. In any circumstance 
one should adhere to truth. Truth is God incarnate. Righteous- 
ness should accompany one like a shadow. When you have 
truth and righteousness as your guiding stars you can achieve 
anything in life. All powers are inherent in these two virtues. 

Man can realize bliss only when he turns his vision inward. 
Only proximity to God can confer happiness. It cannot be had 
elsewhere, from anyone else. 

It is a mark of ignorance to expect that some other person 
will give you happiness. Buddha felt sad that people should be 
subject to such ignorance. He practiced many spiritual exer- 
cises and came to a certain decision. He decided to go to Gaya 
and experience bliss by his own way. He found the source of 
bliss within himself. He realised it could not be got from out- 
side. 

Every man's heart is the dwelling place of God. Hence eve- 
ryone should take good care of it and cultivate it as the source 
of divine bliss. 


Cultivate sacred feelings 


Because Buddha’s teachings were not properly propagated, 
Buddhism steadily declined in this country. All religions suffer 
a decline because those who profess them do not practice them 
in their daily lives. People should practice what they profess. 
People should live up to the truths in which they believe. Peo- 
ple do not act upon the truths they have learnt. 

Unfortunately, people today have only outward vision. The 
external vision is characteristic of animals. You must sanctify 
your vision by turning it inward. Then you can get rid of ani- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 205 


mal qualities and divinise your life. Hence, develop godly 
feelings within you. 

The divine dwells in the heart of everyone. You must en- 
thuse those who entertain godly feelings. Such people should 
not be discouraged. Divine feelings arise in one only as a con- 
sequence of good deeds done in many lives. Only a sacred 
heart can experience the Divine. The pursuit of any object 
other than the Divine is a futile exercise — worldly possessions 
come and go, but divinity comes and grows. 


The way to God 


Embodiments of Love! You have all come from many dis- 
tant parts of the world. You have come to experience the joy of 
participating in the Buddha Purnima celebrations. You need 
not have come all the way from your distant places. Buddhi 
represents the intellect. That intellect must be used properly. 
Then you will realize what is implied in Buddhism. 

People talk about spiritual exercises and waste their lives. 
All these pursuits are waste of time. It is enough if you develop 
sacred feelings. The chief sadhana (spiritual exercise) consists 
of getting rid of bad thoughts and cultivating good qualities. 
Whatever pilgrim center you may visit, try to shed your bad 
tendencies. Develop good qualities instead. 

People speak about nirvana. It is equated with moksha or 
liberation. You must aim at achieving this liberation. Nirvana 
means experiencing bliss in the last moments of your life. Man 
does not realize what it is that he should seek and what he 
should reject. 

There are three things required to be done in life. You 
should try to do good to those that have done harm to you. You 
must forget the harm done by others and also the good you 
have done to others. So you should forget what needs to be 
forgotten and remember those things that require to be remem- 
bered. What are the things you have to remember? The good 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 206 


that others have done to you. You must remember the good 
that has been done to you as something sacred. You must ex- 
press your gratitude to them. 

Make all your actions conform to righteousness (dharma). 
Whatever actions you do remembering God will get sanctified 
thereby. 


See no evil; See what is good. 
Hear no evil; Hear what is good. 
Speak no evil; Speak what is good. 
Think no evil; Think what is good. 
Do no evil; Do what is good. 

This is the way to God. 


This is the essence of Buddha's teachings. When you are 
indulging in evil pursuits through your senses, how can you get 
peace? Peace should come from hridaya (the spiritual heart) 
filled with compassion. 

Embodiments of Love! The Divine dwells in each of us in 
the form of Love. 


11 May 1998 
Brindavan 


24 


Quest for Truth 


Neither by penance nor by bathing in sacred rivers 
Nor by study of scriptures nor by japa 
Can the ocean of Samsara be crossed 
Without serving godly men. 
[Sanskrit sloka] 


Embodiments of Love! Man adopts various means to 
achieve liberation (from the bondage of mundane existence). 
Penance is performed for whose sake? It is for one’s own 
benefit and not for the good of others, nor even for the Su- 
preme Self. In the performance of japa (recitation of the 
Lord’s name), it must be noted that it is done for one’s own 
satisfaction and not for the welfare of others. What should one 
do to secure redemption from the cycle of worldly existence? 
Chanting the Lord's name or performing sacrifices or doing 
other rituals will be of no avail. You have to render service to 
your fellow human beings. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 208 


Service is true worship 


Seva (service) is the highest form of worship and the best 
penance. Seva is the most important form of reciting the Lord’s 
name. Money that is lost can be earned again. Lost friends may 
be got back again. Even the loss of a wife can be made up by 
remarriage. But, if the present body is lost, it cannot be got 
back again. Hence, the body is highly sacred. 

For what purpose should this sacred body be protected? 
The body has to be protected because verily it is the primary 
means of achieving dharma. 

Human birth is a rare privilege. It is highly sacred and sub- 
lime. Having been born as human beings, if men do not realize 
the preciousness of human life, what is the use of being born as 
human? Man is endowed with the gift of memory. Reflection 
is natural to him. The search for the meaning of life is an admi- 
rable quality. It is as a result of this search that man’s creative 
faculties have resulted in great achievements in the fields of 
science and in other fields of knowledge. 

But, owing to their failure to use the intellect properly and 
on account of misdirected search, people are lost in different 
kinds of inquiry. One person sees a tree. He sees only the 
branches and not the roots. Another sees the roots and not the 
branches. This is not the right way to find out the real truth 
about anything. 

Real inquiry into the truth calls for an inquiry both into the 
nature of the branches and the nature of the roots and of the 
tree as a whole. The scientist looks only at the branches. But 
the student of the roots is a Vedantin. Whether one is a scien- 
tist or a Vedantin, the pursuit of truth calls for a study of the 
branches, the roots, and the tree integrally. 

There is an illustration for this from the scriptures. The 
rakshasas (demons) and the devas (gods) churned the Ocean of 
Milk (to get nectar from it.) The first product to come of the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 209 


churning was the dreadful poison, halahala. Not deterred by 
this outcome, they continued with the churning of the ocean. In 
the process, Lakshmi (the goddess of prosperity), marvelous 
beings like Airaavatha, the divine elephant, and finally amri- 
tam (nectar) came out of the ocean. How could they secure all 
these? Because of their persistence in their efforts. 

People today should turn their hearts toward the search for 
truth. The human heart is a symbol of the Ocean of Milk. If, in 
this ocean, the rope of wisdom is used for churning the heart, 
some disappointments and failures may occur. Without suc- 
cumbing to these failures, if man continues his efforts, he will 
secure precious things like truth, righteousness, and justice. 
Qualities like forbearance and compassion will also emerge. 


All arts originated from the search for truth 


People should endeavor to cultivate qualities like tolerance, 
love, sympathy, righteousness, justice, and truth. People do not 
give any importance to this quest for truth. The search for truth 
is being directed toward worldly objects, which are ephemeral 
and worthless. Men should really dedicate themselves to the 
quest for the truth that is eternal. All arts have originated from 
the search for truth. 

In this search for truth, though God may not be realised, 
there will be indications pointing to the Divine. How does this 
happen? For instance; one may point to the Pole Star (Dhruva 
Nakshatra) as the star that is seen above the branch of a tree. 
As a matter of fact, there is no connection between the branch 
of the tree and the Pole Star. The branch, however, indicates 
the direction in which the Pole Star is to be seen. 

Likewise, all our directions, all the words we utter, all our 
behavior, all that we see are all related to the search for the 
truth. All of them testify to the existence of God. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 210 


For instance, we look at the vast ocean. We feel happy on 
seeing its vastness. We see a high mountain. It arouses a feel- 
ing of joy. Looking at a densely wooded forest, your heart is 
gladdened. These are all signs of the discovery of truth. 
Though you do not see God in them, they indicate the presence 
of the Divine in them. 

A big tree grows from a small seed. A chick comes out of 
an egg. One being is born from another. A flower gives fra- 
grance. You get butter from milk. All these are facts discov- 
ered in the search for truth. 


God is immanent in all objects 


The whole cosmos functions on the basis of three types of 
activity. These are what we experience in our daily life. One is 
the act of creation. The second is sustenance of creation. The 
third is the dissolution of what is created. Creation, sustenance 
and dissolution are all happenings of everyday experience. We 
witness them everyday. All of them testify to the existence of 
the Divine who is the embodiment of Truth. 

Without realising basic truth, people are engaged in con- 
troversies about the whereabouts of God. It is easy to raise 
questions about God. But it is difficult to make the search for 
God. Why? God is the truth of all truths. He is present as truth 
even in untruth. He is bad in badness and good in goodness. He 
is the merit in the meritorious and the sin in the sinful. 

It is in this context that the Gita declares that the Lord is 
present as the essence (rasa) in all things. God is the sweet es- 
sence in the syrup. There can be no syrup without sugar. Like- 
wise God is immanent in all objects. He is like butter in milk, 
fragrance in a flower, the good element in every object. This is 
the significance of the scriptural dictum: "Rasovai Sah" (He is 
the essence of everything). 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 211 


God is immanent in everything in the cosmos like sugar in 
syrup. This is not visible to the eye. It has to be experienced. 

Creation, sustenance, and dissolution go on according to 
the predetermined laws. The Vedas have described the master 
of these three activities as God. It is reaffirmed by the Upani- 
shads. The Quaran, the Bible, the Granth Saheb (of the Sikhs) 
—all these have described how the presence of God can be in- 
ferred from various indications. 

There is nothing in the cosmos that is not subject to these 
three processes. None can deny this truth. A philosopher or a 
scientist, an engineer or a doctor, or anyone else has to accept 
this fact. The master of this process is called God. 

What does GOD signify? G stands for generation (or crea- 
tion). O stands for organization:(sustaining the creation). D 
stands for destruction (or dissolution). All these three aspects 
can be noticed when we examine any object. All three proc- 
esses take place according to the will of the Divine. The entire 
cosmos is encompassed by these three processes. 


Happiness is consummation of suffering 


How is one to realise this truth? All impulses of man arise 
from the heart. When the heart is kept pure, all our thoughts, 
words, and actions become sweet. When the heart is dedicated 
to right purposes, all our actions become righteous and our life 
gets redeemed. All that is good or bad in us emanates from the 
heart. Good and bad are seldom separate from each other. They 
are inseparable. Happiness is not a separate state. It is the con- 
summation of suffering. 

The oneness of the Divine subsumes everything. Human- 
ness is the means to realise this oneness. The scriptures have 
declared that the same Divine Spirit dwells in all beings. 

The human body is encased in five sheaths: annamaya 
kosa (the sheath of food or physical sheath), pranamaya kosa 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 212 


(the vital sheath), manomaya kosa (the mental sheath), vi- 
jJnanamaya kosa (the sheath of wisdom), and anandamaya 
kosa (the sheath of bliss). 

Among the five sheaths, vijnanamaya kosa (the sheath of 
wisdom) is present only in man and not in other beings. Man 
should realize the preciousness of this gift of wisdom sheath. It 
should not be misused. Man is endowed with so many noble 
and estimable qualities that he should not be treated as a being 
of no account. 

Forgetting all his immense potentialities and treating the 
physical as most important, man is leading a meaningless life. 

It is not the physical (annamaya kosa) that is really impor- 
tant. As long as life is based on the physical alone, man can 
have no peace. 


Science and spirituality 


The sage Narada, who was proficient in 64 branches of 
knowledge, suffered from lack of peace, so he went to Sanat 
Kumara. He appealed to him, “Swami! Dispel my ignorance 
and teach me the way to attain peace.” 

Sanat Kumara said, “Narada! There is no field of knowl- 
edge in which you are not proficient. You know all the meth- 
ods prescribed by the Vedas, the Upanishads, and other Sas- 
tras (spiritual texts). But all this knowledge has not conferred 
any happiness on you. All this knowledge is concerned with 
the phenomenal world, which is transient in its character. You 
cannot secure peace till you gain knowledge of the Eternal.” 

The same truth is declared by scientists when they say that 
where science ends spirituality begins. 

Science is concerned with all the phenomena in nature. It 
furnishes what is required for the physical body. It is doubtless 
essential to take care of the body. But the body should not be 
deemed as the sole truth. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 213 


However, one should devote all efforts to its maintenance 
and comfort. All achievements are dependent on the body. 
Even the Divine can be realised through the body. But the 
body is not yourself. It is only an instrument for realising God. 
Moreover, the Supreme Atmic Principle (Paramatma) is im- 
manent in it. 


Love is man’s most divine quality 


There are many vital things to be achieved in the world. 
For all of them, the primary basis is love. What could be ac- 
complished by love and goodwill was demonstrated by one of 
the Prime Ministers of the U.K., William Gladstone, during the 
reign of Queen Victoria. He was described by his biographer 
as a noble man, who discharged his duties with love and with a 
spirit of sacrifice. 

Man has many sacred qualities, like love and sacrifice, but 
he does not put them into practice wholeheartedly. There is 
divinity in every man. Without recognising this divinity, man 
is wasting his life on mundane pleasures. Man is the most 
valuable creation in the world. All things, however precious, 
derive their value from man. 

In man, the most divine quality is love. Love is God. Live 
in love. Cultivate love for all. This vast world calls for large- 
hearted love. Then humanness will become manifest. Troubles 
and difficulties are incidental to human existence. But they will 
pass in due course. What are permanent are the values we 
cherish. 

In the world, every country has its own ideals and aspira- 
tions. Every country should adhere to its dharma, its traditional 
values. When a country disregards its ideals, it goes down as a 
nation. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 214 


Bharatiya culture is rooted in divinity 


The culture of Bharat (India) is a glorious one. It has sur- 
vived the vicissitudes of five thousand years in its history. A 
huge banyan tree is sustained by the fact that its roots go deep 
down into the earth to preserve it. In many countries, their an- 
cient culture has vanished long ago. But only Bharatiya (In- 
dian) culture has survived from the distant past to the present 
day. What is the reason? The divine roots of that culture have 
gone down to the core of the earth and established themselves 
firmly. It is that divinity which is sustaining this culture. 

The culture of Bharat should not be considered merely as a 
catalogue of ideals. It is a perennial source of inspiration and 
example. In spite of other changes, it has remained the same. 
The perennial message of this culture is not properly recog- 
nised. 

Despite the remarkable progress in science, peace is elud- 
ing the advanced countries. What happiness can there be when 
there is no peace? Churchill once observed that man had 
achieved many victories but had not conquered his senses. 
Prahlada conveyed the same lesson to his father. If a man has 
no control over his mind, what is the use of all other con- 
quests? 

Control of the mind is the first requisite. It can be achieved 
only by pursuing the spiritual path and not by any other means. 

What is the significance of the Guru Purnima, which we 
are celebrating today? People consider a person who imparts 
knowledge as a preceptor. But most of them are mere teachers, 
not preceptors (gurus). There is only one guru, and He is God. 

Many who describe themselves as gurus collect contribu- 
tions from their disciples on this day. The letter Gu signifies 
one who transcends all attributes. Ru signifies one who has no 
form. Only God can be regarded as one who is beyond attrib- 
utes and forms. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 215 


In another sense, the term guru means one who dispels ig- 
norance. Most so-called gurus are engaged in worldly activi- 
ties. In the Kali Age, even spirituality has become a kind of 
business! 

People should understand the distinction between worldly 
love and spiritual love. Worldly love is based on the desire to 
receive. Divine love yearns to give. God’s love goes on giving. 
This is the true mark of divinity. It is a sign of purity. Spiritu- 
ality is opposed to the ways of the world. Worldly activities 
cannot always be avoided. But if whatever is done is made an 
offering to please God, it gets sanctified. Whatever you 
achieve, treat it as a gift from God. You will then realize your 
true humanness. 

True humanness consists in the unity of good conduct, 
good thoughts and good speech. Never depart from truth. Let 
love flow freely from your heart. 


Mind’s role in health and disease 


At a recent meeting in Bangalore, a devotee said, “I am 
constantly bathing in the river of life flowing in Bangalore.” 
But where is this river of life to be found in Bangalore? He in- 
dicated that he considered the drainage water in the city as life- 
giving river. It flows on forever and is never dry. It is no won- 
der that people bathing in such “life-giving” rivers are full of 
diseases. 

What are the causes of the maladies afflicting people to- 
day? Impure air, polluted water, adulterated foodstuffs, etc. 
Nor is that all. Even the minds are polluted. These mental ail- 
ments are the cause of man's degradation. Most of the diseases 
are caused by aberrations of the mind. Ninety per cent of the 
diseases are psychological. Constant thinking about one’s 
health is also the cause of many diseases. A heart specialist, 
who was constantly examining heart patients, was worried 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 216 


about this own heart. Ultimately he died of heart attack. An- 
other doctor, who specialized in treating digestion disorders, 
ultimately died of gastric troubles by worrying about his own 
digestion! 

The mind has thus a vital role in one’s health or illness. 
That was why the sages declared, “The mind is the cause of 
men’s bondage or liberation.” When the mind is directed to- 
ward sacred things, everything in a one’s life becomes sacred. 
In such a state, all that you think, see or hear becomes pure and 
sacred. 

The heart is like a lock with the mind as the key. Turn the 
key toward God, you develop detachment. Turn the mind to- 
ward the world, you get attachment. Our minds should not be 
immersed in mundane concerns. Deem everything in the world 
as divine. 


True yearning for God is essential to experience Him 


Once Vivekananda went to Swami Ramakrishna Parama- 
hamsa and asked him, “Have you seen God?” 

“Yes,”, said Ramakrishna. 

“In what form?” asked Vivekananda. 

Ramakrishna replied, “I am seeing him just as I am seeing 
you.” 

“Why, then, am I unable to see Him?” 

Ramakrishna explained that if he yearned for God with the 
same intensity with which he was yearning for many other 
things, he would be able to experience God. Ramakrishna said 
that people shed tears for relations, wealth, and many other 
things, but how many shed tears for God? Ramakrishna ad- 
vised Vivekananda to yearn for God with all his heart and soul. 
God is then bound to manifest Himself to him. 

If we are keen to experience the Divine, we must devote 
ourselves to the Divine. People go through various troubles for 
the sake of wealth, relations, position, and power. If they were 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 217 


to devote a small fraction of that time to thoughts of God, they 
would experience freedom from the fear of death. If you think 
only of world, how can you get peace and bliss? 


Love the Lord who resides in your heart 


Concentrate on the love of God. Although one’s mother, 
father, and preceptor are to be adored as divine beings, they are 
not God. God should be worshipped as mother, father, pre- 
ceptor, kinsman, and friend. Father, mother, and preceptor 
dwell in their respective abodes. But God dwells in your heart. 
Love the Lord who resides in your heart. All other objects of 
love are impermanent. What is the use of education if you have 
not learnt to worship God? 

What does the worship of God mean? Practices like medi- 
tation, japa and penance are all tainted by selfishness. True 
worship of God consists in seeking union with God by realis- 
ing one's own divinity. With every breath, man proclaims that 
he and the Divine are one in the mantra So-Ham, expressed 
through inhalation and exhalation. 

Men must recognize that the body becomes a sacred shrine 
(kshetra) because the indweller is God (Kshetrajna). To know 
that God is the indweller will free a person from all bad quali- 
ties. Egoism is the worst enemy of man. Possessiveness 
(mamakara) is another evil trait. Both these should be ban- 
ished, since they are at the root of all vices. When the two evil 
traits go, man becomes divinised. 

By developing love, one sees the Divine in all beings. It is 
like wearing coloured glasses. If you see the world through the 
glasses of love, you will see love everywhere. The glasses and 
the vision must be in harmony. Only with the eye of love can 
you use the glasses of love to see the loveliness of the world. 
There is no greater spiritual path than the path of love. It is 
through love that such noble qualities as kindness, compassion 
and sympathy are fostered. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 218 


Embodiments of Love! You are carrying on a variety of 
spiritual exercises (sadhanas). God does not seek your sadha- 
nas. Nor does He seek your devotion. He seeks only your love. 


Difference between a devotee and a servant of God 


A short while ago, K.R. Prasad, a Member of the Sathya 
Sai Central Trust, came to Me. In the course of our talk he 
asked Me, “What is the difference between a bhakta (devotee) 
and a dasa (servant of the Lord)?” 

I told him, “Dasa is one who seeks to serve the Lord using 
his body for the purpose. Bhakta is one who is always thinking 
about God wherever he may be. The devotee is one who “al- 
ways and at all times contemplates on God’ “Sarvada Sar- 
vakaaleshu Sarvatra Hari Chintanam (Dasa is always thinking 
of service to God).” 

Sankaracharya had five disciples. One of them was pure- 
hearted. The other disciples were keenly studying the Sastras, 
the Upanishads, and other texts. They were also learning logic 
and grammar. One day, Sankaracharya was teaching these dis- 
ciples the principles of logic. 

One of them was primarily concerned with service to the 
guru; he regarded himself as a dasa of the guru. He was en- 
gaged in gathering clothes of the guru after the morning ablu- 
tions, taking them to the Ganga, washing them, drying them, 
and bringing them back to the ashram. Thus he was totally in- 
volved in attending to the personal needs of the guru. He kept 
the guru’s clothes clean, chanting all the while the name of the 
guru. 

Once, on his way back from the other bank of the river, he 
did not realize that the Ganga was in spate. As he was crossing 
the river, it rose up to the level of his neck. He looked around, 
but had no fear whether he would be washed away by the 
swelling waters. His only worry was how to take the clothes to 
the guru even at the cost of his life. Placing the clothes on his 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 219 


head and chanting the word, “guruji! guruji”, he continued 
wading through the river. Because of his intense devotion to 
his guru, at every step he took there was a lotus-shaped stone 
on which he could place his foot. 

He thereby earned the appellation “Padmapada”. Sanka- 
racharya called him and imparted his teachings to him. He told 
Padmapada: “Service to the guru is a great virtue. You have 
adored the guru as God. Guru represents the Divine Trinity 
and is the Supreme Self.” 


God alone is the real Guru 


Today, the scriptural saying that the Guru is Brahma, 
Vishnu, and Maheswara should be understood not in the literal 
sense but in the sense that God alone is the real guru. Sankara 
taught Padmapada that individual preceptors should not be 
worshipped as gods. Then, he imparted to Padmapada the sa- 
cred truth. 

The other four disciples used to treat Padmapada previ- 
ously as an ignoramus. After receiving the teachings from 
Sankaracharya, Padmapada could repeat the entire Vedic texts 
at one stroke. He became a good exponent of Vedanta, better 
than many scholars. 

One day Sankaracharya summoned Padmapada and asked 
him to whom he was preaching and what message he was giv- 
ing to them. Padmapada burst into a hymn in praise of Siva 
and said that Sankara was the inspiration for all his teachings 
and all his discourses were an offering to Sankara. Who is 
Sankara? Sankara is one who is free from sanka (doubts). 

No one should have any doubts about God. The doubting 
man can achieve nothing. With total faith and total love, you 
can accomplish anything. 

It should be realized that proficiency in fields like music, 
literature, and the arts is secured by the grace of the Divine. All 
fine arts are gifts from God. Nothing can be claimed as one’s 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 220 


own achievement. The recipient of God’s grace will lack 
nothing. He will have no troubles, and he will commit no 
wrongs because he has surrendered to God. The person who 
considers God as his all becomes one with God (himself). 
Hence, direct your minds toward God. 


9 July 1998 
Sai Kulwant Hall, Prasanthi Nilayam 


25 


True education fosters human 
values 


Daivaadheenam Jagathsarvam 
Sathyaadheenamtu Daivatham 
That Sathyam Uthamaadheenam 
Uthamo Paradevatha 


The whole world is under the control of God; 

God is subject to truth. 

Truth is subject to noble souls. 

Such noble people are the embodiments of Divinity. 


Students! Embodiments of Love! Teachers and promoters 
of education! Today, people have not understood Divinity, 
have not understood the meaning of God, and are wasting their 
bodies, their time, and all precious things in life. Human values 
do not depend on education alone. They depend more on cul- 
ture. What do you mean by culture? Culture means giving up 
one’s bad conduct, bad behaviour, bad deeds and cultivating 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 222 


good thinking, fostering good sentiments that lead to good ac- 
tions. 

The state of the whole world depends on human activity. 
When the actions of the people are noble, the country is 
equally noble. The people’s behaviour and conduct depend on 
their thoughts. Thoughts depend on the mind. Good thoughts 
are the basis of human values. 


Good thoughts yield goodness 


Because human values are not practised, the world is in a 
mess. The head and the heart are two important organs in every 
human being. Thoughts that arise in the head are worldly and 
fickle. They are influenced by external activities. Reading, 
writing, eating, and earning are all outward activities. They are 
the products of the head. 

All sacred feelings arise from the heart. Sacred qualities 
like compassion, love, sympathy, forbearance, and truth ema- 
nate from the heart. They are all called inward qualities. The 
world is nothing but a combination of external and internal 
tendencies. Just as a sapling grows into a huge tree giving you 
flowers and fruits, likewise, thoughts that are sacred lead to 
actions that yield fruits of all goodness. 

Man is combination of three entities: the body, the mind, 
and the Atma (spirit). First comes the body. It is the instrument 
of action. The mind thinks. The conscience is the Atma, or 
spirit that exists as consciousness. So, human life is a combi- 
nation of these three aspects: action, thinking, and conscious- 
ness. 

If the body functions independently without consulting the 
mind and the spirit, the activity will be animal activity. If the 
mind acts independently without coordinating with the body 
and the spirit, the activity is likely to be demonic. If the spirit 
acts independently, the actions will transcend the body and the 
mind. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 225 


The true mark of a human being is goodness. Goodness is 
not a product of academic education. Can bookish knowledge 
be called true education? Without spiritual knowledge and 
wisdom, can a person be called educated? 


Every student must cultivate human values 


Education must inculcate respect for human values like 
truth, righteousness, love, and peace. Education is for life. Life 
is for man. Man is there for society. Society is meant for spiri- 
tuality. The spirituality is there for the nation. The nation is 
part of the world, and the world is for peace. 

Today everyone wants peace. In fact you can attain and ac- 
quire peace only out of human values. For peace and happi- 
ness, human values are most important. Bereft of human val- 
ues, man can never be in peace. 

Without understanding this principle, man tries to acquire 
education. Man today considers that receiving information is 
education. It is not information that confers human values. 
Modern education makes a man machine, a computer. Great- 
ness lies in becoming not a computer but a composer. You 
have to acquire education to make your life ideal. 

Modern education tends to make men selfish. There should 
be a limit even for selfishness. Every student must necessarily 
cultivate human values. The Government, by establishing edu- 
cational institutions in every village and street, thinks that the 
education in the country has progressed. 

What are the qualities of education? Virtues, good intellect, 
adherence to truth, devotion, discipline, and duty are essential 
qualities. Education must teach these values. Students have to 
learn these things. 

What is the progress in modern education? In fact, students 
try to ruin those who are responsible for their food. They harm 
those who help them. They make fun of those who teach them. 
This is the progress in ‘modern’ education. Students have to 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 224 


foster obedience, humility, and human values and attain Di- 
vinity. This is true education. Modern students do not under- 
stand what true education is. As a result, society is polluted. 
Truth and other human qualities have been distorted and per- 
verted altogether. Sanctity and sacred quality of human nature 
is fast disappearing. The practise of righteousness, compassion 
are viewed as bad practices. Do you call this ‘progress’ in edu- 
cation? No. you should express human values by practicing 
righteousness and cultivating compassion. 


The true meaning of education 


With good education, you will have culture, 
When you have culture, that is true life. 
If you have good education, you will be happy. 
When you are happy, you will be peaceful. 
When you have good education, 
You will be in good company. 
When you are in good company, 
You will have good qualities. 
When you have good education, 
Your life will find fulfillment. 
Thereby, you can attain liberation. 
[Poem] 


Students should adhere to the twin ideals of sathya and 
dharma (truth and righteousness). In this world, there is noth- 
ing greater than truth. You should become embodiments of 
truth. In your daily life you should follow the path of truth and 
realise the Divine. 

You have to water a sapling to get fruit and seeds. Love, 
which is natural to human beings, should be watered with faith 
to sustain it. We should make an effort to attain peace in the 
true sense of the word. The peace that we get today is mo- 
mentary. We cannot call it peace anyway. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 225 


The history of Bharat is one long saga of sacrifice 


In the modern world, Bharat stands for all that is sacred. 
Since, ancient times, it has been a model and an ideal for the 
rest of the world. There is Truth in the air of Bharat. There is 
dharma in the dust of Bharat. There is love in the sands of 
Bharat. And there is compassion in the water of Bharat. 

Forbearance is the core of Bharatiya (Indian) culture. In 
order to enjoy and experience these values, even foreigners 
have decided to come and settle down in Bharat. In ancient 
times, Bharatiyas were determined to follow the principle of 
sacrifice. They were dedicated to righteousness and truth. 

Having been born in the sacred land of Bharat, you should 
not forget this important aspect. If you go through the history 
of this sacred land, you will certainly understand that Bharat 
never tried to invade or conquer any country. They had to re- 
sist foreign invaders. Bharatiyas stand for selflessness. They 
were never selfish at any point of time. Bharatiyas never cov- 
eted the lands of others. The history of Bharat is one long saga 
of sacrifice. 

Emperor Harischandra was prepared to give up everything 
for the sake of Truth. Emperor Sibi sacrificed his own flesh 
and blood to save a dove. Bharat has given birth to men and 
women who stood for sacrifice. Modern students are trying to 
change this land of sacrifice, from a land of spiritual practices 
into a land of pleasure seekers. But all pleasure is transient. 
You should seek the bliss that is enduring by realizing your 
inherent Divinity. 

Yesterday, an American boy came to Swami. Bhagavan 
asked him, “How old are you?” 

The boy said, “Seven years.” 

Swami asked him: “How do you know?” 

He said, “My mother and father told me.” 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 226 


Swami said, “It is only one that has become seven. One 
plus one plus one... comes to seven.” Without one there can- 
not be seven. All numbers come out of one. Truth is one; 
scholars call it by many names. Names and forms differ, but 
Divinity is one and the same in all. First, have faith in yourself. 
Without self-confidence, you cannot have faith in yourself. 
Then how can you have faith in others? Let this visvasa (faith) 
become your svasa (life-breath). Let our education become 
true education. Education that is not practised is bookish 
knowledge. 

You should have love for your country also. Rama Said, 
“Motherland is greater than heaven itself.” That spirit of patri- 
otism is very important. 


10 August 1998 
Sri Sathya Sai Institute of Higher Learning, Puttaparthy 


When you ask God for help, He is right beside you 
with hands held out to help you. All you need is the 
discrimination to pray to God and the wisdom to 
remember Him. 

— Baba 


26 


Truth and love shape dharma 


God is the embodiment of love. 

If you don’t understand even a fraction 
of that love in this world, 

how do you expect to realize truth and 
fulfill your ambitions? 


Embodiments of Divine Love! Peace, friendship, servitude, 
sweetness, affection —these are all synonyms of the basic 
principle of love. The more a man develops love, the more 
blissful he will be. Man aspires to be blissful. Man always 
wants to be happy. What is the reason? Man is born out of this 
bliss. He lives in bliss. He ends in bliss. This bliss is divine. 
Though this divine quality is latent in him, man searches for it 
outside. Bliss does not have a separate existence . 

Man strains himself thinking that he would be happy by 
learning. He makes every effort to take up a job, to be happy. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 228 


Thinking that he would find happiness in it, he struggles hard 
to occupy exalted positions. He thinks that he would be happy 
by becoming a householder. In spite of all these efforts, he is 
far from this happiness. 

Of all the attributes and names of God, Sat-Chit-Ananda is 
the most precious. To attain such a bliss, one has to follow this 
path of Sat-Chit-Ananda. Sat is the truth that remains the same 
in all the three worlds and in all the three periods of time. In 
order to know this truth, one has to tread along this path only. 
Chit means total awareness. Out of this total awareness, you 
can attain Divinity. Where these three principles, Sat-Chit- 
Ananda, exist, there is supreme bliss, Brahmananda. 


Why does God incarnate? 


Man undertakes many spiritual pursuits to attain this bliss 
(Divinity). But they all give him temporary satisfaction, not 
lasting bliss. They are all worldly pursuits. Once you give up 
these external paths and take to the inward path, you attain 
bliss. Those who want this eternal, supreme, non-dual bliss 
should follow this path of Sat and Chit. 

In order to reach this blissful state, one has to follow the 
path of truth. Truth is God. Truth is all pervasive. Truth is be- 
yond time and space and all reckoning. Once you follow this 
truth, naturally you can attain God, who is the embodiment of 
truth. This is what Veda means, when it says, “Uddhareth At- 
manaatmaanam. (You should work for your own eman- 
cipation).” You should know your truth. Investigate your own 
heart. There lies real bliss. 

All physical paths confer temporary satisfaction. 

Man has four primary objectives in life. They are dharma 
(righteousness), artha (wealth), kama (desire), and moksha 
(liberation). These four objectives give us worldly comforts 
and bring peace and enjoyment in our life. However, there is a 
fifth objective of life called Supreme Love. It is the principle 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 229 


of love that makes you love God intensely. The one who un- 
derstands and follows this sacred text of love will attain libera- 
tion. 

What is liberation? Mukti (liberation) is that which would 
put an end to external pursuits. 

What is to be offered to God? This body, which is the tem- 
ple of God, should be offered to God. This is called Pindar- 
panam. This body is Pindamu; offering this to God is libera- 
tion. It means only that all actions that we do with this body 
should be offered to God. This is the fifth objective of human 
life, i.e. the sacred ideal of love. To teach this sacred rule of 
love, to pass on the sacred love, to propagate this love, to make 
people drink the nectar of love, the formless God descends 
from Goloka to Bhuloka in a human form. 


We have to offer our total love to God 


The day of descent of God on earth is celebrated as the 
birthday of God. Why does He incarnate? God descends on 
earth to make humanity drink the nectar of love and enjoy the 
sweetness of Divinity. One who drinks this sweet nectar for- 
gets himself and identifies himself with God and enjoys the 
blissful state thereafter. “Shariramaadyam khalu dharma 
saadhanam, the body is gifted to perform sacred actions. 

We have to discharge our duties and sacrifice the fruits of 
our actions. We have to cultivate the principle of thyaga (sacri- 
fice) and be far off from bhoga (worldly pleasures). God is the 
embodiment of thyaga. The bliss that you get out of sacrifice is 
truly divine. Those who want to enjoy the blissful state of God 
must give up body attachment and turn inward. 

We should not spend all our time for our bodily pleasures. 
We do need to safeguard our body. What for is the body 
given? It is given to serve God. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 230 


What we need is good character 


The body is bound to perish at some point of time. Just for 
the sake of this fleeting body, we should not waste our time 
and energy. What we need is good character. The modern stu- 
dent tries to acquire only physical strength, friendship, and 
wealth. But all these things are not important. Character is im- 
portant. Without character, physical strength, friendship, and 
wealth are of no use. It does not matter even if wealth or 
friendship is lost, but you should keep up your character. 

In the ancient days, Bharathiyas (Indians) believed, “If 
wealth is lost, nothing is lost, if health is lost, something is lost, 
if character is lost, everything is lost." But due to the effect of 
Kali Age, people now say, “if character is lost, nothing is lost, 
if health is lost, something is lost, it wealth is lost, everything 
is lost.” This is the modern trend. This is not the path that we 
have to adopt. 

The previous speaker, Prof. Chatterjee, narrated the inci- 
dent of Krishna lifting the Govardhanagiri, in order to protect 
the gopalas and gopikas (cowherd lads and maids) from the 
torrential rain. When Krishna told them to come and take 
shelter under the mountain, which He had lifted with His small 
finger, the people were afraid to do so. They doubted His Di- 
vinity, thinking Him to be only a small boy. Human beings 
form their opinion based on the physical frame and physical 
strength. It is only the Divine that goes by the character and 
not by the physical strength. 

We have to make an effort to know the difference between 
God’s love and human love. God always gives and gives and 
never receives anything in return, but man always receives and 
is never prepared to give. 

In every activity, we have to inquire the principle of truth. 
One who recognizes the truth will always live in bliss. Love is 
truth, love is life, and love is the goal. Love is second to none; 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 231 


love equals love alone. Only through the path of love can you 
reach the embodiment of love, which is God. It is not physical 
or worldly love. It is not “pravritti [rema”’, which is external, 
but it is the “nivritti prema’, which is eternal and Divine. 


It is not a mistake to criticise God out of love 


You can win God's love either by criticism or praise. When 
Dharmaja was offering first respects to Krishna in the open 
court, Sisupala started criticizing Krishna in many ways. 
Dharmayja could not bear this. As he was listening to this un- 
charitable criticism, he could see the life principle of Sisupala 
merging in Krishna. This made Dharmaja much more unhappy 
and dissatisfied. He started wondering how the life principle of 
a person like Sisupala could merge in the Lord. 

Dharmaja requested Narada, who was by his side, to ex- 
plain how such a thing could happen. Narada said, “O king! 
criticism or praise relate only to the body, not to the spirit. 
Moreover, Sisupala criticized Krishna only out of love and not 
hatred; since he knew that the more he criticized, the sooner he 
could merge in Him. There is no mistake if you criticize God 
out of love. Even such a criticism is a kind of praise.” 

Kamsa, having come to know that he would die at the 
hands of Krishna, decided to kill Krishna and Balarama. Im- 
mediately, he called Akrura and commanded him to go and 
fetch Balarama and Krishna saying, “O Akrura, you are a good 
friend and devotee of Krishna, if you go, they will surely con- 
descend to your request.” 

Since he could not disobey the command of the king, Ak- 
rura went and met Yashoda and Nanda and told them that 
Kamsa was performing a yagna and wanted Krishna and 
Balarama to attend it. But Yashoda and Nanda were not in fa- 
vor of their children going to Kamsa's palace. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 232 


The gopikas’ love for Krishna 


The gopikas (cowherd mainds), having heard of this, sur- 
rounded Nanda’s house and said that Krishna should not go to 
Mathura, because He was their life and they could not live 
without Him. They raised objections in several ways. 

Krishna is the very form of mystery and wonder. He did 
not utter a word, since he knew that gopikas would not be con- 
vinced so easily. So he sat in the chariot and made it disappear 
with his divine power. Until He reached the banks of Yamuna, 
no one could see the chariot. Since the gopikas found them- 
selves helpless, they returned to Brindavan. The gopikas had 
this intense love for Krishna, so they could see this love per- 
vading all over. 

Whenever the hearts of human beings become barren, be- 
cause of unrighteousness and lovelessness, in order to sow the 
seeds of love and in order to propagate the principle of love, 
God incarnates. The main mission of God is to develop the 
principle of love in mankind. Only when we get intoxicated 
and forget ourselves drinking the nectar of divine love can we 
find the path to liberation. 

In order to experience Sat-Chit-Ananda, we should tread 
along the path of truth. We should have total understanding of 
the Self; then we will enjoy the manifestation of God Himself. 
God is not present in a foreign land, He is present in your 
body. 

Krishna once questioned the gopalas around Him, “Who is 
the true victor?” 

One of them said, “One who emerges victorious in the bat- 
tlefield is the true victor.” A few said, “One who can face all 
the difficulties and troubles with steadfastness and courage is 
the true victor.” In this manner, each gave different answers. 

Krishna smilingly said, “Gopalas, whatever you mentioned 
are temporary in nature. None of them can be termed as a true 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 233 


victor. True success lies in controlling one’s senses. Then one 
will be a victor. One has to control the senses. The senses be- 
long to the body. Make this body a temple of God. 


It is impossible to understand God 


No one can describe God. The gopikas sang, “O Krishna, 
can we understand You? You are smaller than an atom, 
mightier than the biggest. You are present in all 84 lakhs of 
species always. Right from the atom to the entire cosmos, You 
are present everywhere.” 

It is impossible to understand God. We have to understand 
Him as the embodiment of love and recognise Him as the em- 
bodiment of truth. We should see that we follow the twin prin- 
ciples of truth and love. Then we will be able to control our 
senses. We cannot control our senses by any spiritual pursuits 
or physical exercises. All these are temporary. Only through 
the principles of love and truth is it possible to gain control 
over the senses. The combination of truth and love would 
shape into dharma. Therefore, speak the truth and follow 
dharma. Once we awaken truth within us, we can see God. 

Ego and attachment are the cause for all misery. In order to 
give up these two, develop love. Under any circumstances, we 
should not give up love. Only through love can you develop 
faith. Love is God, live in love. 

The gopikas prayed to Krishna thus, 


In order to sow the seeds of love in our barren 
hearts 

In order to see that there will be downpour of rain 
of love, 

So that the rivers of love would flow continuously, 

O Krishna! Please play on Your Divine Flute. 

Earth, seeds, rain, river, trees, fruits, all are filled 
with love. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 234 


Offer your body to God 


Having taken this human form, which is full of love, how 
is that we have lost it? Because we make use of our love in the 
worldly sense. When does it become true love? Only when we 
offer our body to God. This is true offering. Many people offer 
different things to God, but a true devotee offers himself to 
God. 

Emperor Bali offered himself to God, and he did not have 
rebirth. We should consider this body as the flower, which has 
to be offered at the lotus feet of God. Therefore, human life 
gifted to you has to be spent in doing good actions and ulti- 
mately offered to God. 

Brahmins think that the word, Pindarpanam is connected 
with the obituary rites. But. that is not so; offering our body to 
God is the true Pindarpanam. This is true offering that gives us 
liberation. Once the body is offered to God, there is no attach- 
ment (moha). Once attachment is gone, that is liberation — 
Moha kshayam is moksham. Those, who know this truth and 
conduct themselves accordingly, can enjoy bliss. Until we 
reach that sacred exalted state, we have to protect our body. 
We have to discharge our responsibilities. 

Bharatiyas (Indians), since ancient times, have given top 
priority to sacrifice. They give utmost importance to dharma. 
They held the quality of renunciation in the highest regard, and 
they welcomed truth. Since ancient times, the hearts of 
Bharathiyas are full of compassion. 

I have told students many a times about Max Muller. He 
was also called “Moksha Muller”, because of his noble quali- 
ties. Though he was a foreigner, his love for Bharat was be- 
yond all limits. He wanted to leave his mortal coil in this sa- 
cred land. Many of his friends questioned him as to what was 
so special about Bharat. He told them, “The air of Bharat has 
truth in it. There is dharma in the dust of Bharat. There is love 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 235 


in the mud of Bharat. In the Ganga, there is sacrifice. There is 
no other country as sacred as Bharat. That which is not present 
in Bharat is not present anywhere else in the world.” 

Even though born in Bharat and called Bharatiyas, we are 
not able to recognize the greatness of Bharat. We have to put 
in great effort in order to know the sanctity and greatness of 
Bharat. 


Significance of Krishna’s pranks 


One day, Balarama brought a few cowherd boys with him 
and started complaining to mother Yashoda. “O mother, 
Krishna is always so hungry! He eats at home as well as out- 
side like a glutton. Why should he eat mud? Today, he started 
eating mud.” 

Yashoda felt sad and was furious. She caught hold of 
Krishna’s hand and asked, “Krishna, am I not serving you 
enough food? Are you not eating enough butter in the neigh- 
borhood? Why have you started eating mud?” 

Krishna started explaining. “O mother, to eat mud am I a 
child or a madcap?” Though Krishna was only 5 years old at 
that time, by telling His mother that He was not a child or a 
madcap, He meant to indicate indirectly that He was the 
mighty Great One. Thu,s Krishna conveyed many inner se- 
crets. 

No one can understand Krishna’s /eelas in depth. They 
have some external implications and inner significance. But, 
today ,very few people know the inner reality. People are full 
of doubts. Mother Yashoda saw all the worlds in Krishna’s 
mouth, but she herself doubted. What was the main reason? It 
was the feeling that Krishna was her son. It is physical attach- 
ment that causes doubts. 

One should attach oneself to Atma. When Atma merges in 
Atma, everything becomes unified. This Atmic relationship is 
spirituality. The body relationship is physical. Therefore, it 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 236 


was Krishna who clarified all the doubts, demonstrated, mani- 
fested Divinity in everybody. 

Though all incarnations are Divine, Krishna Avatara was 
special in this sense that He spent all his time smiling and 
smiling, full of love. At no point in time was He angry. He was 
always smiling. This is the main quality of God. God has no 
trace of ego or pride or jealousy whatsoever. 

Such sacred qualities are present only in Sai Avatar again. 
In no other incarnation was this noticed. Though Divinity is 
uniform in all the incarnations, each Avatar expressed Himself 
on the basis of the prevalent circumstances. So, you should de- 
velop full faith in God. Just as you have faith in yourself, have 
faith in God. Faith in yourself, faith in God —this is the secret 
of greatness. You are God, and God is you only. Why do you 
give scope to doubts? In fact, these doubts will ruin you. So, 
give up all these doubts. Develop love, follow the path of truth, 
and experience the Divinity. This is true sadhana (spiritual 
practice), this is true spirituality. 


14 August 1998 
Prasanthi Nilayam 


27 


Glory of Vinayaka 


Conquering conceit, one becomes endearing; 
Conquering anger, one is free from regrets; 
Conquering desire, one becomes prosperous; 
Conquering greed, one becomes happy. 


Embodiments of divine Love! As long as a man is conceited 
and egotistic, no one will like him. Even his wedded wife and 
his own children, though they may appear to respect him ex- 
ternally,.will not be happy with an arrogant man. As long as a 
man is filled with ego, he is unlikely to be really happy.. 
Therefore, at the very outset, a man should get rid of his aham- 
kara (ego). 

“Krodham hithva na sochathi (As long as a man is filled 
with anger, he cannot experience joy).” He is bound to be mis- 
erable. Only when man subdues anger will he be able to expe- 
rience happiness. As long as one is filled with insatiable de- 
sires. one cannot feel really wealthy. The moment man gives 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 238 


up desires, all riches will come to him. As long as man is 
greedy, he will be a stranger to happiness. When man gives up 
greed, he will feel endowed with all riches. 


The atom and the Atma 


The whole cosmos is based on the atom. Whether an object 
is microcosmic or as vast as the cosmos, it is based on Atmic 
power. Few can realise tfully the power of the atom. 

The atom is constituted of energy in all its forms. The 
words you speak, the objects you see, the sounds you hear, the 
activities you undertake —all are based on the power of the 
atom. Every moment of every being is based on atomic power. 
All experience is derived from the energy of the atom. 

It has taken scientists thousands of years to discover this 
truth. But it was recognised by the child Prahlada a long time 
ago. He declared emphatically, “Do not doubt that He (the 
Lord) is at one place and not at another. You can find him 
wherever you look for Him.” 

Prahlada did not conduct any experiments or explorations 
in space. To those pure of heart, the truth reveals itself sponta- 
neously. 

“Subtler than the subtlest and vaster than the cosmos, the 
Atma (spirit) is the atom and the atom is the Atma.” This truth 
was recognised by the child Prahlada as a student. When this 
truth is recognizsed, the whole cosmos will be seen as perme- 
ated by the Divine, as a manifestation of the Divine. 

In every object there is the power of the atom. You cannot 
find any object or any place in which the atom is not present. 
All objects are compsed of atoms. All forms of energy are 
manifestations of the atom. The whole earth is made up of at- 
oms. 

In this world, every human being is a kind of small gen- 
erator of electricity. The magnetic power in him becomes 
electrical energy. It is because of this energy that man is able 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 239 


to walk, see, hear, and do many other things. The heart in 
every man is like a radio station. The energy in every being is 
based on atomic power. There are light waves. These generate 
magnetic energy. Recognising the connection between matter 
and energy, Einstein affirmed their convertibility. 

These findings of the scientists confirm the Vedantic view 
that the Brahman (the Divine) permeates the whole cosmos 
Only the terms used are different. The scientists declare that 
the cosmos is constituted of atoms. The Vedantins declare that 
the cosmos is Brahmamayam (permeated by the Divine). What 
the scientists and the sages declare is the one truth, called by 
different names. 


Ganapathi is the lord of intellect and wisdom 


Take the word “Ganapathi”. Ga represents buddhi (the in- 
tellect). Na signifies jnana (wisdom). Ganapathi is the pathi 
(lord) of the intellect and wisdom. To worship the intellect and 
wisdom is one form of worship of Ganapathi. 

Ganapathi represents the combination of much energy. Be- 
cause of this, the name Ganapathi is appropriate for him. Nor 
is that all. He is the lord of all the Ganas (celestial hosts). 
Hence, he is hailed as Ganapathi. 

He is called by another name, Vinayaka. There is no master 
above him; he is the master of all. 

Another name for him is Vigneswara. This name means 
that he is the lord of every form of aiswarya (wealth). He is the 
embodiment of all forms of wealth. 

When we explore the inner meanings of all the attributes 
associated with his name, we find that he possesses all powers. 
They include the all-pervading cosmic vibrations, the power 
that is latent in all animate and inanimate objects, and the ef- 
fulgence of the all-pervading Light. He is the energy that ani- 
mates every being. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 240 


There is electro-magnetic energy in every body. Nature is 
the embodiment of the same energy. This energy may assume 
different forms, but its essential character is one and the same. 
A lighted bulb, a fan that is revolving, and many other things 
working through electrical power depend on the same kind of 
current. The energy may manifest itself in the form of light, 
heat, or magnetic energy, but it proclaims the power of the Di- 
vine, which is the source of all energy. 


In all human beings, humanness is present equally 


The electro-magnetic energy in man expresses itself in the 
form of radiation. It is also called reflection of the “Inner be- 
ing”. The power of sight, hearing, speech, digestion, and 
movement of the limbs is derived from this energy. Water also 
contains this energy. In fact, the entitire cosmos is permeated 
by this divine energy. 

On the basis of this, Vedanta declares, “Sarvam khalu idam 
Brahma (verily, all this is Brahman).” Recognising this, the 
Vedas declared, “Sarvam Vishnumayam jagath (The cosmos is 
permeated by the Divine).” Hence, there is no room for making 
any distinction between Ganapathi, Vishnu, Siva, Sakthi, or 
man. 

In all human beings, humanness is present equally. It mani- 
fests itself externally in various forms. This is only the external 
manifestation of nature, not its internal essence. The inner as- 
pect is present in all begins in a subtle formless substance. That 
is atomic energy. Several means were employed for harnessing 
this energy for various purposes. 

On this auspicious day of Vinayaka Chaturthi, what is it 
that we offer to Vinayaka? All offerings to Vinayaka are free 
from the use of oil in their preparation. Boiled rice is made into 
balls, which are filled with thil seeds and jaggery (a form of 
sugar). They are then mixed with rice flour and cooked. In the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 241 


offering, there is no trace of any cooking oil. Hence, the offer- 
ings are called oilless edibles. 

What is the significance of such preparations? It is found 
that oilless edibles are easily digestible. The thil seeds serve to 
keep down the bad effect of phlegm, bile, and wind in the 
body. The jaggery in the prepartion is conducive to improve- 
ment of vision. All these preparations are intended to promote 
health and are not designed to propitiate the Divine. The ener- 
gey derived from these edibles is conducive to the promotion 
of longevity. 

Vinayaka is known for his high intelligence. The very sight 
of his figure gives joy to many. The form itself is extraor- 
dinary. He has a big belly, beautiful tusk, penetrating eyes, 
handsome ears —all these are harmonsiously balances to pro- 
duce an attractive form. 


The reason for endowing the deity with an elephant’s head 


What, it may be asked, is the reason for endowing the deity 
with an elephant’s head? The elephant is well known for its 
high intelligence. Among animals, it has a prodigious size. No 
other animal is cast in such a big mould. The elephant’s foot 
encompasses the footprint of the lion, esteemed as the lord of 
the animal kingdom. In the jungle, hunters follow the foot- 
prints of the lion to trace it to its lair. But if an elephant has 
walked over those footprints, they are totally erased. 

Moreover, the elephant is the pathfinder for human beings. 
In a forest covered with dense bushes, humans cannot easily 
find their way. But once an elephant has goine through the 
jungle, its trail becomes a path for others to follow. 

All these traits of the elephant show that in the journey of 
life, one can find one’s way if one has the intelligence of the 
elephant. Because he is endowed with the form of an elephant, 
Ganapath is is associated with the quality of intelligence. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 242 


Primacy of Vinayaka 


Once, Parvathi and Parameswara, parents of Ganapathi and 
Subramanya, wanted to test their intelligence. They summoned 
the two sons and told them to go around the world to find out 
which of the two would do it quicker. The elder of the two, 
Ganapathi, did not stir from his place. The younger son, 
Subramanya, mounted his peacock and set out on a round-the- 
world trip. With a great deal of effort, he completed the trip 
and was approaching his parents. Seeing him from a distance, 
Ganapathi circumambulated his parents and claimed himself to 
be the winner. 

The mother, Parvathi, told Ganapathi, “Ganapathi! Here is 
your brother, who has gone around the world. And you have 
not stirred from this place. You made no effort at all. How can 
you claim that you have gone around the world? How can I 
regard you as the winner?” 

Ganesha replied, “Mother! The cosmos is the combination 
of matter and energy —the unity of father and mother. When I 
go around You, I have gone around the world itself, since You 
are the parents of the cosmos. There is no place where You 
two are not present. I see Your omnipresence. By circum- 
ambulating both of You, I can claim to have gone around the 
cosmos.” 

The moment He heard these words, Easwara was aston- 
ished at the high intelligence of His son. Ganesha had recog- 
nised the truth about His divine parents. Easwar said, “V1- 
nayaka! You are an exemplary son for one and all. Let the 
world worship you first before they offer worship to me. I am 
not as intelligent as you are. We are your parents, but not more 
intelligent than you.” 

Easwara declared, “I have many attributes, but not your 
intelligence. Hence, before offering worship to Me, let all peo- 
ple worship you. This is the boon I confer on you.” 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 243 


Easwara is a parent who conferred such an honour of a 
higher status than His own on His son. Hence, Ganapathi rep- 
resents no commonplace principle. He is the embodiment of all 
potencies. He is the abode of every kind of intelligence. The 
Saraswathi (goddess of wisdom) dwells in His belly. Nothing 
untoward can happen wherever He is present. 

Ganapathi occupies the position of one who is the source of 
all prosperity. Morevoer, when He is invoked before any un- 
dertaking, there will be no impediments to its completion. 

Today, every kind of people —the welathy, the wise, the 
scholars, and the common people— worship Ganapathi. Stu- 
dents, with a view to secruing the grace of the goddess of wis- 
dom and ensuring that there is no hindrance to their studies, 
place their books before the idol Ganapathi and worship Him. 


Bharat and Bharati 


The name of our nation, Bharat, is derived from that of 
Saraswathi, the goddess of all knowledge and wisdom. Some 
people wrongly attribute the name Bharat as one derived from 
the name of Bharatha, the brother of Rama. This is not so. 

Among the names mentioned in the hymns in praise of 
Saraswathi is Bharati. With reference to music, the word 
bharati is significant. Good music has to combine bhava 
(feeling, represented by the letter bha), raga (tune, ra), and 
thala (rhythm, thi). The feeling, tune, and rhythm have to be 
combined to produce good music. 

Every music concert begins with a song in adoration of 
Ganapathi, like “Vaathaapi Ganapathim Bhaje\” This shows 
that by worshipping Ganapathi, profiency in any sphere is 
achieved. 

Ganapathi is not only the lord of various activities but is 
the presiding deity for all auspicious functions. He can make 
even inauspicious occasions auspicious. He is always engaged 
in conferring boons on all. He is the river of prosperity and in- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 244 


telligence. With the grace of Ganapathi, any desire can be re- 
alised. 


How to pray? 


In praying to Ganapathi, you should not ask for trivial 
things like passing examinations or getting jobs. You should 
pray only, “Oh Vighneswara! Please see that there are no ob- 
stacles in what I want to accomplish. I am worshipping you for 
this purpose.” 

Today, few people understand the true spirit of the Gana- 
pathi Thathwa (Principle). They are concerned with the outer 
forms and ignore the inner esoteric meaning. 

This applies to the way many festivals are celebrated. The 
birthday of Rama is celebrated without understanding the 
qualities represented by Rama. To be real devotees of Rama, 
people should cultivate His qualities. To be a true devotee of 
Krishna, you must be ever in bliss, like Krishna. If you want to 
be a devotee of Sai, you must be full of love. Love all, serve 
all. 

Sometimes, Swami may appear as if He is not showing His 
love. This is only an external appearance for the moment. Pots, 
however different they may appear, are essentially made of 
clay, and all golden ornaments are essentially gold in sub- 
stance. Similarly, all actions of Swami are essentially filled 
with love. You must cultivate this kind of feeling. You must 
love God with full faith. 

The Ganapathi Principle is pregnant with meaning. His 
story itself is unique. In the Bhagavatha, Pothana declares that 
the stories of the lord are extraordinary; they are sacred for all 
the three worlds; they confer all blessings on the listeners and 
are constantly contemplated upon by saints and sages. This ap- 
plies to all deities. 

Every aspect of the Divine is a mystery. Whatever the Lord 
says is full of significance. It is pregnant with sacred meaning. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 245 


Obey the Lord 


Sainath, a member of the university faculty, who had spo- 
ken earlier, said that when someone wanted to leave, Swami 
told him, “Wait!” But he was in a hurry, bought his ticket, and 
left Prasanthi Nilayam. 

However, he had to wait for a long time there, and even 
then he could not get what he wanted. If instead he had waited 
here, it would have been better for him. 

After waiting a long time, he came back. Swami told him, 
“Ayya! When I told you not to go, why did you go?” There is 
latent meaning in whatever I say. Some persons tend to treat 
my words lightly. 

Here, people are seated in rows. I move between them. As I 
move along, various people address various appeals to Me for 
this or that. Swmai tels them, “Wait. Wait. Please sit down.” 
They assume that this means that they should go on sitting and 
waiting until everyone else has left. 

I merely ask them to sit down when they get up from their 
places. “Wait, wait, don’t be hasty,” is all that I mean. Instead 
of understanding this properly, they take it to mean that they 
are asked to wait after all have left. They contniue to sit even 
after the volunteers ask them to leave. 

This is utter foolishness. They should understand words in 
their proper context and behave appropriately. They must un- 
derstand the context of time, place, and circumstance and be- 
have in the correct manner. 

Devotees worship Vinayaka in different ways. They ad- 
dress the deity, describing his white robe, his moon-like com- 
plextion, his four arms, and his ever-smiling face and pray for 
the removal of all obstacles. Some misguided non-believers 
interpret the same hymn in a perverse manner. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 246 


The true devotee sees the Divine in everything. Ramada 
sang about the Lord of Bhadrachala, “Oh Rama! You are eve- 
rywhere in the universe.” 

The power of the Divine permeates every atom in the cos- 
mos. How is this to be recognised? The Divine is effulgent. 
Devotees envisage the Divine in different ways and express 
their adoration in various forms. 

Abhimanyu (son of Arjuna) knew how to make his way 
through the Padhma Vyuha (a military formation). But he did 
not know how to get out of it. The path to God lies through 
love. With love, you can go anywhere. Love is God. Live in 
love. Start the day with love, fill the day with love, spend the 
day with love, and end the day with love. This is the way to 
God. 


Love begets love 


How is love to be fostered? Only through love can you 
foster love. There is no other way. For a plant to grow, you 
have to use manure and water. Students should realise that to 
foster love of God, they have to apply the manure of faith and 
water of love. Only thus can the plant of devotion grow. 

Never forget God. God alone is everlasting. That is the 
only Truth. Your parents will pass away some time or other, 
but God will remain forever. God is eternal. 

Always adore God. In addion, love your parents and all 
others. Your love for God should be steady and unwavering. 
That love is God. It is the very form of Ganapathi. That love is 
present in all beings. 

You are all manifestations of the Divine. Consider your- 
selves as divine. There is nothing wrong in that. In terms of 
the body, you are a human being, but spiritually, you are di- 
vine. Lead your life with the awareness “Aham Brahmaasmi (I 
am divine).” 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 247 


We must think of God every moment of our lives 


Rama once invited Hanuman to come near him and asked, 
“In what manner do you worship me?” 

Hanuman replied, “Swami, from the viewpoint of the body, 
I am Your servant and You are my Lord. Mentally, I consider 
that I am a spark of Your Divinity. But in terms of the Atma, 
you are I are one. We are not two at all. Both of us are one.” 

People worship the Divine in three ways. But ultimately 
they have to realise the third stage. Bodies are different but the 
Atma (the Self) is one only. This is why the sages declared, 
“Ekam Sath, viprah bahudha vadanthi (the Absolute is One, 
but the wise call it by different names).” 

People look upon the Vighneswara festival as some routine 
affair. But Vighneswara embodies all the forms and all the 
powers of all the deities. It is not enough to worship Ganesha 
once a year. We must worship Him always. 

We must think of God every moment of our lives. It is in 
that spirit that everyone is enjoined to offer all actions as de- 
signed to please the Divine. Do what you please. Go anywhere 
you like. But do everything with the feeling that it is to please 
the Divine. Whatever you do, do it with the feeling that you are 
doing it for the pleasure of the Divine. Thereby, you will ac- 
complish all your desires. You will experience bliss. See the 
Divine in everything 


25 August 1998 
Sai Kulwant Hall, Prasanthi Nilayam 


28 


Subjugate your ego 


Sarva Roopa Dharam Saantham 
Sarva Naama Dharam Sivam 
Satchidanandam Advaitham, 
Sathyam Sivam Sundaram 
[Sanskrit sloka] 


Ellaarukkum Enndey Aaseervaadangal (My Blessings to 
all)! 

Embodiments of Love! In this world, you will not find 
peace and happiness anywhere. Though man is himself the 
embodiment of peace and love, man is not able to experience 
them. Even though he has these sacred qualities in him, he is 
not able to understand this truth and is carried away by delu- 
sions. As a result, he is subjected to endless troubles. In order 
to experience Divinity and to find peace and happiness, you do 
not need to search elsewhere. In order to have a vision of your 
True Self, you need to understand your true identity. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 249 


What is that which conceals the Truth from man? It is only 
the Mind. The clouds that originate from the rays of the Sun 
cover the Sun Himself. When a strong wind blows, the clouds 
get scattered, and then you can see the Sun. Just as the clouds 
cover the Sun, likewise the mind covers the Atma from which 
it has originated. 

Embodiments of Love! No other creature has the divine 
power present in man. But he is not able to comprehend such 
divine power latent in him. What is the way to know this? 
Once you develop friendship with God, you will realise all 
your powers. The Gita describes God as Suhruth, which means 
one who is totally selfless, one who does not expect anything 
in return, one who does not harm anybody, and one who is the 
embodiment of Love. Man usually expects rewards for the help 
he renders. But God is the only One who considers the welfare 
of humanity as His happiness and does not have any expecta- 
tions whatsoever. 


Desires are limitless 


Bad qualities like hatred, anger, and desire are responsible 
for restlessness. The worst enemy of mankind is desire. Ac- 
cording to the Gita, desire always remains an enemy to man- 
kind. So, one should keep desire under control. Desires are ca- 
pable of ruining not only mankind, but also gods like Indra and 
Chandra. One can never satisfy one’s desires. 

Vedanta has compared desire to fire and to the ocean. Fire 
will never be satisfied, whatever may be the quantity of fire- 
wood you put into it. The Gita has given the epithet analam to 
the fire, which means that it can never be satisfied and keeps 
asking for more and more. Similar is the case with the ocean. It 
keeps accepting any number of rivers that merge in it, and yet 
it remains the same. Ocean and fire have no trace of satisfac- 
tion. Therefore, limitless desires are compared to these two. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 250 


The whole world is like a book; read it well. Nature is the 
best teacher. There are lots of things in this world to be known. 
You cannot find God by going through a book or by under- 
taking spiritual sadhana. By constantly reading books, one be- 
comes a book himself! All that is contained in pusthaka (book) 
is stored in the masthaka (head). 

Reading books will only increase your doubts. The more 
intelligent you are, the more you get doubts. Developing com- 
passion is the real sadhana. Only when you lead lives full of 
compassion, you will be able to see God, the embodiment of 
compassion. 


Only through ‘eye of love’ can we visualise world peace 


Embodiments of Love! Since ancient times, Bharat (India) 
has been standing for the peace and security of the entire 
world, spreading the message of spirituality. You should work 
for the peace and prosperity of the country. Whatever work 
you undertake, do it for the welfare of the society. Universal 
peace depends on the peace of society, which in turn depends 
on the peace of the individual. So the individual, society, and 
the universe are interrelated and interdependent. But, today 
man is bothered about himself and not society. 

Today, people who talk of peace but actually cause rest- 
lessness in society are on the increase. Though they are en- 
dowed with intelligence, they act in a perverted manner. In 
what way can we help such people? The only way is to open 
their “eye of love (prema netram)’, Only through the “eye of 
love” we can visualise world peace. Without working for the 
welfare of society, how can you attain world peace? It is im- 
possible. 

All wealth and prosperity cannot confer true happiness. 
People say America is a land of prosperity. What is the use of 
all affluence? They do not have peace of mind. Bharathiyas 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 251 


(Indians) are the embodiments of peace. They may not have 
such comforts, but they have love for God. 


Of the time one spends on children, 

friends, and worldly pleasures, 
Acquiring wealth, power, name, and fame, 
If only a fraction is spent contemplating 

on the Lotus Feet of the Lord, 
One can even escape the mighty doors of hell, 

the abode of Yama 

[Sanskrit Poem] 


Only devotion can make your free from misery 


In ancient times, the kings ruled over their kingdoms in a 
righteous manner. The very name of Emperor Bali instills fear 
in the minds of people, but Bali was the very embodiment of 
compassion. He was an ardent devotee of Lord Vishnu, and he 
upheld the principles of righteousness. God loved him, since 
he had these three sacred qualities. It is enough if you have 
Vishnu bhakthi (devotion to Lord Vishnu). Only devotion can 
make you free from misery. 

Prahlada always chanted the name of Hari. 


Narayana Bhaja Narayan 

Narayana Bhaja Narayan, Narayan 
Thanu Mana Ranjana, Bhava Bhay 
Bhanjana, Asura Nikhandana Narayan 


In spite of being pushed down from mountains, drowned in 
the oceans, trampled by the wild elephants, bitten by poisonous 
snakes, he repeated Narayana's name. Only the name of Nara- 
yana helped him to overcome all these troubles. Only devotion 
will make you forget all your problems and experience Bliss. 
Even Sakkubai, the great devotee of Lord Panduranga, con- 
tinuously chanted the name of Ranga in order to overcome the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 252 


troubles caused by her husband and mother-in-law. Gora 
Kumbhar forgot all his worries singing the name of the Lord. 
Such is the power of the Divine name. 


God is the only Saviour 


What man needs today is Bliss. Duhka nivritthi, ananda 
prapthi (alleviation of misery and attainment of bliss) should 
be the sole aim of man. For this man has to make friendship 
with God. 

In this world, you may have many friends. But all of them 
can only say, “Hello, How are you, goodbye,” nothing more! 
God is not like that. He is always with you, in you, around you, 
above you, and below you. Since man is distancing himself 
from God, who is the True and Eternal friend, he is subject to 
sorrow. Today, man is after money and power and does not 
think of God. How long do money and power last? They come 
and go. That's what Sankaracharya said, “Maa kuru dhana 
Jana yavvana garvam, harathi nimeshaat, kaalah sarvam,” 
which means that money, power, and position are momentary 
and will not last long. 


Bhaja Govindam, Bhaja Govindam, 
Govindarn Bhaja Moodha Mathey, 
Sampraapthe Sannihithe Kaale, 

Nahi, Nahi Rakshathi Dhhukrun Karane 


“Your studies will not come to your rescue in the end, so 
chant the name of Govinda,” said Adi Shankara. God is the 
only refuge, and only He can come to your rescue in the end. 
So develop faith in God. He is the only Savior. 

All the world that you see with your naked eyes is only ap- 
parent Truth. All that you see is pravritti, (external) but there is 
a basis for this. That is called nivritti (internal). The unseen 
roots are the basis for the tree, which is seen. For buildings, 
foundation is the basis. Today, you are bothered about only the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 253 


building (body), and not the foundation. The body is the Tem- 
ple of God, but what is the nature of this body?. 


It is full of dirt and diseases. 
It cannot cross the ocean of Samsara. 
So, O mind, never think that this 
body is permanent. 
Surrender yourself at the Lotus Feet of the Lord. 
[Telugu Poem] 


How long will this body remain? “The body is like a water 
bubble; the mind is like a mad monkey; so do not follow the 
body; do not follow the mind; follow the conscience.” This is 
the principle of Atma. But man follows the body and the mind, 
leaving the conscience. No doubt, for the earthly sojourn, the 
body and the mind are necessary, but you should not give un- 
due importance to them. 


Give up moha to get moksha 


Emperor Bali did undertake all the sacred activities, but he 
had in him two bad qualities, ego and possessiveness (aham- 
karam and abhimanam). Even Arjuna had these feelings dur- 
ing the Mahabharatha war. He began his address to Krishna 
uttering the syllable Sva, which means Svartha, Svajana (I and 
My people). This is called moha (attachment). As long as man 
does not give up this moha, he will not get moksha (liberation). 
All your education and jobs will not follow you at the end. All 
these are passing clouds. That is why the Gita said, “Anith- 
yam, Asukham Lokam, Idam Praapya, Bhajasva maam (Since 
the world is temporary and fell of misery, think of God con- 
tinuously).” Keeping God, who is eternal, in your heart, you 
should lead your lives in this temporary world. 

Once, Bali performed a yajna (sacrifice) by name Sarvajit. 
Vamana also attended the yajna. Emperor Bali welcomed him 
and paid his respects. Till then, Vamana did not ask for any- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 254 


thing. In fact, he was planning how to subdue the ego of Em- 
peror Bali. In this world, for any work, people plan in advance. 
But God’s plan is not an ordinary one. God always thinks of 
the future and plans accordingly. 

Vamana went to Emperor Bali and asked for three foot- 
steps of land. But his preceptor, Sukracharya, warned him 
against giving what Vamana asked for, since he knew who 
Vamana was and the purpose for which He had come. Bali 
said, “Guruji, the hand of the giver is always on the top and the 
receiver’s is at the bottom. When God Himself comes to me 
and asks for something, His hand will be below that of mine. 
That is enough for me.” 


Ego is a bad quality for a devotee 


Even there, we find a trace of the ego. What is the inner 
meaning of the inhalation and exhalation processes, i.e. So- 
Ham? So means That (God); Ham means J. The sum and sub- 
stance of this is that we have to take God into us (So - 
inhalation) and leave out ahamkaram, i.e. ego (Ham - exhala- 
tion). This is called Hamsa Gayathri. This inhalation and ex- 
halation process goes on continuously for 21,600 times in a 
day in us. This means that you welcome God into you and 
drive out ego from you that many times. As long there is ego in 
you, you will never be happy. 

No doubt, Emperor Bali was a great devotee, but he was 
also egotistic. Ego is a bad quality for a devotee. Only through 
love, peace, humility, and courage can you overcome ego. 

God came down in order to destroy the ego of Bali and 
distribute Love to the entire world. Bali was granted a boon 
that he should be allowed to come and visit his people on this 
day, every year. That day is celebrated as Onam. Be it an em- 
peror or an innocent person, one can attain God only through 
Love. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 255 


Follow your conscience 


Many lights are glowing in this hall. Some people are lis- 
tening, some are dozing. The light is unaffected by all these. It 
is a witness. Similarly, in the broad day light, some do good, 
and some do bad. The Sun remains unaffected by your deeds. 

Your bad actions can never harm God. Your good actions 
will never make Him happy either. Be it good or bad, you will 
have to reap the fruits of your actions. God is Jyothirmayudu 
(Embodiment of Light). So, He has nothing to do with your 
good or bad. He is just a witness. He is present in everybody as 
conscience. That is why I keep telling, 


Follow the Master, 
Face the devil, 
Fight to the end 
Finish the game. 


Who is your Master? Here, Conscience is your Master. So, 
follow your Conscience till the end of your life. Never give up 
in the middle. Once you have Love in your heart, you can ac- 
complish anything. You should not have hatred toward any- 
body. You should love even those who hate you. As a result, 
there will be transformation in their hridaya. Hri + daya = hri- 
daya, which means the heart should be full of compassion. 

Humanity is also called Mankind. So man should have 
compassion in his heart. But, today there is no compassion, 
only fashion exists. As long as fashion is there, compassion 
does not find a place, because hridaya is a single chair; not a 
double sofa, nor a musical chair. 

“Life is a game, play it.” The difficulties, the pleasures and 
pains, the profits and losses, come and go like passing clouds. 
The very name of the world is ja-gath, which means that which 
comes and goes. In this world, only God is permanent; every- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 256 


thing else is transitory. But we go by this changing world, for- 
getting God. As a result of which, we suffer. 


God is closer to you than even your own mother 


Embodiments of Love! God is not separate from you. He is 
in you. But, you are distancing Him from yourself. Out of the 
fire comes the ash, but it covers the fire itself. Once you blow 
the ash away, you can see the fire. Similarly, there is the fire of 
Divinity in you, but it is covered by the ash of worldly desires. 

In order to see God, you do not need to undertake any 
spiritual practices. All that you have to do is to get rid of igno- 
rance. God is closer to you than even your own mother. You 
are distancing yourself from such Divinity. That is ignorance. 
In order to get rid of this ignorance, you should develop Love. 

You are God. This is the teaching of all religions. Christ 
initially said that, “I am the Messenger of God.” There is al- 
ways a distance between Messenger and his Master. After 
some time, Christ said that, “I am the Son of God.” Here the 
relationship with God has increased. After a few more years, 
Christ said, “I and My Father are One.” Then comes the Holy 
Ghost. This is what Bharathiyas (Indians) described as dvaita 
(dualism), vishistadvaita (qualified non-dualism), advaita 
(non-dualism) and the state of Turiya. 

Even in Zoroastrianism, it is said, “l am in the Light, the 
Light is in Me, and finally I am the light.” 

You should know the Truth that you are God. You are a 
human being in form, but truly, you are God. You are not the 
body, the mind, the senses, the intellect; you are You only. 
When I say that this is My handkerchief, that means, the ker- 
chief is separate from me. Similarly, when you say, this is my 
body, the body is separate from you. 

Then who are you? The body, mind, and senses are your 
instruments. You are the Master, so master the mind and be a 
Mastermind. Understand this Truth and conduct yourself ac- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 257 


cordingly. Then you will not suffer at all. In times of difficul- 
ties, you should think of God more and more, like Prahlada. 
You should love God more and more. Love has no limits. No 
one can describe Love. Love is God, live in Love. You are the 
embodiment of Love. Yet, you suffer because of your attach- 
ment to the body. 


Mind is like a horse and the body is like a chariot 


What is this body? This body is temporary and is bound to 
perish at any time. Death can come at any point of time, be it 
in childhood, or in youth, or in old age. Why do you attach so 
much importance to such a body? As long you are alive, you 
have to maintain your body in good shape. The body is like a 
chariot meant for traveling. The mind is like a horse. Man to- 
day keeps the horse behind the chariot. As a result, he is trav- 
eling in the reverse direction. The horse should always be in 
front of the chariot, which means we have to give primary im- 
portance to the mind and next to the body. But, today, people 
all the time feed only their body and not the mind. With the 
result the horse is becoming weaker and the chariot heavier. 

How can a weak horse pull a heavy chariot? Just as you 
feed your body thrice a day, your mind also should be fed 
likewise. Prayer, meditation, or chanting of the names of God 
is the breakfast for your mind. 

The Gayathri Mantra says, Om Bhur Bhuvah Suvah.... 
Bhur means ‘materialisation (body),’ Bhuvah means “vibration 
(life force), Suvah means ‘radiation (prajnanam)’. All these 
three are present in us. The same teaching is given to small 
children at the time of Upanayanam (Thread ceremony). Such 
sacred teachings are being forgotten today. 

In ancient times, all these were put into practice; now 
practice is replaced by fashion. Only through practice can one 
get happiness. What we need is practical science and not plat- 
form speeches. All the platform speeches are out of bookish 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 258 


knowledge, which is of no use to us. We need to have practical 
knowledge. Devotion bereft of practice is useless. 

Embodiments of Love! In a family of three persons, if there 
is no unity among them, there will be unrest. Similarly, if there 
is no unity in our thought, word, and deed, we will be totally 
restless. So, we should harmonise these three. Let it be any 
name, constantly chant that name. Always have the feeling that 
I am God, I am God. Then you become God. As you think, so 
you become. This is what is called Brahmavid Brahmaiva 
Bhavathi (the knower of God becomes God himself). 


Practice of sacrifice and forgiveness 


All have devotion, all are sincere, but there is no sacrifice. 
“Bali” means sacrifice. Emperor Bali could attain Divinity 
through his devotion and sacrifice. Bharat (India) is the birth 
place of people of great sacrifice, like Emperor Bali and Em- 
peror Sibi. 

A pigeon sought the refuge of Emperor Sibi on being 
chased by an eagle. Sibi granted refuge to the pigeon. The ea- 
gle argued that the pigeon was its prey. Then Sibi said, “O ea- 
gle! I will give you the flesh of my body equal to the weight of 
this pigeon,” and he started chopping his own flesh. He made 
such a great sacrifice for the sake of a small pigeon. 

Such emperors are many in number in Bharat. We should 
follow the ideals of such noble souls. Since ancient times, 
Bharat has been the center for all spiritual wealth spreading the 
gospel of peace, happiness, and security to the rest of the 
world. 

The mind is nothing but a bundle of desires. If you separate 
threads, cloth disappears. Similarly, if you remove desires one 
by one, the mind ceases to exist. In ancient times, this was re- 
ferred to as thyaga (sacrifice). Today, many people talk of 
thyaga but in fact are immersed in bhoga'(pleasures), which 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 259 


results in roga (disease). In order to get rid of this roga, one 
has to cultivate thyaga and love for God. 


Start the day with Love 
Fill the day with Love 
Spend the day with Love 
End the day with Love 
This is the way to God. 


Have full faith in your religion 


Embodiments of Love! Emperor Bali served the people of 
Kerala and sacrificed everything, including his body. That is 
why he has attained such an exalted position, not possible for 
others. The devotion of the people of Kerala is unparalleled. 

At one time, Kerala was considered to be a Communist 
state, but people have been going to the Padmanabha Swamy 
Temple then and now in large numbers. They get up early in 
the morning, have their bath, apply sandal paste on their fore- 
heads, and offer their prayers. There is no change in their de- 
votion. Parties may come and go, but the 'Hridaya party' (Party 
of the Spiritual Heart) is permanent. 

A Muslim should become a true Muslim; a Christian 
should become a true Christian, and a Hindu should become a 
true Hindu. You should have full faith in your religion and lead 
an ideal life. That is true bhakthi (devotion), true mukthi (lib- 
eration). 

To attain mukthi, practice the following principles. Forget 
all the harm done to you by others and the help you have done 
to others. Then you will have peace in your heart. If someone 
has done harm to you, do not be revengeful. If someone has 
hurt your feelings, in order to alleviate your suffering, the best 
way is to forget and forgive. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 260 


Forgiveness is very important. It is Truth, it is dharma, it is 
Veda, it is nonviolence, it is happiness, it is heaven itself. This 
forgiveness is everything in all the worlds. So cultivate this 
sacred quality of forgiveness. This is possible only by devel- 
oping Love for God. 


4 September 1998 
Sai Kulwant Hall, Prasanthi Nilayam 


A lock opens when the key is turned to the right, 
and it closes when the key is turned to the left. 
Thus, the same key performs both locking and un- 
locking functions. In man, the heart is the lock, and 
the mind is the key. When the mind is turned God- 
ward, the heart develops detachment. When the 
mind is turned toward the world, the heart devel- 
oped attachment. 

—Baba 


29 


Knowledge without practice 
is meaningless 


Speech is the cause of prosperity 
Speech secures friends and kinsmen 
Speech brings about bondage. 

Speech can also lead to certain death. 


Embodiments of Love! 

The power of speech gifted to mankind is very important 
and majestic. It gives him all the wealth. So, we should talk 
sweetly and softly in an acceptable manner. Only such sweet 
talk will give us all the affluence and prosperity. Words can 
win many friends and relations and even kingdoms. We may 
have a few relations, but with our sweet talk, we can develop 
good relationship with the entire world. Sacred talk will give 
us all the education and elevate us to exalted positions. But we 
should also know that words spoken with bad thoughts and bad 
feelings will not only lead you to bondage but also put you to 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 262 


death. Both good and bad are present in the words we utter. 
For the one with sweet words, the universe itself becomes the 
mansion. He will feel the caste of humanity prevailing every- 
where. So, words form the basis to make you feel humanity as 
one caste and the universe as the mansion. To attain Divinity, 
one has to take to the spiritual path. Good words coupled with 
humility will take you to higher levels 


Divinity within and without 


The whole world is one, though you may find multiplicity. 
In this world of plurality, there is the underlying principle of 
unity. Of all the numbers 1,2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, the most im- 
portant number is 1. All the other numbers are mere modifica- 
tions of number 1. 1+1 becomes 2. 9-1 becomes 8. Thus | 
forms the basis for all the numbers. This is the unity in multi- 
plicity, This unity is the Truth. 

Vedas say: “Om ithyekaaksharam Brahma,’ — the syllable 
OM is Brahman. Divinity is not separate from OM. Out of this 
unity, the world has emerged. But you do not understand this 
Truth and take to different paths, with aspirations and ambi- 
tions. 

In fact, there is no difference between the world and Di- 
vinity. Just as different limbs form a complete human body, in 
the same way, human beings are like the limbs of society. So- 
ciety forms the limb of the entire humanity, humanity forms a 
limb of Nature and Nature is a limb of Divine. Therefore, hu- 
manity, society and Nature are all the limbs of the Divine. 

“Sarvatah Paani Paadam, Tath Sarvathokshi Shirornu- 
kham Sarvatah Sruthimalloke Sarvama Iruthya Thistathi.” All 
forms belong to the one and the same Divinity. Veda has also 
declared that there is Divinity within and outside (Anthar Ba- 
hischa Tath Sarvavyapya Narayana Sthithaha). 

The grain is Divine, the husk is Nature. This is the relation- 
ship between the Divine and the world, The Gita says, “Mar- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 263 


naivaamsho Jeevaloke Jeevabhoothah Sanathanaha,” which 
means all are the sparks of the Divine. 

In the modern world, every individual wants something or 
other. Do you think a person loves an object for the sake of the 
object? No, he loves it for his own sake. Similarly, a person 
loves another for his own happiness. So, in this world whatever 
man does is for his own sake. 

There are very few individuals who see unity in diversity. 
But there are plenty who see diversity in unity. Only the lives 
of those who see unity in diversity are sanctified. In order to 
understand this underlying principle of unity, you need a guru 
(preceptor). In modern times, we call them teachers. 


Teaching is the noblest profession 


Today, some people say that one takes to the teaching pro- 
fession when one has no other alternative. It is a mistaken 
view. The teaching profession is the noblest of all. The teacher 
has got all the capacity to mould the careers of the students 
committed to his care. 

Bala Gangadhar Tilak struggled hard for the freedom of 
this country. One day, a friend of Tilak questioned him, “Tilak, 
you have been working hard for our independence. After inde- 
pendence what post would you like to take up? Will you be the 
Prime Minister or hold some other portfolio?” 

Tilak smilingly replied that he would never give up the sa- 
cred teaching profession for a ministerial post. He said that, 
being a teacher, he could train a number of students as ideal 
leaders of this country. He considered the teaching profession 
as the noblest. 

What qualities are required for a person who has taken up 
such a noble profession? A teacher should have sacred feelings 
and undertake sacred actions. He should never entertain bad 
habits. What is the reason? It is quite natural for the students to 
follow their teacher. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 264 


A teacher is one who shapes the future of students. So, a 
teacher should never indulge in bad habits like smoking, 
drinking, and eating non-vegetarian food. Students observe the 
habits of their teachers. If the teacher himself indulges in these 
bad habits, he will not have the right to advise his students to 
leave these vices. Not merely this, a teacher should never utter 
a lie and should never resort to stealing. 

A teacher should speak words born out of sacred feelings. 
Virtues, good intellect, truth, devotion, discipline, duty — 
these are the attributes expected of a teacher. Only then will 
the students be able to emulate him. We cannot estimate the 
contribution of a teacher to society, it is he who can build the 
society or ruin it. A teacher carries with him many responsi- 
bilities. He should have a good mind to discharge these re- 
sponsibilities. 


Depend only on God 


You all know that fifty years ago, the young and the old of 
this country struggled hard for independence, giving up all 
their properties and belongings. What do you mean by “inde- 
pendence”? It means that you do not depend on others. Do you 
find such a situation today? It is fifty years since this country 
attained independence. Though fifty years have passed after 
independence, we continue to depend on others. We have 
taken loans from many countries. When you are indebted to 
many countries, how can you say you are independent? If you 
are truly independent, you should never depend on others. 

If you are in need of money, does it mean that you should 
take loans from others? No. You have to reduce your expen- 
diture, pomp, and show. Only then you can save money. 

But Bharathiyas (Indians) have not understood their pre- 
sent position and continue to take loans. Gradually this will 
lead to a position wherein you have to struggle for independ- 
ence for the second time. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 265 


During British rule, we suffered a lot and ultimately at- 
tained independence. But if we continue to take loans, we will 
be again under the control of others. So, we should not resort 
to taking loans. 


Never be a slave 


Students today should be totally independent. They should 
inquire into the true meaning of the word swechcha (independ- 
ence). Swa + ichcha = swechcha. Swa means Atma. So, the 
Will of the Self is called swechcha. Therefore, following the 
conscience is true swechcha. 

But students today do not understand the true meaning of 
this term and roam about in the streets and behave, as they like, 
in the name of swechcha. Students should exercise control over 
their movement, speech, and life. Only then can they work for 
the progress of this world. Right from the tender age, students 
should strive to attain swechcha in the true sense of the term. 
That why I always say “Start early, Drive slowly, Reach 
safely.” You do not need to follow anyone else; follow your 
conscience. That is swechcha. You should never be a slave. 

There is a small story to illustrate this: When the King of 
Darapur expired, his young son was coronated. Being so 
young, the prince was immersed in many doubts. He went on, 
thinking how to run the administration. He was not able to 
know who was good and who was bad. He did not know whom 
to approach for guidance. He thought that he should keep up 
the reputation of his father and grandfather. 

One day, sitting in the palace, he noticed groups of people 
moving across the royal street. He inquired as to where they 
were all heading. He was told that they were going to listen to 
the discourse of a noble soul. He too joined them, incognito. 
He thought he could get his doubts cleared by the saint. He sat 
in the congregation and heard all the sacred teachings. He was 
extremely happy. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 266 


People returned to their homes at the end of the discourse, 
but, the king remained there. As the saint also got up to go, his 
shawl got entangled to a nail of his chair. As a result, the shawl 
got torn. Immediately, the saint brought a needle and thread 
and was trying to get the thread into the eye of the needle. 

The king, in disguise, was watching all this. He said, 
“Swamiji, you are trying to stitch an old shawl, please leave it 
aside and accept the new shawl that I have brought with me.” 

The saint said, “I don't want a new shawl. If you really 
want to help me, help me put this thread through the eye of this 
needle.” The king did accordingly. Then the saint stitched his 
own shawl, turned to the king and said, “Listen to me. I don’t 
like to depend on others. I want to lead an independent life. 
Man should never be dependent on others. We should depend 
only on God.” 

With these words, all the doubts of the king were cleared. 
He realised that God is the basis of all, and only through self- 
confidence could he achieve what he wanted. He went to his 
palace and began following the dictates of his conscience. He 
did not consult anybody or seek advice from others. He be- 
came more independent. He developed an attitude to distin- 
guish between the ephemeral and the permanent. 


Practice what you learn 


The saint had also told the king, “You may be a man of 
wisdom, but if you don’t practice, you will be like a donkey 
carrying dirty clothes.” You should not become like that. Try 
to practice at least one or two good principles in life. Not 
merely that, we should help others to put into practice what 
little they know. 

Education that is not put into practice, becomes unsacred. 
What is the use of receiving degrees if they are not helpful to 
society. Serve society, and share your knowledge with others. 

The best way to love God is to Love All and Serve All.” 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 267 


What is the use of receiving degrees if you sit idle at home 
and keep applying for jobs without serving society? Many 
graduates only apply without any reply! What is the use of 
leading such a life? At least, till you get a job, serve society. 
Go to the villages and serve the needy. In fact, one who serves 
(kinkara) is greater than the leader (Sankara). 

Having known the Truth, What is the use if you do not 
follow it? Ravana had 10 heads, which symbolize 6 Sastras 
(spiritual texts), and 4 Vedas. He was a master of 64 types of 
knowledge. He built the city of Lanka in gold. In terms of 
learning, he was on par with Rama. But what is the use of all 
his learning? He became a slave to his senses. Because he 
could not control his desires he not only ruined himself but 
also his entire clan. The Lanka was completely reduced to 
ashes. 

Ultimately Ravana repented in the end, he said, “Though I 
was the master of all knowledge, I did not put them into prac- 
tice. O people, do not get spoilt like me. Though I had all the 
wealth, I could not enjoy anything because of excessive de- 
sires.” 


Every person has the three gunas in them 


Of the three brothers Ravana, Vibhishana, and Kumb- 
hakarna, Ravana symbolized rajo guna (passionate quality), 
Vibhishana symbolized satwa guna (serene, pure quality), and 
Kumbhakarna was the embodiment of tamo guna (lethargic, 
dull quality). Every man has these three attributes in him. They 
originate out of the human mind. 

Kumbhakarna, who stood for tamasic quality, spent his en- 
tire life eating and sleeping. Ravana, who symbolized rajo 
guna was responsible for the destruction of the Rakshasa clan. 
It was only the satwic Vibhishana who could get the grace of 
Rama. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 268 


So, man should not give room for rajasic and tamasic 
qualities in him. Ravana constantly worshipped Easwara 
(God). It is not enough if you worship God, you should put His 
words into practice. You should give up all wicked qualities. 

When Ravana was about to breath his last, Rama sum- 
moned Lakshmana and told him, “The one of great penance 
and wisdom is going to die. Go and listen to his last words.” 

Obeying the command of his brother, Lakshmana went 
close to Ravana and listened to his words carefully. Ravana 
said, “I achieved whatever I wanted, but only three of my 
wishes remain unfulfilled. I wanted to convert the salt water of 
the sea surrounding Lanka into sweet water. I wanted to make 
those who suffer in hell enjoy the comforts of heaven. I wanted 
to connect hell and heaven with a ladder. But, I went on post- 
poning them and ultimately could not accomplish them.” 

Lakshmana returned to Rama and told the last words of 
Ravana. Rama smiled and said, “Lakshmana, what is the use of 
repenting in the end? The moment he wanted to do good, he 
should have done so immediately.” 


Purvathapam and paschathapam 


Some people think twice before they undertake any action. 
That is called purvathapam. There is another category of peo- 
ple who act in haste and repent for their mistakes at the end. 
That is pashchathapam. It was Arjuna who had this pur- 
vathaapam. Before the commencement of war, he said, 
“Krishna, how can I bear the sight of my kith and kin being 
slain in the war. My head is reeling, I don't want to be here. Let 
us go home.” 

Valmiki described Ravana as wicked and Rama as noble. 
What is the difference between these two? Rama sacrificed 
everything and became an ideal to everybody. The blissful 
state he had at the time of getting ready for coronation was 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 269 


very much the same when he was asked to go on an exile. That 
is the spirit of equanimity at times of pleasure and pain. 

Rama put into practice the education he received, whereas 
Ravana merely accumulated knowledge without practicing it. 
Ravana could not digest all that he learnt. As a result suffered 
from “indigestion”. Greatness lies in putting into practice, not 
in learning. 

Students! Whatever you believe to be good, do put into 
practice. Both teachers and students play an important role in 
laying the royal road for the future, if you spend your time in 
acquiring knowledge, without having faith in God, your life 
will be useless. Neither penance nor japa (soft repetition of the 
Name) can take you across the ocean of samsara. You should 
serve the good people. 


Talk less, work more 


You should not waste your time. “Asthiram yavvanarn 
dhanam, dharmam keerthi, dvayam sthiram (Youth and money 
are temporary; truth and good name are permanent and eter- 
nal).” So, we should uphold Truth and Goodness. 

There is no God other than Truth. Truth is the same in all 
the three periods of time. What is the difference between Truth 
and Fact? You may put on a coat today and wear a different 
dress tomorrow. This is not Truth, it is only a fact, because it is 
subject to change. But Truth always remains the same. 

The Gita refers to Truth as Ritham. So, Truth is not re- 
porting what you see, hear, and experience. What you see and 
hear is worldly truth. It is not Truth in the strict sense of the 
word. It is only external truth (pravritthi sathyam). But the in- 
ward Truth (nivritthi sathyam) remains the same in the past, 
present, and the future. 

Students! 

See that the words that you speak are sacred. “You cannot 
always oblige, but you can always speak obligingly.” That is 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 270 


enough. Try to speak sweetly and softly. I have told you many 
times, “Talk less, work more.” The one who talks excessively 
cannot work. The one who works will not talk. What is the rea- 
son for you not remembering all that you read? It is excessive 
talk. By talking less, your memory power will increase. Not 
merely this, your Atmic power will also improve. 

Whatever you hear, try to recapitulate, then put into prac- 
tice. Sravanarn, mananam, nidhidhyasanam (listening, reca- 
pitulating, and practicing). These three are very essential. Sra- 
vanam can be compared to cooking in the kitchen. Mananam 
can be compared to bringing the food to the dining hall and 
serving it. Nidhidhyasanam can be compared to the eating 
process. When all these three are unified, you will have health 
and happiness. 

So, if you want to lead a life of contentment, recapitulate 
and practice whatever you have studied. Today, we find book- 
ish knowledge everywhere, which is nothing but superficial 
knowledge. This superficial knowledge is of no use, You 
should be thorough in practical knowledge. 


See that you do not have a questionable character 


Teachers, Embodiments of Love! 

In order to shape your students into ideal citizens, you 
should lead ideal lives. Students are the future leaders of this 
country. 

How will you bring about transformation in students? First, 
let there be transformation in you, then try for transformation 
among students. If you tell your students not to smoke without 
yourself giving up smoking, will they listen to you? No. See 
that you do not have a questionable character. Only then you 
will be a good teacher in the strict sense of the term. 

You should have very good habits. You should speak softly 
and use sweet words. You should talk to students with love and 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 271 


encourage them, You should groom the students into ideal citi- 
zens. 

Students should not crave city life. They should live in 
their own villages and try to develop them. Today, the culture 
of Bharat (Ancient India) is found only in villages. We should 
sustain it. 

But students run after urban life, leaving behind their vil- 
lages. What do they do in cities? They lead a life full of vices. 
In cities, you do not find fear of sin and love for God. Once 
you have love for God, then there will be fear of sin. Naturally, 
there will be morality in society. So, first develop Love for 
God. With this Love for God, you can achieve anything in life. 


Know that the safety of the country is important 


Great leaders like Winston Churchill and Kennedy first 
served in the Army and worked for the welfare of their coun- 
tries before they occupied exalted positions. When it comes to 
serving your country, you should be ready to take up any task. 
You should know that the safety of the country is important. 
“Janani janma bhoomishcha swargadapi gareeyasi (Mother 
and motherland are greater than the Heaven itself.)” 

After the death of Ravana, Vibhisbana fell at the feet of 
Rama and said, “Swami, I never aspired to be the King of 
Lanka. I only wanted my brother to give up his bad qualities. I 
pray to you to take over the Kingdom of Lanka.” All the rak- 
shasas also came and prayed to Rama that he should become 
King of Lanka. 

Lakshmana also supported them saying, “O brother, 
Bharatha is already ruling over Ayodhya. Even if you return to 
Ayodhya, you may not be crowned as the King. So, I request 
you to take over this kingdom and transform all the rakshasas. 
Lanka is full of golden mansions. Where else can you find 
such a beautiful place? I will be very happy if you rule over 
this Kingdom. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 272 


Rama lovingly took Lakshmana close to him and said, 
“Lakshmana, how could you get such a silly desire? Just be- 
cause your mother is ugly, can you call any other beautiful 
woman as your mother? Even though my country is poor com- 
pared to Lanka, I still consider it as my mother. Lanka may be 
full of gold, but I don't want it.” 

Students should develop this kind of love and faith toward 
their country. The teachers should inculcate such spirit of pa- 
triotism in students. You should declare wholeheartedly with a 
sense of pride that this is my country, this is My mother 
tongue. 

But modern students do not have such a type of national 
feeling. The moment they receive their Engineering and 
MBBS degrees, they start applying for passport and visa. This 
is not the right attitude. 


Unity is the greatest wealth 


Students! The sacred feelings that emerge out of your heart 
should be exported, and you should import all the good that is 
outside. You do not need any passport or visa to do this! You 
should know the truth that everything is within you. You do 
not need to crave anyone, not even for God, because you are 
all the sparks of the Divine. You have got divine qualities and 
divine powers. Without the divine power in you, you would 
not be able to study and secure good marks in your subjects. 

So, everything is within you. You are the Embodiment of 
Peace, Love, and Ananda. You are the Embodiment of God. 
Have full faith in this Truth. 

When you lead your life with full faith in God, you will 
never be put to difficulties. “Life is a Challenge, Meet it; Life 
is Love, Enjoy it; Life is Energy, Skill it and do not kill it.” 
When you skill this energy, there will be perfect balance in 
whatever you do. Once you have this balance, you will have 
Insight. Due to the absence of insight, you develop Outlook. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 243 


Whatever you see outside, is from within. So develop inner 
view. 

Students! Having learnt all these sacred qualities here, you 
should join hands and work together for the welfare of society. 
There is no higher wealth than unity. Unity should be the aim 
of your life. Only through practice can you achieve this. If all 
95 crore people of this land of Bharath (India) developed this 
sacred quality, “I and You are One,” you can very well imag- 
ine the sacred heights you could achieve. 

Treat everyone with brotherly love. The mother beats the 
child when it commits a mistake. Later, she fondles the child 
with love and affection She beats the child for its own good in 
such a way that the sound is more but the pain is less, Simi- 
larly, if anyone commits a mistake, punish him. Only the 
sound should be heard, but he should not feel the pinch of it. 

God does the same, the punishment given by God is only 
for protection. The doctor removes the ulcer from the stomach 
by cutting it open with a knife. Just because he uses a knife, 
can you call him a wicked person? No. He does it for your own 
good. Similarly, God punishes you only out of Love. Love 
lives by giving and forgiving; self lives by getting and forget- 
ting. 

So, there should not be even a trace of selfishness in you. 
Do anything with Love, the result will certainly be good. Love 
is God, Live in Love. Talk to your friends with love. Help 
them in times of need. 


Have unflinching faith in Me; I shall take care 


I will give you an example from my life. When this body 
was in Uravakonda, studying 6th class, there used to be the 
E.S.L.C. exams. We three students, Suresh and Ramesh on ei- 
ther side and Myself in the middle, used to sit on the same 
bench. They were dullards. At the time of examinations, they 
approached Me for help. They said, “Sathya, we cannot study 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 274 


without you. Some way or the other, you should help us in the 
examinations.” I will never say No to anyone. I said, “I will 
certainly help.” I told them the questions that would appear in 
the next day’s examination and taught them the answers. too. 

E.S.L.C. was a public examination. My examination Reg- 
ister No. was 6, whereas the numbers of Suresh and Rarhesh 
were 60 and 600. You can imagine it yourself, how far our 
chairs were placed from each other. It was not possible for 
them to copy. They said that they would not take the exam. 
Then I told them, “Having studied the entire year, it is not 
proper on your part to skip the exam. You must appear for the 
examination, whatever may be the outcome. Have unflinching 
faith in me; I shall take care.” Though it is not supposed to be 
done, there is nothing wrong, when you are doing it for a good 
cause. 

The duration of the examination was 2 hours. The station- 
eries were supplied by the teachers. I completed My answer 
paper in just 5 minutes. Then I took some more papers from 
the invigilator and wrote the answers in Ramesh’s handwriting. 
After completing it, I took another set of papers and wrote the 
answers in Suresh's handwriting. I also wrote their names on 
the answer sheets and kept them with Me. I had already told 
them not to get up before I got up from My chair. 

At the end of two hours, when the final ball was given, the 
examiners started asking the students to surrender the answer 
sheets. All the students got up, and I silently went and placed 
all the three answer papers on the table. All of us came out of 
the examination hall. Nobody raised any objection. After 10 
days, when the results were announced, only we three got first 
class. The teachers were surprised at how Ramesh and Suresh 
also got first class. They questioned them in the class, “How 
could you write well?” 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 275 


The boys said, “we wrote then, but now we don't remem- 


” 


ber. 
There are none who got ruined with faith in God 


There was no scope for any doubt. They could not have 
copied from Me, since we were seated far from each other. All 
three answer papers were in our own handwritings. Then 
where was the scope for doubt? I told them, “I never let down 
those who have reposed their full faith in Me. There are a 
number of people who ruined themselves for want of faith. But 
there are none who got ruined with faith in God. There may be 
ups and downs in between, but finally they emerge victorious. 

Due to many changes that took place at Uravakonda, I 
stopped attending school. All the teachers and the students 
started coming to the residence to see Me. I gave them what- 
ever they liked. The owners of the house could not bear all this 
and sent a telegram to the parents, asking them to come and 
take Me. I boarded the bus to Puttaparthi. All the boys also 
wanted to come to Puttaparthi. I told them that it was not pos- 
sible to reach Puttaparthi by bus, because there were no proper 
roads. The buses could reach only up to Dharmavaram or Pe- 
nukonda. There were no roads to Puttaparthi 60 years back. So 
I told them not to come. 

When I was in the school I used to lead the prayer. Every- 
day from the dais, I would sing a song emphasising the unity 
of all religions. Everyone, including the teachers, would join in 
chorus blissfully. When I left the School, there was none to 
lead the prayer. There was a Muslim student by name Abdul 
Gaffur. He had a good voice and could sing well. That day he 
was asked to lead the prayer. The moment he was on the stage, 
be remembered Me and started crying loudly. Then all cried 
and the prayer was canceled. 

When I came to Puttaparthi, Ramesh and Suresh could not 
bear the separation from Me. One should not do like this, but 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 276 


Ramesh went on crying, “Raju, you have left us, you have left 
us, I cannot live without you,” and fell into a well and died. 

The second boy went on repeating, “Raju, Raju, Raju” and 
ultimately turned mad. He was taken to a hospital in Banga- 
lore. His father came to Me and prayed, “Swami, he is your 
classmate and my only son. Please come and give him darshan 
at least once.” 

I went to Bangalore and saw him in a mental hospital. The 
boy was continuously repeating “Raju, Raju,” and was not 
looking at anyone. I went up to him and said, “Suresh, I am 
Raju, I have come for you, look at Me.” Hearing this, be lifted 
his head, saw Me, and closed his eyes permanently. 

The same Ramesh and Suresh were born as Jack and Jill. 
When I was in Paatha Mandir (Old Mandir), these two pup- 
pies were with Me. It was I who christened them. One used to 
sleep near My feet and the other near My head. They used to 
bark at any person at sight. They were always with Me. 

One day, the Rani of Mysore came to Me. Since there were 
no proper roads to Puttaparthi, she alighted from the ear at 
Karnatakapalli and walked the rest of the distance. The driver 
had his dinner in Puttaparthi and was returning to Karnataka- 
palli. I called Jack and asked him to accompany the driver and 
show him the way. Jack walked in the front, and the driver 
followed. The driver was surprised as to how a dog could show 
him the way. Then I said, it was not DOG, that was showing 
him the way, but the inner being GOD. 

Next morning, the driver started the car, not knowing that 
Jack was sleeping under it. The wheel of the car ran over the 
back of Jack and its backbone broke. Jack dragged his body, 
across the river, all the while wailing. A washerman by name 
Subbanna, a respected person in the village, noticed Jack and 
came running to Me. He said, “Swami, Jack is coming, wailing 
in pain.” 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 Zed 


I came out; Jack came close to me crying loudly, fell at My 
feet and breathed his last. After three days, Jill also died. The 
Brindavan (tulasi plant) that you find behind the Paatha 
Mandir is the Samadhi of these two dogs. 


We should give and take only Love 


Ramesh and Suresh had very noble feelings. One day, in 
school, the drill master said that all the boys should join the 
Scouts. I am telling you the Truth. I did not have even a single 
paisa with me. That was the position then. I could not ask for 
money at home, since their condition was also poor. If one has 
10 rupees, one was considered very rich in those days. If one 
had 100 rupees, he was equal to a millionaire! 

The drill teacher said that we should get a khaki shirt, 
khaki knickers (shorts), a belt, a whistle, and a pair of boots. 
How could I get this? I was in Kamalapuram, at that time. 

Knowing that I did not have money with Me, Ramesh 
asked his father to get him two pairs of khaki dress stitched. 
We were all of the same height then. He packed a pair of 
knickers, a shirt, and a pair of socks and wrote on it, “Raju, if 
you don't accept it, I will commit suicide. You are My life. 
You must accept this. Our friendship must develop this way.” 

I removed that paper and put another, and wrote on it, “If 
our friendship is to develop, there should be no giving and 
taking. We should give and take only Love. There should be 
no material transaction. So I will not accept this.” The boy felt 
very sad. 

I used to compose excellent poetry in those days. I speak in 
simple language to make the translator’s job easy. Otherwise, I 
can speak in a lofty style. There was a businessman by name, 
Kotte Subbanna. He had brought a new medicine, by name, 
Balabhaskara for sale. He requested Me to compose a song on 
the efficacy of that medicine, which, he said, would serve as a 
good advertisement, so that it would be sold well. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 278 


I composed a beautiful song. Hearing that song, he lost 
himself in ecstasy and got some sweets prepared at home and 
brought them for Me. The medicine was sold in large quanti- 
ties because of the advertisement. He was overjoyed and 
bought two shirts and two knickers for Me. I said to him, “Are 
you paying the price for the song I composed? I will not accept 
this.” He cried, and said that he would not take them home. 
Then I told him that he could as well give them to some beg- 
gars on the street. 

Right from that tender age, I never received anything from 
others. I only give and give and give, I never receive. But only 
for one thing, I stretch My hand and that is pure Love. Love is 
also not your property. Love is God’s property. So, I am asking 
you for My own property. You are misusing the Love given to 
you, therefore you are suffering. You have to surrender your 
Love to God in order to be happy, Thus, as a student, I always 
helped others and made everybody happy. Being Sai students, 
you should also make others happy. Never make anybody suf- 
fer. Help Ever, Hurt Never. Develop this quality. 

There are other things that students should take care of. 
Some students get the homework done by their brothers or 
sisters. This amounts to cheating their teacher. This is not cor- 
rect. Students should do homework themselves. They should 
develop good qualities. Good qualities will become God quali- 
ties. 

During the British rule, children were addressed as “God 
boys”. Later on, due to the effect of Macaulay’s system of 
education, “God boy” became “Good boy'’”’. After some time, 
“Good boy” became “Good-bye”. Later on, even “Good” was 
removed, and only “Bye-bye” remained. “God boy” has come 
down to the level of “Bye-bye” due to the effect of modern 
education. You should remain as “God boys” and “Good boys” 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 279 


and never come down to the level of “Bye-bye”. You should 
set an ideal through your education and conduct. 

I might have caused you lot of inconvenience by speaking 
for such a long time. Now, you may go back to Muddenahalli 
and Alike, discharge your duties, and attain success in your 
endeavors. I visit Muddenahalli now and then, but it is almost 
12 years, since I last visited Alike. Now I will certainly go to 
Alike. I will also take some of the College boys with Me. From 
Puttaparthi, I will go straight to Mangalore. I will make you all 
happy there. Be always happy, happy, happy. 


11 September 1988 
Prasanthi Nilayam 


30 


Worship of God as 
energy principle 


Truth is your true mother and Wisdom the true father, 
Dharma is the true brother and Compassion the true friend; 
The true wife is Peace and the true son Forgiveness 
These six are in fact the true relations of man. 

[Sanskrit sloka] 


Embodiments of Love! In this world, every individual has a 
mother. The entire humanity has also one mother, and we 
should try to know her. This mother is Truth. Those who fol- 
low this mother will never face any problems in life. 

This mother, Truth, remains the same in all periods of time 
and in all three worlds, and this mother transcends all the three 
attributes — satwa (purity, serenity), rajas (passion), and tamas 
(dullness, inertia). The physical mother may die or go to some 
other place, but this divine mother, Truth, remains one and the 
same beyond time and space and to every individual. It is 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 281 


therefore necessary that every person follow this noble, divine 
mother (Truth). 


True relatives of man 


Who is father? Wisdom is the true father. Wisdom is not 
ephemeral, mundane, physical, secular knowledge. Advaita 
darshanam jnanam (Wisdom confers the experience of nondu- 
ality). So, Truth and Wisdom are the true mother and father of 
man. 

Dharma is the brother. Dharma may vary depending upon 
time, country, religion, and tradition. However, dharma is 
loved by the entire humanity irrespective of caste, creed, na- 
tionality, and religion. This brother is the very embodiment of 
love. On this basis, the Vedas gave utmost importance to Truth 
and Righteousness. In the great epic Ramayana, Lakshmana 
personified the Principle of dharma. When he fainted in the 
battlefield, Rama lamented, saying that he could get a consort 
like Sita and a mother like Kausalya, but not a brother like 
Lakshmana. Rama said that His divinity blossomed because 
He had a brother like Lakshmana. 

Compassion is the true friend. In this world, a firned today 
may become an enenmy tomorrow. But there is no greater 
friend than Compassion. 

Peace is the wife. Peace is the previous jewel of saints, and 
it is the royal path in the spiritual field. 

Forgiveness is the son. There is no greater quality than 
Forgiveness. It encompasses all the good qualities, like Truth, 
Righteousness, and Nonviolence, and it is the essence of all the 
Vedas. 

Therefore, for every individual, the true relations are Truth, 
Wisdom, Righteousness, Compassion, Peace, and Forgiveness. 
The whole world is full of agitation and disturbance because of 
lack of these sacred qualities. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 282 


Embodiments of Love! You should always remember your 
true mother and father. You cannot exist without them. The 
whole creation has emerged from Truth and merges back into 
it. There is no place where Truth does not exist. It is the good 
fortune of human beings to have this eternal Truth as their 
mother. But, today, humanity does not follow such a sacred 
mother. 


Worship of Devi as divine mother 


You worship Devi (goddess) in these nice days of Devi 
Navaratri. You consider Devi as your divine Mother. This 
Devi is called Sathya Swaroopini, which means she is the em- 
bodiment of Truth. So, worshiping Truth amounts to worship- 
ing Devi. If you understand and follow this truth, you will be 
successful in every field. 

The Vedas also proclaim this Principle of Truth. There are 
many in this world who chant the Vedas. Many have gone 
through the sacred texts. But they do not seem to follow the 
right path. In fact, only when we tread the right path will we 
know the true meaning of the Vedas and the sacred texts. 

Since ancient times, the sages and saints undertook many 
spiritual practices in their quest for Truth. They were deter- 
mined not to give up till they had the vision of Truth. Ulti- 
mately, they declared to the world that they had seen God, who 
is all brilliance, is full of effulgence, and is beyond the dark- 
ness of ignorance. They also declared that God is not far off in 
a distance land but is present in the human body. 

The saints had the vision of God, who is chin maya (full of 
effulgence) in the body, which is mrinmaya (made of clay). So, 
we should not underrate the human body and use it for mean 
and worldly pleasures. 

The body is the temple of God. This body may be com- 
pared to an iron chest. Just as the precious jewels are kept in 
the iron chest, so also God is present in the human body. So, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 283 


the body has to be maintained and made proper use of.for the 
sake of the precious jewel, the Atma. You get jewels only from 
the earth. Similarly, you have to search for the jewel of the 
Atma only in the body, which is made of clay. 

Let us investigate what comes in the way of experiencing 
the Atmic Principle. Ego and attachment stand as obstacles in 
our path. Only when you give up your ego and attachment will 
you have purity of heart, which in turn will lead you to the ex- 
perience of Supreme Wisdom. 

The more you develop attachment, the more restless you 
become. Ego is much more dangerous. It has become an incur- 
able disease in human beings. So, you have to keep ego and 
attachment under control and engage yourself in the quest of 
Atmic bliss. 


Forms and manifestations of Shakti 


During Navaratri (sacred nine days), people go through the 
sacred texts such as Devi Bagavatha, Ramayana, and Mahab- 
harata. People also worship the deities Durga, Lakshmi, and 
Saraswathi. Goddes Gayathri has three aspects. They are: 
Gayathri, Savatri, and Saraswathi. Gayathri is the presiding 
deity of our senses. Savitri is the presiding deity of the life 
principle. Saraswathi is the presiding deity of speech. All these 
three are within the same Principle of Truth. 

Gayathri Mantra beings with “Om Bhur Buvah Suvah.” 
Bhur means materialisation (body), bhuvah means vibration 
(life principle), and suwvah means Atma (radiation). 

Dr. Venkatraman, the previoius speaker, said that matter 
could be converted into energy and vice versa. From a scien- 
tist’s point of view, that is true. But in My view, matter and 
energy do not exist separately. Matter is energy, and energy is 
matter. These two are inseparable and interrelated. In fact, 
there is no matter in this world; wherever you see, youf ind 
only energy. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 284 


During these nine days, Goddess Shakti (the Energy Prin- 
ciple) is worshiped. Truth, Righteousness, Peace, and Forgive- 
ness are all expressions of the Principle of Shakti. Truth is the 
primal cause. There is nothing other than this. All faculties of 
energy are present in this Truth. So, consider Truth as your 
mother and follow it. 

The Vedas proclaim, “Sathyam vada; dharmam chara,” 
which means: speak the truth and follow rightesousness. Un- 
fortunately, people today do not follow this. On the contrary, 
they follow asathya and adharma. (untruth an anti-dharma) 
This is the cause of all suffering. 

The ancients gave utmost priority to Truth and Righteous- 
ness. Before undertaking any work, they enquired whether it 
was right or wrong. They followed the dictates of their con- 
science. But today, such an attitude is lacking. 


The quest for Truth 


Many people say that they are in search of Divinity. Once 
you follow the path of Truth, you will find Divinity every- 
where. A small example. 

The same eyes see the mother, daughter, wife, and sister. 
Here, you need to enquire as to what kind of feeling you 
should have toward each. This is the quest for Truth. Mother 
should be viewed with reverence and respect. Daughter should 
be considered as part of your own being. In this way, you 
should enquire and understand the Truth. 

If you just go by the direct evidence of what you see, you 
will never know the Truth. All that you see is bound to perish. 
There are many things that cannot be perceived by the naked 
eye. On the spiritual path, everyone wants pratyaksha pra- 
manam (direct evidence). But direct evidence cannot constitute 
the entire Truth. 

For example, you see a person who is five feet five inches 
tall, weighing forty-five kilograms, and fair complexioned. All 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 285 


these can be seen by the naked eye. But you cannot go merely 
by these physical qualities. You should also take into cons- 
dieration the unseen qualties, such as love, compassion, anger, 
etc. It is utter foolishness to go by the physical form, which is 
direct evidence. 

It is not possible to see the direct manifestation of God. 
Truth is everywhere. Dharma is everywhere. God, who is the 
embodiment of Truth and Righteousness, is everywhere. So, 
you should practrice Truth and Righteousness and enjoy the 
bliss. 


How to know the Atmic Principle 


For everything, conscience is the witness. If you do not 
follow the conscience, everything becomes unsacred. The 
Atma is the eternal witness, and that is conscience. The Atma is 
everywhere. It is in every individual and every creature. It has 
no form. It is attributeless, eternal, ancient, unsullied, and im- 
mortal. Who can understand such an Atmic Principle? You 
speak of Truth and consider whatever you see and hear as 
Truth, but all this is limited to the senses. The Atma is beyond 
senses. 

Then how to know the Atmic Principle? You do not need to 
search for this elsewhere. Turn you vision inward. 

The Vedas said, “Pashyannapi na pashuathi moodho (he is 
a fool who sees yet does not see).” All that you see is divine, 
but you mistake it for nature. The one with Atmic vision will 
see the entire nature as divine. But, if you have the worldly 
view, you can see only the world. 

“Vishvam Vishnumayam (Vishnu pervades the entire uni- 
verse)”. Names and forms may vary, but the Atma is uniform 
in all. To understand this unity, you have to turn your vision 
inward. There is no separate path to know God other than 
knowing one’s own Self. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 286 


There is no human being that has no hunger for food. 
Similarly, you should also have hunger for God. Some people 
may call it madness; that is their madness. Each has their faith, 
conviction, and experience. No one has the right to criticise 
others. 


Expand your Love 


It is only the body that has birth and death; the Atma has no 
birth and death. It has no beginning and no end. It is the all- 
pervading eternal Brahma. 

Whos is Brahma? He is not the one with four heads as de- 
scribed in books. Brahma is vaastness. You find only Brahma 
wherever you see. This expansion of love is God. The feeling 
of “my body” is contraction of love, which is death. So, you 
should expand you love. Your love should not be limited to 
your family and relations. 

In mathematics, 1+1+1+1 becomes 4. The number in- 
creases or decreases depending on whether 1 is added or sub- 
tracted. But in spiritual mathematics, Atma + Atma + Atma re- 
sults again in Atma. It does not increase or decrease. 

The first name of Atma is “I” The Vedas declare, ““Aham 
Brahmasmi (I am Brahman).” This “I” is the first name of 
God. It is possible to know this “I” only by following the path 
of Truth. 

In this world, only Truth exists; there is no falsehood.If you 
find falsehood, the mistake lies in your drishti (vision) and not 
in the srishti (creation). If you put on blue glasses, the world 
appears blue in colour; if you put on red glasses, you will find 
only redness all around. The defect lies with the colour of the 
glasses, but not with the world. 

The very principle of creation is Divinity. “Sarvam 
khalvidham Brahma,” so revere everyone as Brahman. Love 
everyone as Brahman. Then there will be no scope for hatred 
or enmity. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 287 


What is the reason for all the agitation in the world? It is 
lack of equanimity. Only through equanimity can you develop 
love. 

Embodiments of Love! In these seven days of yajna, we 
have seven modes of worship. We call it Sapthaham (seven- 
day event). What is the significance of having a Sapthaham? 
This number seven is very significant in numerology. In mu- 
sic, we have saptha swaras (seven notes). There are seven 
oceans, seven rishis (sages), seven colours, and seven worlds. 
They are all within us. There is nothing beyond you. 

It is foolishness to think that God is separate from you and 
to search for Him outside. You are God. But since you identify 
yourself with the body, you are not able to understand this 
Truth. Body is like a ater bubble, and the mind is like a mad 
monkey. Why do you rely on these two? Follow your con- 
science. Only then will you have self-satisfaction. 


Only sacred qualities should emerge out of Hridaya 


Atma symbolises hridaya (spiritual heart). God dwells in 
hridaya. Hridaya is the centre of Love and Peace. Only sacred 
qualities should emerge out of hridaya. But instead, animal 
qualities like anger, hatred, and jealousy emerge, and you be- 
com a beast and not a human. Such a heart is a dwelling pplace 
for animals, not God. If you conduct yourself with peace, love, 
and compassion, you are God. The Navaratri worship was 
started in order to foster sacred qualities within us. 

You would have heard the name of Dasaratha. Who is he? 
He is not the king of Ayodhya. Dasaratha refers to one who 
has control over the human body, which has five senses of per- 
ception and five senses of action. The matster of these ten 
senses is Dasaratha. This body is a chariot, and Dasaratha is 
the master of this chariot. 

Dasaratha had three wives. They signify satwic (serene, 
pure), rajasic (passionate), and tamasic (dull, lethargic) quali- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 288 


ties. He had four sons. They signify the four objectives of life: 
dharma, artha, kama, and moksha. What is the capital of 
Dasaratha’s kingdom? Ayodhya, which means it is a place that 
no one can get into. It signifies Hridaya, which no wicked 
qualities can enter. 


Your happiness is heaven and your misery is hell 


The entire universe is within you. The mountains may ap- 
pear smooth from a distance, but once you go near, you will 
know the truth. It is the distance that lends enchantment. As 
long as you think that Kailas, Vaikunta, and Swarga are at a 
distant place, you will be crazy about them. Actually, all of 
them are in your hridaya. Your happiness is heaven and your 
misery is hell. The concept of heaven and hell was introduced 
in order to see that you do only good. Heaven and hell are not 
separate; they are in your mind. 

What is the cause of misery? Your own actions. Buddha 
did penance for six long years. One day, he opened his eyes 
and said that he had caught hold of the thief. Who is the thief? 
It is the mind. He realised that mind was the root cause of all 
suffering. If you control your mind, you will never suffer. 

Churchill said, “Man has conquered everything, but he has 
not conquered himself.” Man is trying to know everything 
without understanding his true Self. Know Thyself, then you 
will know everything. This is what the Upanishads said: “try to 
know and experience that by which everything is known and 
experienced.” That is Atmic bliss, which is eternal and su- 
preme. True happiness lies in union with God. If you are with 
the world, you will never get happiness. 

The human heaert can be compared to Ksheera Sagara 
(Ocean of Milk), but today it has become Kshara Sagara 
(Ocean of Salinity). Lord Vishnu dwells in the Ocean of Milk, 
which means that He resides in our heart. But if we make our 
heart into a Kshara Sagara, then whales and sharks (bad 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 289 


qualities) will enter. Human heart should be pure; only then 
can Lord Vishnu reside in it. If you understand God, you will 
not search for Him outside. God is within you, in you, above 
you, below you, around you. There is no one nearer than God. 
God is nearer than your physical mother. So, worship God as 
your mother, who is the embodiment of Truth. 


Experience and enjoy the banquet of Bliss 


I begin My discourse with a sloka (verse) or a poem and 
conclude it with a bhajan (devotional song). Do you know 
what they are? The first sloka or poem is like a plate, the dis- 
course can be compared to the various delicious items that are 
served on the plate, and the bhajan at the end is like a plate 
covering the delicious items. Do not treat this as a mandu 
(medicine), thereby taking only a little of it. Treat this as a 
vindu (banquet) and partake of the delicious items that I serve 
to the maximum extent. Experience and enjoy this banquet. 

Students! Embodiments of Love! You have to learn many 
things in daily life. First, know the mistakes in your life and try 
to correct them. Love is essential to become a complete human 
being. If you follow the path of Love, everything becomes 
Love. 


25 September 1998 
Prasanthi Nilayam 


31 


Know your true identity 


One may master all forms of knowledge, 

One may vanquish one’s adversaries in debate, 

One may fight with valour and courage in the battlefield, 

One may be an emperor reigning over vast kingdoms, 

One may offer cows and gold as an act of charity, 

One may count the countless stars in the sky, 

One may tell the names of different 

living creatures on the earth, 

One may be an expert in eight forms of yoga, 

One may reach even the moon, 

But it is impossible to control the body, mind and senses. 

Turn the vision inward and 

Achieve the supreme state of equanimity of the mind. 
[Telugu Poem] 


Embodiments of Love! In this world, for man to accomplish 
any task, ichcha shakthi (will power), jnana shakthi (power of 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 291 


discrimination), and kriya shakthi (power of action) are essen- 
tial. Ichcha shakthi refers to the determination to undertake a 
task. Jnana shakthi refers to the ways and means to be adopted 
to fulfil the task undertaken. It is not enough if you have ich- 
cha shakthi and jnana shakthi; you need to have kriya shakthi 
too. 

If you want to weave cloth, you need to have cotton. The 
cotton has to be made into thread, which in turn has to be 
woven. This relates to kriya shakthi. An enquiry into the type 
of equipment needed to do this relates to jnana shakthi. Man 
has got all these three potencies in him, but that is not enough. 
He needs to bring them together. 


Primordial cause of Creation 


Here is a small example. Suppose you have flowers, thread, 
and a needle; can you have a garland? Should not there be 
someone to make a garland out of them? You have a container 
for oil, a wick, and a lamp. But will this alone produce light? 
No. There must be someone to light the wick. You have gold, 
gems and precious stones; can you have jewels out of them? 
No. A goldsmith is needed to make them. 

Here, you have two types of causes: One is upadana 
karana (primary cause) and the other is nimitta karana (in- 
strumental cause). A goldsmith makes ornaments using gold, 
but who is the one who has created gold? He is God. So, God 
is upadana karana and the goldsmith is nimitta karana. 

Without the primordial principle, upadana karana (God), 
nimitta karana is useless. God, the upadana karana, is the 
creator of this world. Man, the nimitta karana, is trying to ex- 
perience and enjoy this creation. But man forgets the upadana 
karana (God) and thinks that he is the doer and prides himself 
on his achievements. 

Without the primordial basis, man cannot achieve any- 
thing. Students of science are aware of this. Two parts of hy- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 292 


drogen and one part of oxygen are combined to make water. 
Scientists pride themselves on this achievement and ignore 
God, who is the creator of hydrogen and oxygen. 

In this modern age, man is carried away by the sense of 
doership, forgetting the Principle of Mooladhara (primordial 
basis). The potter makes pots, but without clay and water, he 
cannot do so. The potter is only an instrument, and hence he is 
the nimitta karana. God, who has created clay and water ,is the 
upadana karana. 

Bharathiyas (Indians) believe that there are eighty-four 
lakh species in this world. These can be classified into four 
categories: (1) andaja (born out of eggs), (2) pindaja (born out 
of womb), (3) swedaja (born out of sweat), and (4) utbhija 
(born out of earth). There are twenty-one lakh species under 
each of these categories. They make a total of eighty-four lakh 
species. 

Beings are many, but the living principle is uniform in all 
of them. There are innumerable waves in the ocean, each 
looking different from the other. Waves may vary in form, but 
ocean is the basis for all of them. Likewise, all eighty-four lakh 
species have emerged from the ocean of Sath-chith-ananda 
(Being-awareness-bliss)> All have their origin in Sath-chith- 
ananda. 


Man is essentially divine 


What is Sath-chith-ananda? Sath is Being, that which is 
changeless and eternally present. Chith means total Awareness. 
Sath is like sugar; Chith is like water. When water and sugar 
are mixed, you have neither sugar nor water, but syrup. Simi- 
larly, the combination of Sath and Chith results in Ananda 
(Bliss). 

In all living creatures, you find this Sath-chith-ananda. But 
man is not able to understand his true identity, which is Sath- 
chith-anandam and is in search of happiness outside. It is like 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 293 


searching for his own self outside. How can he find his own 
self outside? He has to look within. 

In the waking state, there are four aspects: kala (time), 
karma (action), karana (reason), and karthavya (duty). Sup- 
pose you have decided to go to Bangalore by car to participate 
in a programme. You start at 5 a.m. and reach Bangalore at 8 
a.m. Here kala is 3 hours, karma is traveling by car, karana is 
the programme, and karthavya is participating in it. All four 
aspects are present in the waking state. 

Now consider that at 10 o’clock in the night you had a 
dream. In the dream, you went to Bangalore and participated in 
a programme. When did you start? How did you travel? When 
did you reach? What was the reason? You do not know. This 
only means that the above four aspects do not exist in the 
dreaming state. In the sushupthi (deep sleep state), there is no 
time, no reason, no duty, and nothing that you do; you only 
experience bliss. 


Man is changeless in all three periods of time 


In the waking state, you undertake different tasks with your 
body. In the dreaming state, you create everything, including 
your own self. In deep sleep, you enjoy bliss. You are one and 
the same in all the three states. On this basis, it can be said that 
man is changeless in all the three periods of time and experi- 
ences bliss directly or indirectly. He experiences oneness in all 
the three periods of time. When once he understands this spirit 
of oneness, there will be no scope for differences and conflicts. 
As long as you identify yourself with the body, you find only 
multiplicity. 

Once, Adi Sankara went to Kasi and prayed to Lord 
Viswanath thus, “O Lord! I have come here to redeem myself 
of the three sins I have committed.” He had not harmed any- 
one; nor did he steal anything. Then why did he call himself a 
sinner? 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 294 


He explained the first sin in the following words. “It was I 
who declared, ‘ Yatho Vacho Nivartante Aprapya Manasa Sah.’ 
Though I know that you are beyond the ken of thought and 
word, I tried to describe you in a string of words: Isha, 
Gireesha, Naresha, Paresha. 1 have committed the sin of not 
practising what I preached. This is my first sin. 

“Though I declared that God is everywhere, I have come 
all the way to Kasi to have Your darshan, as if You are present 
only in Kasi. I have committed the sin of saying one thing and 
doing another. This is my second sin. 

“It was I who said, ‘Na punyam, na papam, na sukham, na 
durkham,’ which means there is no sin, no merit, no joy, and 
no sorrow. Yet, I am praying for the atonement of my sins. 
This is the third sin I have committed.” 

The significance of Sankara’s statement is that the dishar- 
mony of thought, word, and deed is in itself a sin. “Ma- 
nasyanyath vachasyanyath karmanyanyath duratmanam,” the 
evil one is he who does not observe the unity of thought, word, 
and deed. “Manasyekam vachasyekam karmanyekam mahat- 
manam,” he is the noble one who has achieved the unity of 
thought, word, and deed. 


Lord’s name, the only Saviour 


Every action of Sankara is a teaching to humanity. When 
he was returning from Kasi, he found a person who was trying 
to memorise Panini’s grammatical formula by constantly re- 
peating, “Dukrun karane, dukrun karane.” 

Sankara decided to give him a teaching. He went and asked 
him what benefit he would get by repeating Panini’s grammar. 
That man said that he could become a great pandit, join the 
court of the king, and earn lots of money and lead a happy life. 
When Sankara asked him, what would happen to him after 
death, he said he did not know. Sankara told him, “O foolish 
man, understand that the body, money, and power are tempo- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 205 


rary. Attain eternal bliss, which you can enjoy even after your 
death.” Sankara sang the following verse: 


Bhaja Govindam Bhaja Govindam 
Govindam Bhaja Mooda Mathe. 
Samprapthe Sannihite Kale 

Nahi Nahi Rakshathi Dukrun Karane. 


O foolish man, chant the name of the Lord.When 
the hour of death approaches, It is only the Lord 
who can save you, and not your grammar. 


Though Sankara had no personal gain, he strove hard for 
the emancipation of humanity. 


Engage yourself in sacred actions 


Not only Sankara, Krishna too did the same. In the Bha- 
gavad Gita, He declared, 


Na me parthasthi karthavyam trishu lokeshu kinchana, 
nanavapthamavapthavyam varthayevacha karmani. 


I don’t have to do anything in these three worlds, nor do 
I gain anything. But yet, in order to teach humanity, I 
constantly engage Myself in action from dawn to dusk, 
so that people follow My ideal and sanctify their lives. 


Only through action man can redeem himself. “Karmanye- 
va-adhikaraste maphaleshu kadachana (you have the right to 
action, not to the results thereof).” “Karmanubandheeni manu- 
shyaloke (humanity is bound by action. No one can spend their 
time without being involved in action).” 

When I ask some of the foreigners, what they are doing, 
they say they are doing nothing. They think action is related to 
involving in some kind of job or business. In fact, our inhala- 
tion and exhalation process is also a kind of action. Even the 
movement of eyelids is action. Day in and day out, the body is 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 296 


engaged in some kind of activity or the other. The noblest way 
is to engage the body in sacred actions such as sravanam (lis- 
tening to the Lord’s stories), kirtanam (singing His glories), 
smaranam (remembrance), Pada sevanam (service to the Lotus 
Feet), archanam (worship), vandanam (salutation), dasyam 
(servitude), sakhyam (friendship), Atmanivedanam (offering 
oneself to the Lord, i.e. self-surrender). 

You should understand that whatever sadhana (spiritual 
exercise) you do, be it japa, tapa, yoga, dhyana, or bhajan, it is 
for your own satisfaction. God does not need them. Some peo- 
ple think they worship for God’s sake; it is a mistaken view. 
Whatever man does is for his own sake and to meet his selfish 
ends. 


Vision of the True Self 


As you inhale, you make the sound so, and when you ex- 
hale, you utter the sound ham. Together Soham means, “I am 
That,” which means you are God. When you go on repeating, 
Soham, Soham, where is the need for any sadhana? 

Where is God? How to see Him? These questions of seeing 
and experiencing God have been there since ancient times. In 
fact, you have to take to the spiritual path in order to know 
your true identity i.e. Divinity. He who knows his true identity 
is a true aspirant. Without realising this truth, all spiritual sad- 
hana will be a waste of time. 

“Sariramadyam khalu dharma sadhanam (body is gifted to 
undertake righteous actions).” What is our dharma? Love is 
our dharma. Truth is our dharma. Peace is our dharma. We 
should follow our dharma. 

The quality of sugar is sweetness. If it is not sweet, then it 
is not sugar. Similarly, Love is your natural quality. Without 
Love, you cannot be called a human being. There is love in 
you, but you are limiting it to your family, friends, and rela- 
tions. However, remember that your relations will come with 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 207. 


you only up to the burial ground. It is only God, who is with 
you always, even after your death. 

“Janthunam narajanma durlabham (human life is the rar- 
est).” Such a sacred and noble life should not be wasted. Hav- 
ing taken birth as a human being, you should set an ideal. 

A dancer always keeps the rhythm in her mind, while 
dancing. Similarly, you should always remember your innate 
divinity in whatever you do. Maya (illusion) is like a narthaki 
(dancer) always trying to distract you. In order to control this 
‘nar-tha-ki’, you have to reverse the order of the letters and do 
‘kir-tha-na’ 1.e. singing the Lord’s name 


Harernama, Harernama Harernamaiva Kevalam, 
Kalau Nasthyeva Nasthyeva Nasthyeva Gathiranyatha. 
In this Age of Kali, the Lord’s name is the only refuge. 


Many people aspire for Sakshathkaram (vision of the true 
Self). Westerners say that they want liberation. But they do not 
know what it really means. If you want to see your Self, give 
up body attachment and develop attachment toward the Self. 
Only then you will have Sakshathkaram. 

At birth, you cry, ‘koham, koham,’ which means ‘who am 
I? Who am I?’ You should not die with the same question on 
your lips. When you die, you should be able to assert cheer- 
fully, ‘Soham,’ meaning ‘I am God.’ Finding out the answer 
for the question, “Who am I?’ is true liberation. 

Today, you have endless worries such as birth, death, old 
age, losses, failures, family life, etc. All these are of your own 
making. They arise because of your attachment and delusion. 
God does not give them. Who is the giver and who is the re- 
ceiver, when you are God yourself. 

Along as you have bhrama (delusion), you cannot attain 
Brahma (God). Just as ash covers the fire, likewise maya con- 
ceals your true identity. Fire is seen when ash is blown away. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 298 


Similarly, you can have the vision of the Self, when you give 
up body attachment. 


Divinity through unity 


Vedanta says, “Ekam sath viprah babudha vadanthi (Truth 
is one, but scholars refer to it by many names).” The same 
water has different names in different languages. Similarly, 
God is one, but He is worshipped in many forms and names. 

‘T’ is the first name of God. Right from the pauper to a 
millionaire each one uses the letter ‘TY’ while introducing them- 
self. This ‘I’ is your true identity. The single letter ‘I’ refers to 
the Atma, while the three-lettered ‘eye’ refers to the body. The 
body has three attributes; whereas, the Atma has none. Atma is 
Supreme Bliss. It is the eternal witness and beyond all descrip- 
tions. “Ekatma Sarvabhoothantharatma “it is the same Divin- 
ity that is present in all beings.)” 

Embodiments of Love! 

Try to enjoy and experience the love that is in you. If 
someone says there is no God, tell him, “Maybe your God does 
not exist for you, but my God exists for me. You have no right 
to question the existence of my God.” You have to argue with 
conviction. Such an argument will silence the person. 

Each one is mad in their own way. The world itself is like a 
mental hospital. There are some who derive delight in self- 
praise. There are some that beat and accuse others. But the 
madness for God is the noblest. God sees to it that you give up 
madness for the world and become mad for Him. Only a fortu- 
nate few will be blessed with this madness for God. If only the 
entire humanity developed this madness for God, the world 
would be rid of disturbances and peace would prevail. 


Do not imbibe negative feelings 


Students! Embodiments of Love! 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 299 


After every bhajan session, you are praying for the peace 
of the world (Loka samastha sukhino bhavanthu). You find 
only ‘pieces,’ but no peace in this world. In fact, if you de- 
velop love and tolerance toward fellow beings, there will be no 
need to pray for peace; the world will automatically become an 
abode of peace. 

Develop love in you and share it with at least ten persons in 
a day. There are ninety-five crore people in this land of 
Bharath (India). If each one goes on sharing his love with oth- 
ers, then all will be one. Out of this unity, you will attain Di- 
vinity. Where there is mistake, there is fear; where there is 
love, there is no fear. Why fear when I am near and dear? You 
should have full faith in Divinity. Many devotees come here, 
but how many are firm and steady in their faith? All the 
worldly desires are negative in nature. The negative feelings 
stand in the way of attaining the positive. So, do not imbibe 
negative feelings. Develop positive feelings and think of God 
with unwavering faith. 


26 September 1998 
Prashanthi Nilayam 


32 


Obey God’s commands 


Just as dogs bark at the mighty elephant, 
Some people may heckle noble souls. 
Neither the elephant nor the noble souls 
Suffer any loss on this account. 
[Telugu Poem] 


Due to the effect of the Kali Age, we come across many 
such situations. On hearing the melodious singing of cuckoo 
birds, crows out of jealousy start cawing at them. But that does 
not deter cuckoos from singing. In the same way, seeing the 
swans, cranes make fun of them. But the swans are least af- 
fected. Similarly, one who has realised his true identity will be 
neither elated by praise nor depressed by blame. 

Human life is the gift of God. If only you make proper use 
of this gift, your life as a human being will find fulfilment. 
Human beings can be classified into three types: (1) adham 
(low and mean), (2) madhyam (average), and (3) uttham (no- 
ble). The human body can be compared to a sacred vessel. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 301 


Utttham is one who makes proper use of this vessel gifted by 
God. Adham is one who uses the body for unsacred purposes 
without understanding its value. Madhyam is one who makes 
use of the body both for sacred and unsacred purposes. 

What is the use of having a cosy bed, a soft pillow, and a 
ceiling fan if one does not get proper sleep? Likewise, man, in 
spite of being endowed with a heart like a bed, a mind like a 
soft pillow, and an intellect like a ceiling fan, does not enjoy 
peace and happiness. Then what for are these —the heart, the 
mind and the intellect? 


Life devoid of peace and happiness is no life at all 


We describe the heart as pure and unsullied. We also at- 
tribute the quality of all-pervasiveness to the mind (Mano 
moolam idam jagath). We describe the intellect as the tran- 
scendental principle (atheendriyam). God has gifted these in- 
struments to man so that he can enjoy peace and happiness 

In spite of these valuable instruments, man does not have 
peace and happiness. We say that human life is the rarest and 
most precious (Nara janma durlabham), but does your conduct 
deserve such a description? You are not making proper use of 
the mind and the intellect and not keeping the heart pure. As a 
result, you do not experience peace and happiness. Life devoid 
of peace and happiness is no life at all. 

Great men say that in order to enjoy peace and happiness in 
life, you need to develop a sense of detachment. Detachment 
does not mean leading a life of seclusion in a forest, leaving 
family and property. 

Students should understand the true spirit of the word. ‘re- 
nunciation’. You should realise that this gross world is inert. 
Consider the subtle aspect of this world as illusion and the 
causal aspect as only a reflection. Only when you understand 
the gross, subtle, and causal aspects of the world can you have 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 302 


renunciation. But man believes this gross world as real, forget- 
ting the Primal Cause, God. 


Make an effort to know the value of human life 


These three aspects that constitute the apparent world will 
delude you. You should understand the Primal Cause, the Ar- 
mic Principle. Only then can you experience bliss and peace. 
You should make an effort to know the value of human life. 
Human being is called Nara. What is the meaning of Nara? It 
means the embodiment of the Self, the Atma. 

The gopikas (cowherd maids) used to pray thus: “Kleem 
krishnaya, govindaya, gopijanavallabhaya swaha.” Kleem 
means the earth. Krishnaya means water. Govindaya means 
fire. Gopijanavallabhaya refers to air. Swaha refers to ether 
(akasa). There is no life or place in this world without these 
five elements. They are present everywhere. This is how the 
gopikas described Krishna as all-pervasive. 

God, who is in the form of five elements, is omnipotent, 
omnipresent, and omniscient. So, the main duty of mankind is 
to make proper use of these five elements. Misuse of these five 
elements amounts to misuse of Divinity. 

Man considers his body as everything and spends his entire 
life in the pursuit of bodily comforts and conveniences. Body 
is bound to perish. Though a 100-year life span is stipulated, 
you cannot take it for granted. Death can occur either in boy- 
hood or in youth or in old age. Nobody can say when one 
would die. 

Then why should you take such great pains for the sake of 
your body, which is like a water bubble? Having taken a hu- 
man birth, you should lead an ideal life and make everyone 
happy. You should not give undue importance to the body; 
treat it only as an instrument. 

Mind is like a fan. Only when you turn the fan in your di- 
rection can you enjoy the breeze. Similarly, only when you 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 303 


turn your mind toward God can you experience the breeze of 
bliss. But if you turn your mind toward the world and say that 
you are not able to experience bliss, only you are to be blamed. 
You have to turn your mind toward God, not the body. All the 
actions that you do for bodily comforts are useless. 


The heart is always filled with peace, love, and bliss 


You cannot find peace outside; it is within your heart. So, 
search within. The heart is always filled with peace, love, and 
bliss. It is the basis for all sacred qualities such as compassion, 
love, tolerance, etc. All that emanates out of your heart is sa- 
cred. Body is the root cause of all six evil qualities (desire, an- 
ger, greed, pride, attachment and jealousy). So, do not be at- 
tached to the body. 

Human life is very sacred and highly valuable. The mind, 
the intellect, and the senses are mere instruments. But you are 
not making an effort to know this. You are only trying to un- 
derstand the nature of the instruments, but not the Atmic Prin- 
ciple, which is the primordial basis of life. Your life will be 
sanctified only when you understand the Atmic Principle. 

People undertake many spiritual practices in order to sanc- 
tify their lives, but without purity of heart all these will be of 
no use. First, purify your heart. Do not give scope for wicked 
feelings such as desire, anger, and greed. In the spiritual path, 
these three are the worst enemies. 

In the Ramayana, Ravana is a symbol of lust and desire. 
Ravana was one who did great penance and received boons 
from the Lord. He had mastered all sixty-four types of knowl- 
edge. Such a mighty and great person like Ravana succumbed 
to desire and ultimately ruined his life. 

In the Bhagavatha, Hiranyakasipu symbolises anger. He 
was a great scientist. He had control over the five elements. 
Modern scientists are able to reach the moon, but Hiran- 
yakasipu attempted to reach the sun. He even tried to stop the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 304 


rotation of the earth. Such a great scientist was ruined due to 
his anger. 


The one with anger will never be successful. 
He ruins his property and loses his respect. 
He will commit sinful deeds and 
Will be rejected by one and all. 
[Telugu Poem] 


In the Mahabharata, Duryodhana stands for greed. 


In order to kill a miser, 
There is no need to harm him physically. 
Just ask him for money, and 
He will’ die’ immediately! 
[Telugu Poem] 


Duryodhana as such a miser. What could he achieve ulti- 
mately? Therefore, for a spiritual aspirant, desire, anger, and 
greed are his worst enemies. The merit acquired through sev- 
eral years of spiritual practice will be ruined in a moment of 
fury. One should therefore control all these three. 


Only he who obeys God’s commands is redeemed 


In this world, there may be at least one good person out of 
every ten persons. Out of every ten good persons, there may be 
at least one who has love for God. Out of every ten persons 
who have love for God, there may be at least one who wants to 
attain Divinity. Out of every ten persons who want to attain 
Divinity, there may be at least one who is ever ready to obey 
God’s commands. Only he who obeys God’s commands is re- 
deemed. There is no point in undertaking spiritual practices 
without obeying God’ s commands. 

Today, everyone wants happiness without understanding 
what it means. True happiness lies in being desireless. Desire 
is the cause of misery. A rich man may have no dearth of 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 305 


money, food, and other material comforts, but still he may lack 
peace and happiness. Material objects may provide physical 
comforts, but not mental peace. Money may give reputation, 
but not respect. There may be a number of servants, but they 
are not friends. All of them serve only out of compulsion, not 
out of love. 

There is only one true friend, who is always with you, in 
you and around you. He is God. As long as there is water in the 
tank, thousands of frogs gather. But once the tank is dry, not a 
single frog will be seen around. Likewise, as long as you are 
rich and in a position of authority, everyone acts like a friend. 
But once you lose your position and money, your so-called 
friends will desert you, without even caring to say good-bye. 


Hearts bereft of love are like barren lands 


In this world, nothing is permanent. Only the principle of 
love in your heart is permanent. Only love can win people’s 
hearts. If you have love within, the whole world will be with 
you. Why do so many people from so many countries gather 
here? There is something here that is not there in your country, 
in your village, and in your family. That is the all-encom- 
passing love. Only through love can you establish intimate re- 
lationship with each other. Hearts bereft of love are like barren 
lands. There should be love in the field of the human heart. 
Gopikas prayed to Krishna thus: 


O Krishna, play on your flute 

So that the seeds of Love germinate 

In the barren fields of our hearts and 

Make the rain of love and 

The rivers of love flow incessantly. [Telugu Song] 


Love always gives and never receives. Such selfless Love 
is only with God. You have gathered here to experience that 
Love. No one has sent you any invitation. It is only Love that 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 306 


has brought you here. What is that I am giving you? When I 
just ask you, “When did you come?” you become ecstatic. 
There is so much sweetness even in the words that I utter. You 
too should learn to speak softly and sweetly. “You cannot al- 
ways oblige, but you can always speak obligingly.” Harsh 
words are like atom bombs. When someone visits your house, 
even if you do not give anything to eat, at least talk to him 
sweetly and softly. It can even appease their hunger. Instead, if 
you speak harshly, that will not only increase their hunger but 
also dishearten them. 


Charity is the true ornament for the hand. 
Truth is the true ornament for the throat. 
Listening to sacred texts is 
the true ornament for the ears. 
Why need any other ornaments? 
[Sanskrit sloka] 


You should not have the feeling that only your country 
should be happy. You should pray for the welfare of the entire 
world —Loka samastha sukhino bhavanthu. Let everybody 
and every country be happy. Only when you have such broad 
feelings will you be respected. No one will respect you if your 
behaviour and words are not proper. 


Do not waste a precious human life 


Students! Try to understand what human life is. The 
Upanishads declare that human life is most valuable. It is not 
easy to understand the divine quality immanent in man. All 
forms and all powers are in man. Man thinks that gold and 
diamond are most valuable, but actually it is man who endows 
value to them. “Men are more valuable than all the wealth of 
the world.” So, do not waste such a precious human life. 

Ancient sages like Vasishta worked very hard in order to 
sanctify their lives. Why did Vasishta join the court of 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 307 


Dasaratha? One day Vasishta himself explained this to 
Dasaratha in the following words: “O king, I have come to you 
not because you are wealthy and powerful but because Lord 
Narayana Himself will be born as your son. I want to sanctify 
my life in His company.” Vasishta always used to think of di- 
vinity. So, he had the appellation Brahmarishi. 

Viswamitra was called only a rajarishi because he was full 
of rajasic qualities. In spite of repeated efforts, Viswamitra 
could not get the appellation that Vasishta could get. So, he 
developed hatred toward Vasishta. Due to this hatred, Viswa- 
mitra lost all his powers. 

You all know that Durvasa, one of the great rishis (sages), 
also had the bad quality of anger in him. Even if you were to 
search with a ‘torchlight’, you would not find even an iota of 
love in him. What is the use of being a maharishi (great 
sage)when there is no trace of love or peace? Only one with 
sweet words and with sacred actions can be called a true ma- 
harishi. 


If you protect the values, they will in turn protect you 


Bharat (India) could progress in ancient times because of 
saints and noble souls. In spite of repeated foreign invasions, 
this country could not be destabilised because of the greatness 
of its spiritual power. In order to preserve and sustain the 
strong spiritual foundation laid by the saints and noble souls, 
we have to foster human values such as Truth, Righteousness, 
Peace, Love, and Nonviolence. If you protect these values, 
they will in turn protect you. “Dharmayeva hatho hanthi, dhar- 
mo rakshati rakshitah (Uf you protect dharma, dharma will 
protect you).” Similarly, if you destroy dharma, dharma will 
destroy you. 

Love is your true form. Only through love you can achieve 
anything. There is no need to search for God and no need to 
undertake any spiritual practice. “Love is God, Live in Love.” 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 308 


Without spending a penny and without even crossing your 
doorstep, you can attain liberation. How? It is only through 
love. So, develop love. 

Embodiments of Love! Do not have hatred toward anybody. 
Start loving even those that abuse you. It is only through love 
that you can bring transformation in them. By loving them 
more and more, you can get relieved of the pain inflicted by 
their harsh words. 

Harsh words are like sharp arrows that pierce deep into the 
heart. There is no medicine in this world that can cure you of 
the pain inflicted by harsh words. When you are shot with the 
arrows of harsh words, in reply speak sweetly, softly with love. 
It is the best medicine. It gives quick relief. Any incurable dis- 
ease can be cured with love. 


Love is beyond description 


What is the cause of disease? It is mental tension, which is 
man’s own making. Tension gives rise to temper ,and the two 
together ruin man. If you want to fill a cup with milk, which is 
already filled with water, what do you have to do? You have to 
pour out the water and then fill it with milk. In the same way, 
remove all wicked thoughts and wicked feelings from your 
heart and then fill it with love. 


Start the day with Love. 
Fill the day with Love. 
Spend the day with Love. 
End the day with Love. 
This is the way to God. 


You can develop Love in you by sharing it with others. 
Love never diminishes. It is nectarine and eternal. Once Na- 
rada asked Narayana if there was anything sweeter than nectar. 
Narayana replied, “Love is sweeter than nectar.” You may 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 309 


even get fed up with drinking nectar, but that is not the case 
with Love. The more you taste it, the more you ask for it. 

First remove all dirt (bad qualities) in you. As soon as the 
calf is born, the cow removes all dirt from its body by licking it 
repeatedly and then feeds it. When a pashu (animal) has got so 
much Love for its young one, then you can very well imagine 
the Love of Pashupathi (God) for His creation. Love cannot be 
expressed in words. Narada said “Anir vachaneeyam prema,” 
which means: Love cannot be described in words. 


Love is the principle of God 


People think that Narada is fond of creating differences 
(kalahapriya), but it is a mistaken view. Yes, he was a ‘kala- 
hapriya’ in his early days, but later on he realised his mistake, 
did severe penance, and rectified himself. He ultimately be- 
came a great teacher. It was Narada who brought nara (man) 
and Narayana (God) together. He worked for attainment of 
bliss and total removal of grief. He said, “The Atma, the Spirit, 
is God.” It is Narayana who makes you forget your body at- 
tachments and gets you intoxicated with the love of God. 

Love is the principle of God. Having got this Love in you, 
why should you suffer? Why do you have problems? In fact, 
you have no difficulties and no anxieties. There is only bliss. 
But how can you experience bliss? You have to follow the path 
of Love. 

Just by repeating the names of the dishes, your hunger will 
not be appeased. You have to use your hands and mouth to fill 
your stomach. In the same way, you have to speak sweet words 
and do sacred actions. Through these, you will enjoy the 
sweetness of life and you will be blissful. 

All are the children of immortality. You are all the em- 
bodiments of ananda (bliss). The Upanishads say that man is 
“ananda pipasi’ (seeker of bliss). Since he has emerged from 
bliss, he wants to return to his source. Just as fish, born out of 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 310 


water, always wants to get into water, so also man, born out of 
bliss, always craves for bliss wherever he is and whatever he 
does. Until he returns to his source, man has no rest at all. 

Man is always restless because he cannot find bliss in this 
world. That is why the Gita said, “Anithyam Asukham Lokam, 
Imam Prapya Bhajasva Maam (having got this joyless and 
transient human life, constantly worship Me).” 

You may engage yourself in your daily activities; there is 
no need to give up your jobs and business, but keep your mind 
on God always. Only then you will have peace and happiness. 
After tasting honey, can you say it is bitter? You have actually 
not experienced bliss. Once you experience divine bliss, your 
mind will never crave for worldly pleasures. 

So, try to experience this bliss, which is within you. Bliss is 
your source, bliss is your breath and bliss is your life. And it is 
there with God. Be successful, attain Divinity and enjoy divine 
bliss. 


27 September 1998 
Prasanthi Nilayam 


33 


Entire universe is within you 


Even a millionaire has to be content with ordinary food. 
He cannot live on a diet of gold. 
When time is not favourable, 
a stick may turn into a snake, 
While, when it is favourable, dust may turn into gold. 
The wheel of time can turn a scholar into a fool 
And a fool into a saint. 
A wealthy man may become a plaything 
of adversity at some time. 
Whatever your efforts may be, 
You cannot get what you are not destined to get. 
O man, don’t be over ambitious, 
Lead instead a noble life 
making proper use of the intellect. 


Embodiments of Love! In this vast world, among all living 
creatures, human life is the noblest. One is born as a human 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 312 


being as a result of meritorious deeds done in past lives. Just as 
a small gramophone plate contains many songs, poems, and 
dialogues, likewise the human heart contains the entire uni- 
verse in a subtle form. You can neither see the script of the 
dialogues and songs by keeping the gramophone plate close to 
your eyes nor hear the sound by keeping it close to your ears. 
Only by playing it will you be able to hear the music and the 
dialogues that are in it. 


Human being is the Embodiment of Cosmic Principle 


The human heart, which can be compared to a gramophone 
plate, contains in it all the traits of past lives. The reaction, re- 
sound, and reflection of all that you have seen, heard, and ex- 
perienced are contained in it. The vast oceans, the mighty 
mountains, and all the different places that you visited are im- 
printed on your heart. In short, the entire universe is imprinted 
on the human heart. So, it can be said that human being is 
Viswavirataswarupa (Embodiment of Cosmic Principle). But 
man, not being able to realise this truth, considers himself low, 
and is affected by pleasure and pain, good and bad. 

Wherefrom has this universe originated? The Sruthis (the 
Vedas) have given a proper answer to this. The universe has 
originated from where the ‘I’ principle has originated. That is 
Hridaya. The Sruthis declare that Hridaya is the origin of the 
‘T’ principle. This ‘I’ is all-pervasive. Everyone uses this letter 
‘T’ while introducing thesmelf. 

There is no place or person without this ‘IT’ principle. Even 
the birds and beasts have got this ‘I’ principle, though they are 
not able to express it. Wherever ‘I’ is, there is Hridaya. Hri- 
daya is not limited to body alone, it is all-pervasive. ‘I’ is the 
name of the Atma. So, in everybody, the Atma is present in the 
form of ‘I.’ It is associated with buddhi (intellect). 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 313 


The five aspects of buddhi 


Right from an illiterate person to a scholar, everyone de- 
fines buddhi as the power to discriminate between the transient 
and the permanent. This is not the correct definition. People 
use it only in the worldly sense. In fact, buddhi has five as- 
pects. They are: sraddha, rutham, sathyam, yogam, and ma- 
hatthatwam. 

Sraddha has two powers: one is interest and the other is 
steadfastness. Rutham refers to unity of thought, word, and 
deed. Rutham expressed in the form of words becomes Sath- 
yam (Truth). Yogam refers Yoga chitta vritti nirodha (control- 
ling the aberrations of the mind). The fifth aspect, mahatthat- 
wam, is that which is sacred and divine. When buddhi has all 
these five aspects, is it not an understatement to define buddhi 
as that which only discriminates between the transient and the 
permanent. 

Today, many people talk of manas (mind) and buddhi (in- 
tellect) without understanding their true meaning. They think 
that the mind is only a combination of thoughts, but even the 
actions are associated with it. When the mind and the intellect 
unite, humanness reaches a state of freedom, which is referred 
to as moksha (liberation). 

It is a mistake to undertake any spiritual practice to control 
the mind. The nature of the mind is mysterious. It is unsteady 
and associated with ego. Who can control such a mind? So, 
never try to control the mind. Follow the intellect, then the 
mind naturally submits itself. The master of the mind is the 
intellect. The master of the intellect is the Atma. The Atma has 
no master. So, master the mind and be a mastermind. 

Search for Truth is search for God, because Truth is God. 
So, worship Truth, follow Truth, and practice Truth. People 
may deny God, but none can deny Truth. You cannot fragment 
Truth by saying, this is Pakistani Truth, this is American Truth, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 314 


this is Indian Truth, and so on. Truth is uniform for people of 
all nations and all religions in all periods of time. 

Truth is one, so God is one. But people worship God in dif- 
ferent forms. This is bhranthi (delusion). As long as there is 
bhranthi in you, you cannot attain Brahma. This bhranthi is the 
cause for all your sufferings. So, first and foremost, give up 
bhranthi. 


Go closer to God and love Him wholeheartedly 


It is a mistake to consider that God is separate from you. 
Once you realise that you are one with God, you can never be 
separated. For example, when a pot full of water is emptied in 
the ocean, the water of the pot becomes one with the ocean. 
You cannot separate them. Similarly, once you unify your love 
with God, you become one with God. 

How to unify? When fire and coal are placed apart, they 
remain as they are. Only when both are brought close to each 
other, does fire enter coal. If fanning is also done, coal gets 
transformed into fire. Likewise go closer to God and love Him 
wholeheartedly. Going close to God can be compared to coal 
coming in contact with fire (nearness), and loving Him whole- 
heartedly can be compared to fanning (dearness). Such near- 
ness and dearness to God will ultimately make you one with 
God. This is what Vedanta declared: “Brahmavid Brahmaiva 
Bhavathi (the knower of Brahman becomes one with Brah- 
man).” 

The human body contains all the three worlds: Devaloka 
(head), Naraloka (throat) and Nagaloka (heart). The head is 
referred to as Devaloka (heaven) because it has got all five 
senses of perception, which recognise shabda (sound), sparsha 
(touch), rupa (form), rasa (taste), and gandha (smell). 


The body is made of five elements and 
is bound to perish, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 Bs 


But the Indweller is immortal. 

The Indweller has no birth, 

no death, and no bondage. 

Truly speaking, that Indweller is God Himself. 
[Telugu poem] 


God is present in the form of five elements 


Such a sacred body, the temple of God, is being misused. 
Yesterday I told you that the world is made of five elements. 
Human body is also made of five elements. God is present in 
the form of five elements all over the world. The Vedas de- 
clare: Antarbahischa Tath Sarvavyapya Narayana Sthitha, 
which means Divinity is present in you, with you, above you, 
below you, and around you. 

Every human being has five sheaths: annamaya kosha 
(gross sheath), pranamaya kosha (life sheath), manomaya ko- 
sha (mental sheath), vijnanamaya kosha (wisdom sheath), and 
anandamaya kosha (bliss sheath). In order to acquire wisdom, 
you do not need to go through sacred texts or hear the teach- 
ings of elders. The sacred sheath of wisdom itself is present in 
you. Once you experience the sheath of wisdom, you will ex- 
perience the sheath of bliss. Just as the water bubble is born 
out of water, sustained in it and ultimately merges in water; so 
also human being is born out of bliss, sustained in bliss, and 
ultimately merges in bliss. But, being unaware of this, you are 
wasting your time, money, and energy in search of bliss. 

Truly speaking, man is wasting a lot of time in worldly 
pursuits. But he does not spend even a moment to know his 
Self. “Who am I? What for am I born? What am I doing?” 

Man does not put these questions to himself. Instead, he 
questions others, “Who are you? Where do you come from? 
What are you doing?” He has got the inquisitiveness to know 
about others, but not about himself. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 316 


What is the purpose of life? It is not khana, peena, sona, 
mama (eating, drinking, sleeping, dying). The body is gifted in 
order to follow dharma. Your dharma is to know your own 
Self. Consider everyone as divine and the whole world as the 
mansion of God. Offer all your actions to God. Let every word 
that you utter be a mantra and every step you take be Pradak- 
shina (circumambulating God). 

Instead of leading such a sacred life, man is wasting his 
time and energy in amassing wealth. Due to excessive desires, 
his life becomes a big zero. 

Zero gains value when number one (hero) precedes it. As 
the number of zeroes increases, the value also increases if 
number one precedes them. Similarly, if you keep God (Hero) 
in view, all the zeroes such as your body, mind, and senses 
also gain value. 

Hero becomes zero if he forgets God. The world is zero, 
human life is zero, the sky is zero, the sun is zero, and the 
moon is zero. All these zeroes have got value only because of 
the Hero i.e. God. 


By serving others, you are serving only yourself 


Embodiments of Love! 

Take to service, but do not think that you are serving oth- 
ers. You are serving only yourself. Similarly, all the spiritual 
practices such as japa, tapa, dhyana, and bhajan are for your 
own Satisfaction. God does not need them. 

God wants only one thing, that you know your Self. Only 
then you will know God. Confidence in self and confidence in 
God—this is the secret of greatness. Prahlada had total faith in 
Narayana, while Hiranyakasipu had faith in the body. God will 
always protect the one with strong faith, like Prahlada. 

Today, man visits temples and pilgrimage centres in search 
of peace, but peace is not found in pilgrimage centres. Peace is 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 317 


not found outside, it is within you. You are the embodiment of 
peace, truth and love. So search within, tread along the path of 
love. Only then you will be peaceful. 

Through love, you can achieve anything. God is Love, live 
in Love. Without love, you cannot be successful. Love helps 
you to know your Self. In order to experience love, you do not 
need to approach anybody; nor do you need to exert yourself. 
Turn you vision inward. 


Less luggage, more comfort make travel a pleasure 


Krishna said, “Mamaivamso jeevaloke jeevabhutha sana- 
thana” (human beings are the sparks of My Divinity). Serve 
anybody; it amounts to serving God. The best way to love God 
is to love all and serve all. If you lead such a life, all your ac- 
tions will be pleasing unto God. 

Embodiments of Love! 

You need food. Clothing, shelter, and some money to pur- 
chase medicines if you were to fall sick. That is why I said in 
the beginning, “O man! Never be over-ambitious, lead instead 
a noble life by making proper use of the intellect.” Happiness 
lies in contentment. Dissatisfaction will lead to misery. 

In order to experience peace, keep your desires under con- 
trol. Misery is the birthplace of all desires. In this journey of 
life, desires can be compared to luggage. “Less luggage, more 
comfort make travel a pleasure.” So, reduce your desires. This 
is called Vairagya (renunciation). 

As the desire for the world decreases, the desire for God 
increases. This is what the Vedas declare: “Na karmana na 
prajaya dhanena thyagenaike amruthathwamanusu (Neither 
by actions nor by progeny nor by wealth but only by sacrifice 
can one attain immortality).” 

Offer all your actions to God, consider all as children of 
God, treat money as God’s gift and make proper use of it. As 
long as there is no sacrifice in you, you will have only anrut- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 318 


hathwa (falsehood). Only sacrifice will give you amruthathwa 
(immortality). 


Experience happiness through divine love 


What is the way to immortality? Removal of immorality is 
the only way to immortality. Without getting rid of wicked 
qualities such as lust, anger, greed, and jealousy, how do you 
expect to attain immortality? When the tumbler is already 
filled with water, you cannot fill it with anything else. 

Similarly, when the head is filled with evil qualities, good 
qualities have no place in it. You have filled the vessel of your 
heart with all types of worries. Then how do you expect to be 
happy? 

Vyasa gave the essence of all the eighteen Puranas in one 
sentence: Help Ever, Hurt Never. Only then you can be s 
happy. If it is not possible to help, at least do not harm any- 
body under any circumstances You should serve wholeheart- 
edly, not for name and fame. 

Today, man is leading a worldly life, devoid of all ideals. 
Instead of trying to know his true identity, he is wasting his 
time on useless pursuits. 


He knows the route to America, but not to Kasi. 
He knows a lot about Botany, 
But not the use of the Tulsi plant. 
[Telugu Poem] 


What is the use of leading such a life? I Develop daya 
(compassion) in your hridaya (heart). Today, there is only 
fashion, but no compassion. What is the meaning of mankind? 
Man should have kindness. The one without kindness is not a 
man, but a demon. The proper study of mankind is man. There 
should be harmony in thought, word, and deed. Whatever 
originates from the heart should be expressed in words, and the 
words in turn should be put into action. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 319 


Once, a devotee prayed thus: “O Bhagavan, people send 
many applications to you expressing their desires. How do you 
find time to go through all this? When do You reply? We get a 
headache even if we read two letters. But You read so many 
letters and send so many replies, and yet, You remain happy 
and cheerful in spite of your busy schedule. This itself is a sign 
of Divinity.” 

I am doing all this not for My happiness, but for your hap- 
piness. Many people greet Me ‘Happy Birthday’. I am always 
happy. You do not need to greet Me thus. Give happiness to 
those who are not happy. 

Happiness cannot be experienced through spiritual prac- 
tices. It can be experienced only through Divine Love. You 
will never fail in your life if you have love for God. As the 
previous speaker said, there are people who have failed for 
lack of faith, but people with strong faith will never fail. Man 
is suffering because he lacks faith. 

In order to experience bliss, you need to develop love. 
Love is like a rose and lust is like a thorn. Cut the rose without 
touching the thorn and offer it to God. You should offer your- 
self to God. That is surrender. Love within you should be 
merged with the Divine Love. There lies the bliss. 


Think of God from early age 


In the Ramayana, Vali and Sugriva suffered because they 
lacked unity. In the same way Ravana, Kumbhakarna, and 
Vibhishana also suffered due to lack of unity. Though the Pan- 
davas had difference of opinion among them, they stood 
united. Therefore, their the name and fame have spread far and 
wide. With unity you can achieve anything. 

There are 95 crore people in India. If there is unity among 
them, this country can be transformed into a very heaven itself. 
But there is no unity, no purity. Only enmity exists. Heart is 
like a single chair, not a musical chair or double seated sofa. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 320 


So, let Love be seated in that chair, then bad qualities have no 
place in it. Modern devotion has become artificial. People say 
something and do quite the opposite. There is no harmony in 
their words and actions. This is not proper. It amounts to 
cheating themselves. 


You can have happiness only from difficulties 


Each one has to face their own destiny. So, you should be 
ready to face difficulties. There can be no pleasure without 
pain. Do not feel dejected on seeing a dark night. Think of the 
moonlight that can be seen on the following night. Without 
dark night, there cannot be full moon night. There is happiness 
in sorrow too. You cannot have happiness out of happiness. 
You can have happiness only from difficulties. 

Though you are the embodiment of love, you have to do 
sadhana (spiritual practices) and seva (selfless service) neces- 
sarily till you realise your true identity. Some people say, 
“Swami, why do we need to be devoted at a young age? We 
can as well think of God after retirement.” When the messen- 
gers of death come to seize your life, when your relatives make 
arrangements to keep your body outside, and when your wife 
and children cry bitterly, is it possible to remember God at that 
moment? So, right from an early age, you should think of God. 
That is why I say, “Start early, drive slowly and reach safely.” 

Embodiments of Love! Fight against bad thoughts and bad 
deeds. Run away from bad company and join good company. 
Develop good thoughts, good feelings, undertake good actions 
and attain Divinity. 


28 September 1998 
Sai Kulwant Hall, Prashanthi Nilayam 


34 


Bhagavan’s assurance to devotees 


Punar Vittam Punar Mithram 
Punar Bhaarya Punar Yashaha, 
Yavath Sarvam Punar Labhyam 
Na Sareeram Punah Punah. 


If man loses money, he can get it back; 
If his friend leaves him, he can get another; 
If he loses his wife, even then he can remarry 
and have another wife; 
If he loses his share of land, he can procure another. 
He can regain all these things, 
But he cannot get back the body once it is lost. 


Embodiments of Divine Love! Therefore, we should con- 
sider that for all spiritual pursuits and for all types of endeav- 
ours in life, the body is the main instrument. Of all the living 
beings in this world, human life is the rarest, noblest, and most 
sacred. It is a great fortune to have this vesture of human body. 
However, in this human body there is mind, which is mysteri- 
ous. Everyone is aware of the presence of the mind in the hu- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 o22 


man body. But no one knows the vagaries of the mind. Though 
it does not have feet to move, it can travel faster than air and 
light. It has no death, has no fixed life span, and always re- 
mains youthful. You may be born again and again, but the 
same mind follows. Once you understand the nature of the 
mind, you will be able to understand your true Self. 

The whole world is a mansion, and the entire humanity is 
one family. There is no multiplicity. We live under the same 
sky, tread the same earth, breathe the same air, and drink the 
same water. So, it is foolishness to develop diversity in this 
underlying principle of unity. 


Whatever work you do, do it with sacred feeling 


What is the sadhana (spiritual practice) to be undertaken? 
You should purify your body, mind, and speech. How to purify 
the body? It is not enough if it is cleaned with soap and water, 
which amounts to only external cleanliness. It has to be 
cleaned with good thoughts, good words, good deeds, which is 
very essential on the inward path. Whatever work you do, do it 
with sacred feelings. Divert the body from all unsacred activi- 
ties, and use it only for good purposes. 

In what way can you purify the mind? You can purify the 
mind through sense control. Use the ten senses for sacred pur- 
poses. 


See no evil, see what is good. 
Hear no evil, hear what is good. 
Talk no evil, talk what is good. 
Think no evil, think what is good. 
Do no evil, do what is good. 

This is the way to God. 


In order to purify the senses, you should make use of them 
in a sacred way. Purity of the senses is purity of the mind. The 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 325 


mind is the master of the senses. If the mind is to be pure, the 
senses have also to be pure. 

How can you purify your speech? You can purify your 
speech by speaking truth, following dharma and cultivating 
love and peace. 


Atma, aham, mind, and speech belong to the same family 


The moment the human body is born, Aham (1) also fol- 
lows it. The Atma is the origin of Aham; so, Aham is the son of 
the Atma. From Aham the mind is born; so, the mind is the 
grandson of the Atma. And from mind speech originates, so 
speech is the great-grandson of the Atma. In short, the Atma, 
Aham, mind, and speech belong to the same family. So, you 
should have the conviction that the “I” principle in you is the 
dear son of God, the mind is the grandson of and the speech is 
the great grandson. Once you understand that your Aham, 
mind, and speech belong to the divine family and act accord- 
ingly, your life will be sanctified. 

Man finds it very difficult to have control over the senses. 
Due to the effect of modern education and high intelligence, 
man has become a slave of his senses. Unable to control his 
mind, man is leading a life of fear and delusion. From where 
does this fear arise? Where there is mistake, there is fear. 

What is the mistake made by man? He has forgotten that 
the 'l' principle in him is the son of God. He has forgotten that 
his mind is the grandson of God. And he has forgotten that his 
speech is the great-grandson of God. Since he has forgotten his 
relationship with God, man is fear-stricken and gripped in 
anxiety. 

Due to the advancement in the field of science and tech- 
nology, human values are lost and the mind has become pol- 
luted. On the one hand, science has progressed, but on the 
other hand, the sanctity of the senses has regressed. Man is 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 324 


happy seeing advancement in science and technology but has 
not realised how far he has moved away from Divinity. 


‘You should understand My ideal” 


Man’s life has become highly artificial. There is no trace of 
love in his thoughts and in his relationship with others. Even 
the relationship between mother and son has become artificial. 
Nowadays, when one finds a son talking to his mother, one 
finds only artificial exchange of words, but not true love. 

Students are leading an artificial life, without sense control. 
Even animals have sense control to some extent, but not the 
modern students. This is due to the progress in modern educa- 
tion. I do not say that education should not make progress. I 
Myself have established a University. I say only that along 
with education, students should imbibe human values and de- 
velop good character. 

Can you call mere bookish knowledge education? Can you 
call all those who can read and write educated? Can you call 
all those who have degrees to their names educated? If educa- 
tion were to be only for a living, do you not find birds and 
beasts living? 

Education is for life and not for earning a living. The ob- 
jective of human life can be realised when you try to know the 
purpose of life. You should not be content with bookish 
knowledge and superficial knowledge; you should have practi- 
cal knowledge. To have practical knowledge, enquire within. 

You should understand My ideal. Once I say that you are 
Mine, I will never forsake you. You may forget Me, but I will 
never forget you. You may develop hatred toward Me, but I do 
not have any hatred toward you. In this world, I have no ene- 
mies, and I have no dislike toward anybody. I always uphold 
My promise. I always go forward to protect; never do I retract. 

But, some may question that even after Swami accepts 
them as His, why do they have problems? Why should they 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 325 


suffer? This is not My mistake. I always keep My promise. 
They suffer because they forget their promise and lose their 
sacredness. I never go back on My word. I never make anyone 
suffer. Till the last moment, I will be with you, in you, below 
you, above you, and around you. 

Many are not making an effort to understand this truth. 
They do not enquire into the reason for their suffering. Their 
wavering mind and their ingratitude are responsible for this. 

The previous speaker, Ravi, said, God is nearer to you than 
your mother. Though I shower much more love than their own 
mothers, some people do not show their gratitude. I do not 
look forward to your gratitude. But, when I do My duty, you 
also have to discharge your duty at your level. 


God will never make anyone suffer 


Some people blame God for their suffering, ignoring their 
own defects. They argue that God does not keep His word. But 
God will never go back on His promise. Man does not under- 
stand this truth. Being fully immersed in physical and worldly 
feelings, he blames God for his suffering. God will never make 
anyone suffer at any point of time. But each has to face the 
consequences of their own actions. 

Every action has a reaction. It may take place immediately 
or in a few hours or in a few days or in a few months or in a 
few years or in a few births. For example, when your finger is 
cut with a blade, it starts bleeding immediately. If you fall 
from a staircase, you may suffer a fracture immediately. In 
both the cases, the reactions are instant. The food that you eat 
takes a minimum of two hours to get digested. For a seed to 
grow into a tree and yield fruit, it may take a few years. 

Good or bad, you cannot escape the consequences of your 
actions. Then you may question, why should one pray to God? 
One should pray to God not for the alleviation of suffering, but 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 326 


for peace of mind. Once you have peace of mind, all your 
problems will vanish. 

You can even escape the consequences of your actions if 
you have God's grace. After the expiration date, the medicine 
loses its potency; similarly, once you acquire God’s grace, the 
consequences of your actions will have no effect on you. In 
order to make the consequences of your actions ‘expire,’ 
prayer is essential. You have to pray wholeheartedly. 

Your heart is the seat of God. So, think of God, who is in- 
stalled in your heart. You cannot expect happiness in the out- 
side world. Bliss is not in the material world; it is within you. 
So, when you search within, you will find bliss. 


Take God into you and drive out ego 


Embodiments of Love! 

Never blame God for your difficulties. Come what may, 
pray to Him. That is your duty. As long as you have the feeling 
that you are separate from God, you have to pray. Once you 
realise that you are one with Him, you need not pray. 

Your breathing process teaches you a lesson. When you in- 
hale you make the sound So, and when you exhale you make 
the sound Ham. This process goes on 21,600 times a day. So 
refers to Divinity and Ham to ego, which means you have to 
take God in and drive ego out. This is an important principle of 
life. 

We have to understand what we should receive and what 
we should reject. We breathe in oxygen and breathe out carbon 
dioxide. Divinity is like oxygen, which supports our life, and 
ego is like carbon dioxide, which is a very bad quality. It has to 
be driven out.. 

In your daily life, knowingly or unknowingly, you commit 
some mistakes. You are only keeping the physical body clean, 
but you are not making any effort to know how to purify your 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 o27 


mind and speech. You are treating bad as good and good as 
bad. We should make efforts to know what is good and what is 
bad. 

All service rendered to others for the welfare of society is 
good. You are a member of society. So, your welfare depends 
on the welfare of society. The country will prosper if society is 
good. Individual prayer, family prayer, and community prayer 
—all the three are very essential. 


Your love should be as big as an ocean 


The Vedas have declared, “Loka samastha sukhino bha- 
vantu (May the whole world be happy)!” Since ancient times, 
Bharat has propagated spiritual discipline to other countries, 
ensuring peace and security for the entire humanity. You 
should have such broad feelings. Your love should be as vast 
as an ocean. 

When Jesus was being crucified, people around were 
weeping. At that moment, an ethereal voice declared, “All are 
one, My dear son! Be alike to everyone.” The same thing is 
taught by the culture of Bharat wishing the welfare of entire 
humanity. Unfortunately, with the passage of time, selfishness 
and self-interest have become rampant. 

According to Bharatiya (Indian) culture, Uttarayana is 
considered to be very sacred. The great warrior Bhishma, lying 
on a bed of arrows, waited for 56 days for the advent of Utta- 
rayana to give up his mortal coil. During Uttarayana, the sun 
travels toward the north. What does this signify? In the north, 
we have Himachala (Himalaya mountains), which are said to 
be the dwelling place of Eswara. When Eswara is 
all-pervasive, how can we limit him to Himachala? What is the 
significance of this statement? 

The word Himachala is made up of two words: Hima 
+Achala. Hima means snow, which is white and pure. Achala 
is that which is firm and unshakeable. What is the place to 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 328 


which this description applies? It is the pure heart, where Es- 
wara is installed. 

It is said, “Eswara sarva bhoothanam (Eswara is the in- 
dweller of all beings).” So, in order to see God, you do not 
need to go anywhere; just turn your vision inward. We cannot 
call an unsteady and impure heart as Himachala. Only the 
heart that is pure, peaceful, sacred, unpolluted, and unwavering 
can be called Himachala. So, when you turn inward, you are in 
Himachala. 


Parents must teach their wards to pray to God every day 


There is no trace of spiritual thinking among modern stu- 
dents. When the parents and teachers themselves have not re- 
alised the importance of spirituality, how can we blame the 
students? First the parents must teach their wards to pray to 
God everyday. But modern parents themselves do not pray to 
God. As soon as they return from the office, they go to the club 
and spend their time in drinking and playing cards. Naturally, 
children follow in their footsteps. 

In some houses, parents quarrel in front of their children, 
which is an unhealthy practice. If there is any difference of 
opinion between parents, they should resolve it in the absence 
of their children. Children cannot concentrate on their studies 
if they are disturbed by family problems. So, parents should 
never discuss them in front of their children. They should in- 
stead teach them all good things and show them good ways of 
life. There are a few parents who set a bad example to their 
children by speaking untruth. For example, if some unwanted 
person makes a phone call, they instruct their children to tell 
him that they are not available. Thus, they teach their children 
how to tell lies. 

Some children are like pure gold as long as they are here. 
But, when they go home for vacation, their minds get polluted. 
But some students remain the same. Some return much before 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 329 


their vacation ends in order to spend time with Swami. Their 
innate tendencies acquired as a result of deeds done in past 
lives shape their behaviour. 


Only God is permanent 


Students! Embodiments of Love! You should try to know 
what Divinity is. In this age of science, some say that there is 
no God. But there is God in all periods of time. There is no 
other matter. “Yath drishyam tannashyam (Whatever is seen is 
bound to perish.)” Only God is permanent. 

Time is most precious in human life. Misuse of time is evil. 
Time is God, so don’t waste time. I feel very sad when I find 
you wasting time. I always say, “My life is My message.” I 
never waste even a moment. You think that after supper 
Swami goes and sleeps. But, actually I do not know what sleep 
is. [never sleep. As you know, I collect letters from you. I see 
some of them immediately. I spend time in a most sacred way. 

But I do not require anything. I do not need anything in all 
the three worlds. I do not need anything for Myself. Still, I am 
engaged in activity from dawn to dusk in order to set an ideal. 
From top to toe, there is no trace of selfishness in Me. Believe 
it or not, I always give but never receive. I ask for only one 
thing, and that is pure love. I am ready to give My life for 
those who offer their pure love. 

You cannot understand My work. Only men of sacrifice 
can understand this. I am always engaged in activity. I do 
something or the other. Even while resting I am working. I 
have to take rest for others’ sake. Otherwise, they too would 
not take rest. To give them rest, I take rest. What is My rest? 
Doing devotees’ work is My rest. 

The previous speaker, Narasimhamurthy, spoke about this 
incident. On day, all of a sudden, I left this body. Gangadhar 
Shetty and Narasimhamurthy were surprised at this. Only these 
two were there inside since it was not possible for others to 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 330 


come in. I told them that there was a widow who always 
thought of Swami. She had two children. After the death of her 
husband, she took up a small job to maintain her family. The 
loss of her husband and her inability to run the family made 
her depressed. Since the money was not sufficient, she took a 
part-time job. But every moment she used to chant Sairam, 
Sairam, Sairam ... wholeheartedly. In such a situation, she suf- 
fered a heart attack. In fact, she was to die. 

So, I took the heart attack on Myself. For seven days, I did 
not come down. I took upon Myself all her suffering and pain 
and made her healthy. After three days, she sent a telegram, 
“Swami, You came and protected me and my children.” She 
did not know that I had taken her disease on Myself. After a 
week, she came here with her children. 


Do not limit spirituality to Bharat 


I am ready to do anything for the sake of those who have 
total faith and pure love. But it is very difficult to find such 
devotees. However, there are a few of them. If there are no no- 
ble people, how is that you find goodness in this world? There 
are many sacred people in this country as well as in this world. 

Do not limit spirituality to Bharat; it is present all over the 
world. Truly speaking, it is more in foreign countries than in 
Bharat. Indians do not know much about the Brahma Sutras, 
the Upanishads, and the Bhagavad Gita. But, many foreigners 
have learnt the Bhagavad Gita by heart. 

In Italy, there is a devotee who has learnt the Brahma Su- 
tras by heart. She can chant Rudram. In Italy, she constructed a 
building named ‘Mother Sai,’ spread over 25 acres of land. 
Having full faith that one day Swami would certainly visit that 
place, she also built a spacious hall like the Poornachandra 
Auditorium, so that public meetings could be held there. She 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 331 


has also constructed some rooms to accommodate the students 
that follow Swami. 

Do you know how clearly and with perfect accent our pri- 
mary school children from foreign countries chant the Vedas? 
This is the result of being in good company. If the company is 
good, the children’s future will also be good. Tell me your 
company, I shall tell you what you are. As your company, so 
you become. So, wherever you go, join good company. 

Let your heart and mind be purified. Speak always the truth 
in a palatable and acceptable way. This is the spiritual path 
thaat you have to adopt. People may wonder why one should 
do meditation and bhajans. They are all good actions meant to 
spend the time in a sacred way, but God is not interested in 
them. 

What should you do to make God happy? You should in- 
volve your body in good deeds, fill the mind with good 
thoughts, and speak sweetly and softly. Only these actions 
please God. Bharatiyas (Indians) refer to this as “Trikara- 
nashuddhi (purity of thought, word, and deeds).” With sacred 
feelings, students should undertake sacred actions and lead an 
ideal life. This is what I teach the students in particular. 


Fill your hearts with Divinity 


The students who study here should transform thousands of 
students outside. It is not enough if you merely preach; first, 
practice what you preach. Only then will your study in this In- 
stitute find fulfillment. 

We do not receive even a naya paisa from you. Education 
is offered free. How can you express your gratitude to this In- 
stitute? Share with others all that you have learnt here. This is 
true gratitude. Do your jobs, and take care of your parents. Fill 
your hearts with Divinity. 

When there is pure water in the tank, you get the same 
water out of the taps. Your heart is like a tank. All the senses 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 332 


are like taps. So, fill your heart with love and experience love. 
I expect and bless the students to take to this path of love and 
to lead an ideal life. Thus, I bring My discourse to a close. 


29 September 1998 
Sai Kulwant Hall, Prasanthi Nilayam 


No water will come in the tap if the pipe is not 
connected with the regular supply system. Have 
you connected your act of service with the reser- 
voir of love in your heart? Are you doing it with 
good consciousness, or is it merely a superficial 
ceremonial routine act for pride and publicity? 
Diagnose and rectify. No worship can succeed 
unless the heart is pure and the senses are mas- 
tered. 

—Baba 


35 


Power of divine love 


Nirguno nishkriyo nithya nirvikalpo niranjana 
Nirvikaro nirakaro sarva mukthaihi labhyaha 


[Sanskrit verse] 
Attributeless, unattached to actions, eternal, be- 
yond all thoughts, ever pure, unsullied and form- 
less (Brahman) is accessible to all liberated souls. 


There is one principle that is attributeless, formless, eter- 
nal, and beyond thought, word, and deed. That is the principle 
of Love. The Upanishads call this Love the Atma. How can 
man understand this Love, which is attributeless and formless? 
This Love is not an intellectual exercise; nor is it a psycho- 
logical phenomenon, or a reflection in the dreaming state. It is 
the life principle of all living creatures. Noble souls propagated 
this principle of Love in various ways. Many elders, young- 
sters, scholars lecture on this principle of Love and sing its 
glory. But, no poetry, no composition, no language can de- 
scribe Love. “Yatho vacho nivarthanthe aprapya manasa saha 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 334 


(It cannot be described by speech and It is beyond the reach of 
the mind).” So, it is beyond human comprehension and narra- 
tion. Love has no form; it can be seen only in practice. 


All are sparks of the Divine 


If one were to ask what the form of Love is, it can be said 
Love is God. Who is God? Where is God? What is His form? 
How to search Him? This has been the continuous enquiry 
since ancient times. But, none can describe Divinity. The Ve- 
das said: “Vedahametham Purusham Mahantham Adityavar- 
nam Thamasa Parasthath (Divinity shines with the brilliance 
of a thousand suns and is beyond the darkness of ignorance).” 
Divinity is beyond human understanding and expression. 

How can one recognise Divinity, which is the embodiment 
of Love? In this world, love assumes various forms as ex- 
pressed by mother, father, brother, wife, friends, and relations. 
In this worldly love, you find selfishness and self-interest. But 
Divine Love is absolutely selfless. 

Just as God loves all, you should also make efforts to love 
all, because in the Bhagavad Gita, the Lord says, “Mamai- 
vamso Jeevaloke Jeevabhutha Sanathana (the eternal Atma in 
all beings is a part of My Being).” So, as He loves you, you 
should also love all and make all happy. But, today, one does 
not find such love between human beings. 

Divine Love does not expect anything in return. In order to 
cultivate such divine Love, man should have the faith that he is 
the spark of the Divine and He should understand that the same 
God is present in all. Once he understands and develops faith 
in this truth, he can love everybody. Today, one does not find 
such love; it means only that man has no faith in the statement 
of God that “all are sparks of the Divine.” 

Just as a Mariner’s compass always points toward the 
north, likewise under all circumstances Love is directed toward 
God. Time, space, and individuals do not affect Love. Love is 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 355 


the true sign of Divinity. Understanding Love amounts to un- 
derstanding Divinity. 

None can decide the form of God. 

When you enter a cinema theatre, you find a white screen. 
Merely watching the screen does not satisfy you. Once the 
show commences, you find different scenes projected on the 
screen. Without the screen, can you see the picture? No. But, 
when the picture is projected, though the screen exists, it is not 
seen; it merges itself with the picture. The screen exists all the 
time—before, during, and after the show. 

The Vedas declare: “Anther bahischa Thath sarva vyapya 
Narayana sthithahs (That all-pervasive God is present within 
and without).” As the screen is to the picture, so is the Atma to 
the creation. The screen of Atma present within and around all 
beings and is the primordial basis for the entire creation. 
Therefore, it is said, “Sarvam Vishnumayam Jagat (Divinity 
pervades everywhere).” Divinity is present in the “picture”, 
around the “picture”. 


The Atma has no definite name and form 


So, who can know the form of such a Divinity? On the 
screen of Love, you find the picture of the universe. This Love 
is present in the name of Atma in all beings. What form can 
you attribute to the Love present in you? It is not possible. 
How can a person who does not understand his true nature un- 
derstand God? So, first and foremost, one should make efforts 
to understand one’s own Self. 

The Atma has no definite name and form. “Ek Prabhu Ke 
Anek Nam (the one Lord has many names).” The Atma is the 
fundamental principle, which is pure, immutable, and unsul- 
lied. It forms the basis of the entire universe. Without the basis 
of the Atma, the universe cannot exist. The Vedas declare: 
“Pashyannapi na pashyathi moodho (He is a fool who sees yet 
does not recognise the truth).” The same principle of Atma is 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 336 


reflected in all beings. God is the basis of the entire universe. It 
appears rather strange when we enquire where God is. God is 
in the forest and also in the mansion. He is present in your 
heart and also in your speech. He is present everywhere. So, 
never make an attempt to investigate Divinity. Instead have 
faith in God, follow Him, worship Him, and experience bliss. 


Atma is the reality 


In order to experience Divinity, understand this example. 
The very nature of mother is love. Mother has a form, but love 
has no form. Mother herself is the form of love. 

Due to the presence of the Atmic Principle, you are able to 
see its reflection in the form of the world. The whole world is 
nothing but reflection, reaction, and resound. The Atma is the 
only reality. But man has forgotten the reality and is seeing 
only the reflection. You cannot have reaction without action; 
you cannot have resound without sound. 

Though the Sound is everywhere, you are not able to see it. 
Though the Reality is everywhere, you are not able to see it. 
How will you be able to see it? With unflinching faith and 
selfless love, think of God continuously. God will certainly 
manifest before you. 

Today, man chants the name of God and desires to see 
Him. But since he lacks steady faith, he is not able to experi- 
ence Divinity. Man has become blind having lost the two eyes 
of faith. Faith is most important. 

Self-confidence is the foundation on which one can build 
the walls of self-satisfaction. On the walls of self-satisfaction, 
one can lay the roof of self-sacrifice. Under the roof of 
self-sacrifice, one can lead a life of self-realisation. You cannot 
have walls without foundation and roof without walls. So, 
self-confidence, the foundation, is very important. 

Today, man pretends to have love, but he does not know 
what it is. Our Vice Chancellor described Swami's love as that 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 337 


of a thousand mothers. But how can one who cannot under- 
stand the love of one mother understand the love of a thousand 
mothers? So, first and foremost try to understand and experi- 
ence the love of your physical mother. This is the significance 
of Mother worship in Navaratri. 


Cultural principle of the Heart is one and the same 


The culture of the heart is the main standard of life. What 
is this culture? It is the divine feeling that originates in the 
heart. All the materials and powers of the world are present in 
your heart. Men vary in name and form, but the cultural prin- 
ciple of the heart is one and the same. 

God resides in this divine heart. What is His form? The 
Vedas describe Him as formless, attributeless, ancient, and 
eternal. No one can attribute a name to God. Had anyone ex- 
isted before God, he would have named Him. But none existed 
before God. Creation itself did not exist. 

For crores of years, there existed only darkness. At that 
time, the sun and the moon did not exist and there was no liv- 
ing creature. Then it rained heavily for lakhs and lakhs of 
years, which led to the formation of oceans. From the oceans, 
rivers originated. Then there was light in the world with the 
creation of the sun and the moon. Human habitation came into 
existence only after this entire process, which took many 
crores of years. Then how do you expect man to understand 
Divinity? 

First and foremost, man has to kill the tamasic (slothful) 
quality in him. Though water has no colour, it appears red 
when poured into a red bottle. Similarly, the Atmic Principle, 
which is pure and unsullied, appears ‘red’ in a person with ra- 
jasic (passionate) quality, ‘dark’ in a person with tamasic 
quality and ‘bright’ in the heart of a person with satwic (pure, 
serene) quality. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 338 


In the Bhagavad Gita, Krishna said He created four varnas 
—Chaturvarnamaya Srusti. But people make the mistake of 
equating them with these four castes: Brahmin, kshatriya (war- 
rior), vaisya (businessman), and sudra (labourer). Here varna 
refers to the colour and not the caste. The Russians are red- 
complexioned, the British are white-complexioned, the Japa- 
nese are yellow-complexioned and the Africans are dark- 
complexioned. The remaining colours are only combinations 
of these four colours. 


In His creation, God has given humans a special place 


Students chant a prayer and offer food to God before they 
partake of it. How do they pray? 


Brahmarpanam Brahmahavir 
Brahmagnou Brahmanahutham 
Brahmaivathena Ganthavyam 
Brahmakarma Samadhina 


They think they are offering the food to Brahman. But, 
where is Brahman? He is within. He gives immediate response: 


Aham Vaishvanarobhoothwa 
Praninam Dehamasrithaha 
Pranapana Samayukthah 
Pachamyannam Chathurvidham 


What does this mean? It means that Brahman, who is pre- 
sent in the form of vaishvanara (digestive fire) in you, digests 
the food that you eat. Who is responsible for your blood circu- 
lation? Who makes your heart beat for 24 hours a day? It is all 
God’s creation. None can understand this. In His creation, God 
has given human beings a special place. He has endowed them 
with buddhi (intellect). The Vedas call it Prajnanam (constant 
integrated awareness) and declare “Prajnana Brahma (Brah- 
man is Constant Integrated Awareness).” 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 339 


Buddhi is greater than medha shakti 


Once, King Vikramaditya convened a meeting of scholars. 
He asked them which was greater, buddhi (intellect) or medha 
shakti (intelligence)? The scholars came to a conclusion that 
buddhi was greater than medha shakti. They said medha shakti 
was only worldly intelligence, which was temporary; whereas 
buddhi consisted of five aspects: sraddha, sathyam, rutham, 
yogam, and mahatatwam. All the worldly achievements are 
based on medha shakti, but not on buddhi. Buddhi is transcen- 
dental and beyond all senses. It relates to nivritti (inward path), 
whereas medha shakti relates to pravritti (outward path). 

The principle of Love is the most important of all. Love is 
Atma, Love is Wisdom, Love is Truth, Love is Righteousness, 
Love is Peace, and Love is Nonviolence. Where there is Love, 
untruth and violence and restlessness find no place. 

Human heart is a single chair, not a double-seated sofa or a 
musical chair. So, once you fill your heart with Love, wicked 
feelings have no place in it. Everything is contained in Love. 
Love is the life principle. 

But man has forgotten this principle of Love and is ruining 
his life in worldly love. The love between the mother and child 
is vatsalya (affection); the love between wife and husband is 
moha (attachment). It is only the divine Love that is true love 
in the strict sense of the term. Love applies to God only, none 
else. 

Prachethasa (Valmiki) composed the Ramayana consisting 
of hundred crore slokas (verses). Devatas (gods), rakshasas 
(demons) and manavas (human beings) came to know that 
whoever read the Ramayana and followed it would be liber- 
ated. Immediately they approached Brahma and requested him 
for a share of the Ramayana. 

Brahma divided the Ramayana into three parts consisting 
of 33,33,33,333 slokas each and distributed among them. One 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 340 


sloka remained consisting of 32 letters. Brahma divided these 
letters into three parts consisting of ten letters each and distrib- 
uted to them. Ultimately, two letters remained. These are the 
two letters of the holy names of God: Rama, Krishna, Hari, 
Shiva, Sai, and Baba, which were given equally to them. For 
all thes enames, the primordial principle Love. 


Human society is bound by action 


Only through Love can world peace be achieved and non- 
violence can be practiced. Buddha said that nonviolence is the 
supreme dharma. He did penance for six years. He approached 
elders and listened to their teachings, but he could not get any 
benefit out of them. Ultimately, he enquired within and found 
out the Truth. He said samyak drishti (right vision) led to sam- 
yak bhavam (right feelings), which in turn led to samyak vak 
(right speech). Right speech led to samyak karma (right ac- 
tion). 

Spiritual sadhana does not mean doing meditation or japa. 
Undertaking sacred actions is true sadhana. Krishna has said, 
“Karmanyevadikarasthe maphaleshu kadachana (You have 
got right to action but not to the fruits).” Human society is 
bound by action. So, undertake good actions. 

Today, man does not make any effort to know why the 
body is gifted. The body is gifted not just for “loading” and 
“unloading”. Food is required to keep the body fit to undertake 
sacred actions. As the food, so is the head. As the head, so is 
God. So, partake of sacred food, undertake sacred actions, and 
join good company. To the extent possible, render service to 
society. 

Have good feelings in your heart, speak good words, and 
do good actions. This is called trikaranasuddhi (unity of 
thought, word, and deed). Understand that this is the purpose 
of human life. Sarvakarma Bhagavath Preeyartham (Whatever 
actions you undertake, do them to please God). 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 341 


Divinity pervades everything, right from an ant to Brah- 
man, but man does not realise this and misuses his body. Body 
is the gift of God. To misuse it is a great sin. Sin and merit are 
not present in a foreign land; they are attached to your actions. 
Good actions yield good results and bad actions yield bad re- 
sults. Therefore, make proper use of the body, mind, and in- 
tellect, which are gifts of God. 


If you have devotion, God Himself will confer bliss 


What is sadhana (spiritual exercise)? Service is true sad- 
hana. Serve society. Treat everyone as your brother and sister. 
Only through selfless service will your life be redeemed. Con- 
sider service unto others as service to God. Unfortunately, to- 
day man takes to service expecting something in return. He has 
become money-minded. 

Excessive wealth makes one egotistic. Ego leads to bad 
qualities. Excessive desires make one suffer. As the desires 
increase, misery also increases. “Asamtruptho dwijo nashtaha 
(a discontented man suffers both ways).” He is not happy with 
what he has and feels unhappy over what he has not got. Be 
content with what you have. Experience bliss and share it with 
others. If you have devotion, God Himself will confer bliss. 

As our Vice Chancellor said, when Hanuman was to go to 
Lanka in search of Sita, Sugriva, Jambavantha and others 
doubted that he could cross the ocean. 

Hanuman smilingly replied that because Rama Himself had 
commanded him to cross the ocean, He would also grant him 
the strength to do so. He leaped across the ocean chanting the 
name of Rama and reached Lanka. 

Having been commanded by Rama, he never doubted 
whether he would accomplish the task. Once God commands 
you to do something, He will certainly grant the necessary skill 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 342 


and strength. So, act according to the command of God; with- 
out a trace of doubt, you will certainly be successful. 


Happiness lies in union with God 


Today, since science is progressing, doubts are also in- 
creasing in the human mind. The more intelligent you are, the 
more doubts you have. So, do not aspire for more intelligence 
(medha shakti). Make proper use of the intellect God has given 
you. Then you will be happy in life. 

Happiness lies in union with God. God is the embodiment 
of bliss, which is eternal, unsullied, pure and non-dual. It is 
most unfortunate for you to forget God. Never give up Sai. 
Make the best use of the chance given. Once you lose the op- 
portunity to serve the Lotus Feet of Paratheesha, you will not 
get it back. Sai grants you devotion, strength, and liberation. 

Do not ruin yourself by listening to others. Do not believe 
anybody; believe your conscience and follow it. Once you 
follow your conscience, you will attain consciousness, the 
Atma. Develop self-confidence, worship God, attain Divinity, 
and be an ideal to the rest of the world. That is the essence of 
education. 

The man who studies and studies without discrimination 
fails to understand himself. A mean-minded man can never 
give up his meanness in spite of his vast learning. Why should 
one waste one’s life in the pursuit of useless learning? Better is 
to acquire such wisdom that confers immortality. 

Worldly education leads to argumentation, but not to total 
knowledge. It is all a waste of time. It is a sign of ignorance. 
So, never argue with anybody. “Vade, vade varjathe vairam 
(arguments will lead only to enmity).” Today, what we need is 
unity, purity, and divinity. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 343 


The name of God should spread everywhere 


Embodiments of Love! For the last seven days, you are a 
witness to this holy yajna. Why is it conducted? It is for the 
welfare of the world. The name of God should spread every- 
where. For example, Delhi is far away from here, but when 
you tune your radio to a particular wavelength, you can hear 
the songs that are being broadcast in the Delhi station. This is 
possible because of the presence of electric waves in the at- 
mosphere. 

All over the world there are electric waves and magnetic 
waves. So, the effect of mantras chanted during the yajna will 
spread all over the world and purify the atmosphere. Once the 
mantras enter the air that you breathe in, you will develop sa- 
cred feelings, because there is also a mantra in you. 

The body is yantra, hridaya is , and the breath is mantra 
(Soham). Soham means, “I am God.” There is no greater man- 
tra than this. Therefore, chant this sacred mantra, lead an ideal 
life, and make the world an abode of peace. 

In this train of society, youth are the long-journey passen- 
gers. Since the youth have a long way to go, they should work 
for world peace. Teach the principle of Divinity to others. In- 
stil Divine feelings even in hardhearted people. Sow the seed 
of the holy name of God in every heart. Then the world will 
become verily the heaven. 

Your happiness is heaven; your grief is hell. So, be happy 
and serve everybody. Do not have the narrow feeling that only 
Bharat (India) should be prosperous; pray for the prosperity of 
the entire world because all are your brothers and sisters. Have 
such broad feelings and sacred thoughts. Only then will the 
dictum Lokas samastha sukhino bhavanthu be realised and will 
everyone be happy. Share this immortal principle with every- 
body. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 344 


The Upanishads address you as the sons of immortality — 
Srunvanthu viswe amruthasya putraha (listen O children of 
immortality). You should lead your life befitting your name, 
like saint Thyagaraja. Thyagaraja said, Nidhi chala sukhama, 
Easwar Sannidhi chala sukhama, nijamuga thelupumu manasa 
(O mind, tell me, is it money or proximity to the Divine that 
confers happiness?) He rejected the money sent by the king, 
saying Rama was his only wealth. Thyagaraja means one with 
sacrifice. So, his action befitted his name. There is no heaven 
beyond sacrifice. 

Embodiments of Love! Do not have excessive desire for 
wealth. Lead a life of sacrifice. Lead a peaceful life. 


30 September 1998 
Sai Kulwant Hall, Prasanthi Nilayam 


36 


Develop steadfast faith in God 


Daivadeenam Jagathsarvam Sathyadheenamthu Daivatham 
Thath Sathyam Uttammadheenam Uttamo Paradevatha 


The whole world is governed by God, and God is governed 
by Truth; Truth is in the hands of noble souls, and the noble 
souls are verily divine. 


Embodiments of Love! Since ancient times our country of 
Bharat has been spreading the infinite spiritual knowledge to 
every country all over the world. Bharat believes that for the 
peace and security of the entire world, spirituality is most es- 
sential. Bharathiyas (Indians), with all the sincerity and devo- 
tion, have made efforts to establish stability and peace in the 
world. But, with the passage of time, due to the effect of Kali 
Age, people have lost faith in the Self and have reposed faith 
in this transient and ephemeral world. Today, man does not 
even have faith in the Self of birds and beasts. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 346 


When a small bird rests on a thin branch of a tree, the 
branch starts tossing up and down. But the bird is not fear- 
stricken because it depends on its wings, not on the branch on 
which it rests. Bird has total reliance on its wings, but not man 
in his Self; he suffers as a result. 

In spite of the fact that man goes through sacred texts and 
listens to discourses, he has not developed faith in the Self. He 
nods his head as he listens to the discourses with the feeling of 
having understood and benefited by them, but does not have 
the faith to put them into practice. 


Every man should develop faith in the Self 


There is no scope for any doubt in a man with Faith in the 
Self. He is unperturbed by the vicissitudes of life. Since an- 
cient times, the culture of Bharat has had Self-confidence as 
the basis. But with the commencement of the modern age, 
Self-confidence is on the decline. Every man should develop 
faith in the Self . One can attain the blissful state only through 
Self-confidence. 

Today is Vijaya Dasami. This is the samapthi (conclusion) 
of the sacred Navaratri festival. Samapthi is that which confers 
prapthi (deservedness) in every possible way. This also hap- 
pens to be the day on which Shirdi Baba left his mortal coil. 
Having left His mortal coil on this day, Shirdi Baba reincar- 
nated here after 8 years. This is an ample testimony to the ex- 
istence of Divinity in humanity. 

If man does not know his own Self, what is the use of 
knowing the rest? He reads the newspaper everyday in order to 
be aware of the happenings around the world. He makes efforts 
to know what is happening in every country, but he does not 
put in any effort to know his own Self. He keeps questioning 
whoever he comes across, “Who are you? Where do you come 
from?” but he does not put these questions to himself. There is 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 347 


no point in undertaking any spiritual practice without Self- 
enquiry. 


Food habits: main cause for lack of purity of heart 


Food and habits play a vital role in fostering human values. 
As the food, so is the head. As the head, so is God. You should 
understand the connection between food, head, and God. To- 
day we find many unhealthy changes in the food and habits of 
man. This is the main cause for the lack of purity of Heart. 

After the Pandavas emerged victorious in the battle against 
Kauravas, Krishna took them to Bhishmacharya, who was ly- 
ing on a bed of arrows, for his counsel and blessings. Bhishma 
began expounding to them all aspects of dharma. This teaching 
of Bhishma is called Shanthi Parva in Mahabharatha. 

When all the Pandavas were listening to their grandsire 
with all sincerity and devotion, Draupadi suddenly burst into 
laughter. One should be aware of the fact that Draupadi was 
one of noble virtues and sense of discrimination. She was one 
who practiced the cultural values of Bharat. But all the Pan- 
dava brothers were very much upset by her unaccountable lev- 
ity and considered it an insult to the venerable Bhishma. 
Bhima and Arjuna became very furious, and Dharmaja bent his 
head in shame. 

But Bhishma knew the reason for Draupadi’s laughter. He 
called her close and said, “My dear child, the people of this 
world are like crows and will misinterpret your laughter in 
varied ways. Without trying to know the truth, they will mis- 
understand and misinterpret. So explain the reason for such a 
behavior and thereby remove the misapprehension of your 
husbands.” 

She replied, “Revered grandsire! You should have taught 
these lessons of dharma to the evil-minded Kauravas. But in- 
stead you are teaching now to my husbands, who are virtuous, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 348 


righteous, and selfless. This appeared to me both ironical and 
futile. Hence I could not refrain from laughing.” 

Bhishma said, “Draupadi, I can understand your feelings, 
but as I have been living in the company of Kauravas, my 
blood and mind have become polluted as a result of consuming 
food from such wicked persons. Knowing fully well that the 
Kauravas have been on the wrong side, I have not corrected 
them. But, as good luck would have it, Arjuna’s arrows have 
drained away all that impure blood from me in the last 56 days. 
As a result the good thoughts and good feelings that were lying 
buried deep in me are coming out.” 

It has been bad company that had affected Bhishma's mind. 
This fact is very well expressed by the statement, “Tell me 
your company, and I shall tell you what you are.” As the com- 
pany, so you think and so you become. 


Everyone must make an effort to dispel bad thoughts 


Every teaching has to be passed on, keeping in view of the 
time, space, and circumstances. Though Krishna and Arjuna 
moved together for 64 years before the Kurukshetra war, never 
did Krishna mention anything about Bhagavad Gita to Arjuna. 
It was only before the war that Krishna gave the teaching to 
Arjuna. For everything there is an appropriate time. 

You might have gone through many sacred texts and heard 
many sacred teachings. You may also have had the darshan of 
sacred people. What is the use? Due to the effect of unsacred 
food and bad company, all your good thoughts are subdued. 
Good thoughts can express themselves only when you get rid 
of bad thoughts. Everyone must make an effort to dispel bad 
thoughts. 

Consider this example, you have built a house with a main 
door and many windows for proper ventilation. Just because 
there is an entrance, you will not allow all the street dogs and 
pigs into your house. You open the door only for your family, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 349 


friends, and relatives. Likewise, the mind is the main door and 
senses are like windows to the body, which is the temple of 
God “Deho devalaya proktho jeevo Devah Sanathanaha (The 
body has been described as a temple and the indweller as the 
Eternal Divine).” You have to enquire as to who is to be per- 
mitted into this temple and who is not to be permitted. But to- 
day, no one makes this enquiry. As a result all types of wicked 
feelings and wicked thoughts are permitted to enter the mind. 


Have limited connections and contacts 


“Nasreyo niyamam vina (for everything, discipline is es- 
sential).” You should not develop friendship with everyone. 
You should enquire whether the person is good or not. How- 
ever, do not hate anybody (Adhveshta sarvabhoothanam). At 
the same time, do not cross your limits in your dealings with 
others. Have limited connections and contacts. 

What is the use of being born as a human being if you do 
not foster human values such as sathya, dharma, santhi, 
prema, and ahimsa? Vedas say “Sathyam vada; dharmam 
chara (Speak truth and follow righteousness.)” 

Peace is like a precious jewel to mankind. Saint Thyagaraja 
said, “Shanthamu leka soukhyamu ledu (Without peace, there 
is no happiness in this world).” For all the human values, Love 
is the basis. 

Today, human beings are human in form but not human in 
practice. In some places, one finds people exhibiting human 
values outwardly without practicing them whole-heartedly. 
Human values are not meant for pradarshana (exhibition) but 
are meant for nidarshana (example). Human values should be 
reflected in all your thoughts, words, and deeds. But today, 
there is only selfishness and self-interest in whatever man 
thinks, speaks, and does. Due to selfishness and self-interest, 
human values are totally lost. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 350 


A small example, here you find many bulbs glowing. It is 
not enough you have only bulbs, you also need to have wires 
and current. When the current flows through the wires and en- 
ters the bulbs, they start glowing. Likewise, in order to experi- 
ence the light of Love, the current of Truth has to pass through 
the wires of dharma and enter the bulb of Peace. 


Atma, Aham, mind, and speech 


As I have already told you, Atma is the origin of Aham, 
Aham is the origin of mind, and mind is the origin of speech. 
So, Aham is the son of Atma, mind is the grandson of Atma, 
and speech is the great grandson of Atma. 

First and foremost you should remember that Atma, Aham, 
mind, and speech belong to the same family. So, Aham, mind, 
and speech should be filled with the feelings of Atma. Only 
when there is a total unification of Aham, mind, and speech 
with Atma will you become a total human being. When Atma is 
the underlying principle in Aham, mind, and speech, then there 
is no scope for any mistake. But today there is no Atmic feeling 
in man’s thought, word, and deed. This is the cause of all suf- 
fering. 

You should develop the spirit of nationalism and practice 
ancient Bharat (Indian) culture. The culture of Bharat speaks of 
unity in diversity. 


Countries are many, but earth is one; 
Stars are many, but sky is one; 
Jewels are many, but gold is one; 
Cows are many, but milk is one. 


This is the spirit of unity that the culture of Bharat has 
propagated since ancient times. You should give up the 
worldly feelings and worldly thoughts and develop full faith in 
the principle of unity. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 351 


Partake only of sacred food 


Embodiments of Love! On this sacred day of Vijaya 
Dasami, take an oath to give up vices such as smoking, drink- 
ing, and partaking of non-vegetarian food. Many do not realise 
the evil effects of these bad habits. If a smoker blows air on a 
white handkerchief, he will find yellow spots on it. This is a 
sign of disease. Smoking leads to cancer. Drinking is a de- 
monic quality. It makes you intoxicated and makes you forget 
yourself. 

Consuming non-vegetarian food is also a bad quality. 
When human body itself is made of flesh, where is the need to 
consume the flesh of birds and animals? You should partake of 
only sacred food. Only then you will have sacred feelings. For 
sacred thoughts and sacred deeds, sacred food is essential. A 
noble soul like Bhishma himself suffered on account of unsa- 
cred food. As a consequence, he had to lie on a bed of arrows 
for 56 days. 

In order to have sacred feelings, apart from partaking of 
sacred food, you also need to have sacred vision. Do not cast 
bad looks on anybody. Do not speak ill of others. Do not hear 
anything that is bad. Do not entertain bad thoughts. Do not in- 
dulge in bad deeds. Do not hurt anybody. More than this, there 
is nothing else that one needs to do to improve one’s own Self. 

Human life is highly sacred. “Janthoonaam narajanma 
durlabham (human birth is the rarest of all).” But today, some 
people kill fellow human beings without compassion. That is a 
demonic quality, not a human quality. Having taken human 
birth, you should not become a demon. In your old age, when 
your vision is blurred, you cannot see properly; when your 
body becomes weak and decrepit, when everyone calls you old 
monkey, what is the use of repenting then? Undertake good 
actions from this moment. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 52 


Let everybody be happy. Do not harm anybody. Sage 
Vyasa conveyed the essence of 18 Puranas in two sentences. 


Ashtadasa Puraneshu Vyasasya Vachanadvayam 
Paropakara Punyaya Papaya Parapedanam 


which means “Help ever, Hurt never.” Do not hurt even an in- 
sect, because there is God in every creature. Based on this 
Saint Thyagaraja composed a song in which he says, “O Rama, 
you are present in an ant and in Brahma.” 


Do not blame God at times of difficulties 


Even such a great devotee like Thyagaraja began blaming 
Rama in times of difficulties. He said, “O Rama, don’t you 
have the power to protect me, or do I lack devotion? Each and 
every hair of my body is filled with your name. I am thinking 
only of you all the time. So, certainly there is devotion in me. 
But you don’t have the power.” 

Immediately he sat in meditation and enquired within. He 
realised his mistake. Then he composed a song in which he 
said, “O Rama, your power is so great and mighty, otherwise 
how could a monkey like Hanuman cross the ocean? Would 
Lakshmana, who is Adisesha himself, worship You? Would 
Lakshmi Devi, the Goddess of Wealth, Herself serve You? 
Would the most intelligent Bharatha obey your command? Out 
of my foolishness I started blaming You, forgetting Your Di- 
vinity. Please forgive me.” 

When Jesus was being crucified, he cried out to God, “O 
God, Why do You punish me like this?” 

Immediately he realized the Truth and said, “O God, let 
your Will prevail. It is You who has created me, sustained me, 
and protected me. I will not act against Your Will. It was a 
mistake on my part to blame you.” 

When he recognized his mistake, an ethereal voice said, 
“All are one my dear son, be alike to everyone.” Once you rec- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 353 


ognise your mistake, Divinity manifests. Man today does not 
recognise his mistakes; instead he looks for mistakes in others. 
Do not be bothered about others faults; search for your own 
faults and rectify them. Only then will your life be sanctified. 


Whatever you do, do it with Love 


Embodiments of Love! Most importantly, you should de- 
velop Love. It contains all the other human values, such as 
sathya, dharma, and shanthi (truth, right conduct, and peace). 
Whatever you do, do it with Love. Your Heart is like a big 
tank, and the senses are like taps. Fill the Heart with the water 
of Love. Only then you can experience Love through all the 
senses. 

Today, you talk of human value, but you do not seem to 
practice them. That makes Me very sad. You have been lis- 
tening to many of My teachings; can you not practice at least 
one? Instead of teaching others, teach yourself and put into 
practice. What is the use of reading Vedas and sacred texts 
without practicing them? Will you be cured of your disease by 
merely repeating the names of the medicines? Will merely re- 
peating the names of delicious items appease your hunger? 
Likewise, mere repetition of the name of the Lord is not 
enough. You should engage yourself in His work. 

When Vibhishana met Hanuman, he said, “O Hanuman, 
how lucky you are? In spite of you being a monkey by birth, 
Rama has kept you in His company, but I have not been 
blessed with such an opportunity, though I chant His name 
constantly.” 

Hanuman replied, “O Vibhishana, mere repetition of the 
Lord’s name is not enough; you should participate in His work. 
Only then can you be a recipient of His grace.” As soon as 
Vibhishana heard these words, he crossed the ocean and fell at 
Rama’s feet, seeking His refuge. In this respect we can say that 
Vibhishana is greater than Bhishma. Vibhishana tried to put his 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 354 


brothers on the right path but ultimately left them, since they 
did not pay heed to his good counsels; whereas, Bhishma did 
not even make an attempt to counsel the Kauravas and contin- 
ued to live with them, being fully aware of their evil designs. 

When Vibhishana sought Rama’s refuge, Sugriva, Jamba- 
vantha opposed, saying, “Swami, you should never believe 
these rakshasas (demons). There must be some ulterior motive 
behind this act of Vibhishana. So ask him to return to Lanka.” 

Rama replied, “Once someone says, ‘I am yours,’ whoever 
he may be, I will take care of him. So I will not reject Vibhis- 
hana.” This is a testimony to God’s Love. 

Once you say “I am yours,” live up to it with strong faith. 
Thereafter, God will take care of you at all places and under all 
circumstances. I expect and bless you so that you develop 
strong faith, give up vices, join good company, entertain sacred 
feelings, and attain Divinity. 


1 October 1998 
Sai Kulwant Hall, Prasanthi Nilayam 


37 


Offer yourself to God 


In order to deserve God’s grace, 
Your faith should grow. 

When you do not have faith, 
You cannot offer yourself. 


For human progress, mental strength and purity of heart are 
essential. It is only mental strength and purity of heart that 
make the human divine. Mind is the basis for the existence of 
mankind. Thoughts are responsible for the existence of mind. 
Human behavior, whether good or bad, is based on the 
thoughts. The human life is the result of thought process. 

When a small pebble is thrown into a lake, the ripples 
spread all over the lake. Likewise, the ‘ripples’ that arise in the 
lake of mind when a pebble of thought is thrown into it spread 
to all the senses. When the ‘ripple’ that arises out of good 
thought spreads to your mouth, you speak only good words. If 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 356 


it is a bad thought, you utter only bad words. Similarly, what- 
ever you see, hear, or do depends on the thoughts you enter- 
tain. So, the good or bad of a human being is based on 
thoughts. 


God is not pleased by contemplation alone 


Today, man aspires for God and contemplates on Him con- 
stantly, but mere aspiration and contemplation are not enough 
to experience God. God is not pleased by contemplation alone; 
one has to totally offer oneself to experience Him. Once you 
offer yourself completely to God, you and He become one. 

What are the spiritual pursuits to be followed to become 
one with God? When fire and coal are placed apart, they re- 
main as they are. Only when they are brought together and 
fanned can coal get transformed into fire. Likewise, go closer 
to God and love Him whole-heartedly. Such nearness and 
dearness to God will ultimately make you one with God. 

This is what Vedanta declared, “Brahmavid Brahmaiva 
Bhavathi (the knower of Brahman becomes Brahman).” The 
food eaten gets digested and its essence is supplied to all parts 
of the body. This means that the food partaken becomes one 
with the body. Similarly, you have to offer yourself completely 
to God. Only then can you become one with him. All your 
thoughts should become divine. 

Jiva is Nara and God is Narayana. Both should become 
one. Nara means Atmic principle. So, you are human only in 
form, but your nature is divine. It is only the Atma that moves 
about from top to toe. Whatever that is thought, said, or done is 
due only to the presence of Atma. That is why Krishna has 
said, “Mamaivamso Jivaloke Jivabhutha Sanathana (You are 
eternal sparks of Myself).” You are the reflection of God. 

The purpose of the spiritual pursuits lies in the unification 
of man and God. Mere worshipping of padukas, chanting the 
name of God, or contemplating on His form are not sufficient 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 O57, 


to bring about this unification. These correspond to the out- 
ward path (pravritti marga). You should take to the inward 
path (nivritti marga). Only then can you understand the princi- 
ple of unity. 


Significance of five faces of Gayathri 


This morning, Sastriji, while explaining the significance of 
Gayathri Mantra, described Gayathri as Pancha Mukhi (deity 
with five faces). What are the five faces? The first face is the 
primal sound Aum. Bhur Bhuvah Suvah is the second face. Tat 
Savitur Varenyam is the third face. Bhargo Devasya Dheemahi 
is the fourth face. Dhi Yo Yonah Prachodayat' is the fifth face. 

Who is Gayathri? “Gayathri Chandasam Matha (Gayathri 
is the mother of the Vedas).” Gayathri has three names: 
Gayathri, Savitri, and Saraswathi. “Gayantham Trayate Iti 
Gayathri (Gayathri redeems the chanter of the mantra).” 
Gayathri is the master of the senses. Savitri is the master of 
Prana (Life Force). Saraswathi is the presiding deity of speech 
(Vak Devata Swaroopini). You have to unify your senses, life 
principle, and your speech and offer yourself to God. 

You should also understand the meaning of Bhur Bhuvah 
Suvaha. You are under the impression that they refer to the 
three worlds —Bhuloka, Bhuvarloka, and Suvarloka. These 
three worlds are present in you and in every living creature. 
Bhur refers to the body, made up of five elements (materiali- 
sation). The same five elements constitute the entire world. 
Bhuvah refers to the prana sakthi (vibration), which makes the 
body move. However it is the presence of Prajnanam, i.e. su- 
vaha (radiation), that enables the prana sakthi to animate the 
body. 

It is on this account that the Vedas have declared “Pra- 
jnanam Brahma (Constant Integrated Awareness is Brah- 
man).” This Constant Integrated Awareness is present in man. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 358 


Man has also the five elements in him. The five elements 
constitute the world. What is the primordial basis for these 
elements? That is the primordial sound Omkara. On this basis, 
the gopikas (cowherd maids) prayed thus: “Kleem Krishnaya, 
Govindaya, Gopijanavallabhaya Swaha\” Kleem means the 
earth. Krishnaya means water. Govindaya means fire, Gopija- 
navallabhaya refers to air. Swaha refers to ether (akasa). 
Krishna's name encompasses the five elements. 

These five elements permeate the whole universe. In fact, 
these five elements form the basis of life for the entire uni- 
verse. These are essentially divine. That is why earth is re- 
ferred to as Bhoodevi, water as Gangadevi, fire as Agnideva, 
and air as Vayudeva. 


Surrender with pure heart 


There is no need to search for God elsewhere. He dwells in 
your heart. That is why He is called Hridayavasi (indweller of 
the heart). If someone were to ask you, “Where do you come 
from?” you may say that you are coming from a hotel or from 
your house. But actually you come from none of these places. 
You come from Hridaya. It is this Hridaya that is your dwell- 
ing place. Then where is the question of coming and going? 
Similarly, God neither comes nor goes. He is present all over, 
all the time. 

But, in order to confer grace on a devotee, He may mani- 
fest Himself. Just because God has appeared to a devotee in 
America does not mean that God has traveled all the way to 
America. He is present in America too. It is the devotion that 
makes God manifest Himself. Divinity neither comes nor goes. 
It is present everywhere. “Viswam Vishnuswaroopam,” “Sar- 
vam Khalvidam Brahma.” There is no place where there is no 
God. All names and forms are His. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 359 


You should not have the feeling that God is the master and 
you are His servant. The individual (nara) and the Divine (Na- 
rayana) are one. You should take to the spiritual path in order 
to understand this principle of unity. Right from birth to death, 
if you are immersed in duality, when will you experience the 
bliss of non-duality? A man with a dual mind is half blind. So 
you should make every effort to experience oneness. 

In the morning, Punditji, while doing abhisheka to the 
padukas with milk, curds, and honey, explained the signifi- 
cance of these offerings. All these spiritual pursuits are meant 
for the purification of Heart. “Chittasya Suddhaye Karmaha 
(all actions are aimed at the purification of heart).” 

Purity alone is not enough to experience Divinity. With pu- 
rity of heart, you should offer yourself to God. You would not 
offer a faded flower to God. Likewise, the heart, which may be 
compared to a flower, should be fresh and devoid of impurities 
before it is offered to God. There is an ocean of difference 
between archana (worship) and arpitham (total surrender). It 
is not archana, but it is arpitham that is most essential. 


True meaning of sathsanga 


What is the meaning of sathsanga (good company)? Sath is 
the name of Divinity. It is changeless in all the periods of time. 
It is eternal and is present in you. You have to understand this 
eternal principle. In order to do so, you have to be in com- 
munion with Sath. 

As Punditji has said in the morning, milk is very happy in 
the company of water. The combination of water and milk can 
be termed sathsanga. That is ideal friendship. 

When the milk is boiled on a stove, the water gets evapo- 
rated. The milk, unable to bear the separation from water, tries 
to jump into the fire. The moment you sprinkle some water on 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 360 


the boiling milk, it gets pacified. The milk is happy on being 
united with its friend. 

The same relationship exists between nara (individual) and 
Narayana (God). God is very happy when the individual joins 
His company. But God feels very sad when the individual di- 
verts his attention from Him and gets immersed in worldly 
pleasures. Once the individual surrenders completely to God, 
He is happy again. Due to the effects of Kali age, the individ- 
ual separates himself from God. The individual may not feel 
sad, but God feels sad because His friend, the individual, is 
parting ways with Him. 


Whatever God says or does is for your own good 


God is the only permanent friend in this world. All the 
worldly friends can only say, “Hello, How are you?” and 
“Good-bye,” nothing more. God does not say “Hello, How are 
you?” and “Good-bye.” As long as you are in His company, 
you will be happy and He is also happy. But when there is 
separation from His devotee, though he may not express it, He 
feels sad. Why is the individual going along the wrong path? 
Why is he forgetting the truth? Why is he distancing himself 
from Divinity? Why is he losing his purity? Thinking so, God 
feels sad. Even this is for the devotee’s sake, not for His sake. 
Whatever God says or does is for your own good. 

Lakshmana is a superb example of the attitude of surren- 
der. When Rama, Sita, and Lakshmana went to the forest and 
reached Chitrakoota mountain, Rama told Lakshmana to put 
up a hermitage in a place of his choice. 

Hearing these words, Lakshmana felt hurt and bent his 
head down with grief. Noting this, Sita asked Lakshmana, 
“Why are you perturbed, Lakshmana? Your brother did not 
speak anything harsh. Why do you feel so sad?” 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 361 


Lakshmana said, ““O Mother, have I ever had any choice of 
my own? The likes of Rama are mine. I have surrendered my- 
self to Rama. The command of Rama is what I want to carry 
out. While so, how can I withstand the impact of Rama asking 
me to put up the hermitage at a place of my choice? Does it not 
amount to separation from Rama?” 

That is the intensity of the feelings of a true devotee toward 
the Lord. Your thoughts should always be centered on God. 
The world is like a passing cloud. But the relation between you 
and God is permanent and eternal. 


Understand your relationship with God 


Gayathri Mantra consists of three parts. One is praise, the 
second is prayer and the third is meditation. The first nine 
words of Gayathri Mantra (Om, Bhur, Bhuvaha, Suvaha, Tat, 
Savitur, Varenyam, Bhargo, Devasya) correspond to the de- 
scription (praise) of Gayathri. Dheemahi pertains to medita- 
tion. “Dhiyoyonah Prachodayat” is the prayer to God to con- 
fer the steady and pure intellect. 

The Divine is first praised and meditated upon. Then an 
appeal is made to the Divine to awaken and strengthen the in- 
tellect (buddhi). So, first and foremost, you should extol God. 
But in what way? You should extol Him with a feeling of inti- 
macy. The son will never shower lavish praises on his father 
when he asks for a new dress. Instead he demands rightfully. A 
devotee has a similar right to demand from God. 

Hridaya is the son of Atma. From hridaya, mind is born. 
So, mind is the grandson of Atma. And, from mind, speech 
originates. So, speech is the great grandson of Atma. In short, 
your hridaya, mind, and speech belong to the divine family 
and have got a share in the divine property. Therefore, your 
hridaya, mind, and speech should be in constant communion 
with God. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 362 


On this basis, Jesus said, “I am the messenger of God” 
from the physical point of view. From the psychological point 
of view, he said, “I am the son of God.” And with the feeling 
of oneness of Atma, he said, “I and my father are one.” 

From a physical point of view you may consider yourself 
different from God. In the mental realm you should feel that 
you are the spark of the Divine. But from the Atmic point of 
view, you should realise that you are not different from God. 
You have to make every effort to realize this unity. You should 
not distance yourself from Divinity basing on body attachment. 
Without understanding your relationship with God, all your 
spiritual practices will be of no use. But once you understand 
this principle of unity, wherever you are, you are one with 
God. 


Develop attachment with the Atma 


The body relationship is only physical and worldly. It has 
nothing to do with spirituality. The master of the house is ad- 
dressed in different ways by his family members. Son calls 
him father, daughter-in-law calls him uncle, and grandson calls 
him grandfather, on the basis of body relationships. You 
should never go by body attachment. 

The body is full of dirt and diseases. It cannot cross the 
ocean of samsara. O mind, never think that body is permanent; 
surrender to the feet of God. Do not get yourself bound by 
body attachment. Develop attachment with the Atma. 

In order to do so, engage yourself in sacred actions such as 
sravanam (listening to the Lord’s stories), kirtanam (singing 
His glories), smaranam (remembrance), Padasevanam (service 
to the Lotus Feet), archanam (worship), vandanam (saluta- 
tion), dasyam (servitude), sakhyam (friendship), Atmanive- 
danam (offering oneself to the Lord 1.e. self-surrender). 

Friendship is the stepping stone to self-surrender. So, you 
should develop friendship with God and be a recipient of His 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 363 


love. You undertake many spiritual pursuits to obtain this love. 
In fact, you do not need to undertake any spiritual practices. It 
is enough if you remember the relationship between you and 
God. 

Divinity is one but is responsible for the three-fold cosmic 
process. These three aspects of God can be seen in the English 
word GOD. G represents Generation (Srishti), O represents 
Organization (Sthithi) and D -represents Destruction (Layam). 
God has all the three aspects in Him. Seeing the same God in 
all the beings is the true spirit of non-dualism. 


The greatest and the noblest path is that of devotion 


You know that it was Adi Sankaracharya who propagated 
the principle of non-dualism. All the compositions of Sankara 
speaks of non-dualism. But, toward the end, Sankara himself 
entered the path of devotion. He sang the following verse. 


Bhaja Govindam Bhaja Govindam 
Govindam Bhaja Mooda Mathe, 
Samprapthe Sannihite Kale 
Nahi,Nahi Rakshathi Dukrun Karane. 


O foolish man, chant the name of the Lord. When 
the hour of death arrives, only the Lord can save 
you, not your grammar. 


Even the one of wisdom becomes a devotee at one point of 
time. The greatest and noblest path is the path of devotion. The 
word bhakthi (devotion) is derived from the root word bhaj, 
which means total surrender. Offering total love is bhakthi. 
Worship and other rituals are only physical and worldly activi- 
ties. You have to enter nivritti (inward path) from this pravritti 
(outward path). 

When you learn the English language, you start with the 
alphabet. Then you join letters to make words. Then you join 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 364 


words to form sentences. The atheists say, God is no where. 
When the letter w is moved from where to no, it becomes God 
is now here. The aim of learning the language is to make sen- 
tences out of it. Similarly, the aim of worship and rituals is to 
understand the principle of unity. You start with one name and 
one form and ultimately realise that everything is one. It is the 
goal of spiritual sadhana. It is the essence of spiritual sadhana. 


Surrender brings limitless Bliss 


Worship of Padukas, observance of rituals, and celebra- 
tions of festivals are all different paths leading to the principle 
of oneness. All these rituals are essential till you realise that 
God is one. But you should not spend your whole lifetime in 
these rituals. 

At birth, you cry “Koham? Koham?” which means “Who 
am I?, Who am I?” You should not die with the same question 
on your lips. Before you die you should be able to say “Soham, 
I am God.” 

From dualism you should enter qualified non-dualism, and 
from there you should proceed to non-dualism. Just as cotton 
and thread are present in the cloth, likewise dualism and quali- 
fied non-dualism are present in non-dualism. 

Today the devotees read many sacred books and listen to 
discourses, but there is no transformation in the mind. All these 
sacred texts and teachings are like jewels. Merely adorning 
these jewels does not give you bliss. The bliss is within; you 
should experience it. 

Just as precious jewels are kept in an iron chest, likewise 
Atmic principle is present in this human body. God has kept 
many valuable jewels in your body. But you are not making 
any effort to realise this. God says, “O madcap, why do you 
entertain mean and Iow desires? If you give up desires and of- 
fer yourself, I will give you the most valuable gifts.” When 
God is ready to give you the limitless non-dual bliss, why do 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 365 


you crave limited happiness? Do not ask for mean things. Of- 
fer yourself to God; then God will grant you jewels of limitliss 
bliss. 

But in order to deserve God’s grace, your faith should 
grow. When you do not have faith, you cannot offer yourself. 
One who does not know himself in spite of all his education is 
foolish. With his limited knowledge, he will enter into argu- 
ments and will never be able to acquire total wisdom. If ulti- 
mately one has to die, what is the use of studying? One has to 
study to be immortal. The Vedas declared, “Srunvanthu viswe 
amruthasya putrah. (Listen, O sons of immortality)”. Under- 
stand and experience this. 


God wants only selfless love 


You pay water tax to the municipality for providing water 
to you. When the current is supplied to your house, you pay the 
electricity bill. But God has given the sunlight, the wind, and 
the rains —what tax are you paying to God? Self-surrender is 
the tax you are expected to pay. All your troubles are your own 
making. God always gives you everything good. But you are 
not receiving it. 


Some people do not listen to good words, 
And instead pay heed to all bad words. 
Such people can never understand Me. 
[Telugu poem] 


What is that you need to do to make God happy? You 
should go close to God and worship Him with a sense of sur- 
render. This is for your own sake. God does not ask for any- 
thing. Child sits on the lap of mother for its own satisfaction. 
When the child goes near its mother, she showers her love. 
When you want to be close to God, you do not need to go 
through sacred texts or undertake great spiritual exercises. 
Rituals and reading of holy texts are only worldly actions. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 366 


They are meant only to give external satisfaction, but one has 
to make efforts to experience inner satisfaction. 

Embodiments of Love! The letters that the postman brings 
give joy to some and plunge some in deep sorrow. It is the 
contents of the letters that are responsible for the joy or sorrow, 
not the postman. God is like a postman. He gives you the fruits 
of your actions. “Karmanubandheeni manushyaloke (Human 
society is bound by actions).” When you follow Truth, you will 
be happy and prosperous. Jealousy will make you miserable. 


Strive for divine Love 


Buddhi is governed by fate. Fate is governed by actions. 
Actions are governed by thoughts. If you do all activities with 
sacred thoughts, you will be successful. Wicked thoughts and 
wicked feelings confer only misery. 

If you do not have the grace of God, all the worldly powers 
will be of no use. You know what happened to the great war- 
rior Karna, who has had all powers but not God’s grace. You 
should strive for divine Love. To acquire divine Love, you 
should develop good thoughts. 

Embodiments of Love! You are happy that the number of 
padukas is increasing year after year. It is quite natural to have 
such a feeling in the external world. But I do not desire in- 
crease in numbers. 

It is the feeling that is important, not the number of padu- 
kas. What God wants is pure Love and steady mind, but those 
who have come for this paduka puja have not understood this 
truth. They have brought many eatables such as dry fruits, ap- 
ples, bananas, and sweets and kept them in the Poornachandra 
hall thinking that I would eat them. Do they think that I am 
Kumbhakarna? I do not even take meals, so what are these 
fruits for? The boys will have to work for 15 days just to sepa- 
rate them, and in the meanwhile the fruits will become rotten. 
What I want is only your Love. Some people have brought 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 367 


towels and bedsheets. I do not need them, if you want you can 
give them in the hospital. Even that need not be done. 

I do not desire anything. I want only one thing: pure, 
steady and selfless love. There is no selfishness from top to toe 
in Me. When I do not have any desires, why do you bring all 
these? 


‘Your heart is My chariot” 


Chetty Garu is an ardent devotee. Yesterday, he prayed that 
I should ascend the chariot. I do not have any liking for these 
things. Your Heart is My chariot. Then where is the need for a 
golden chariot? Today, they brought a Simhasana (throne) too. 
They do not inform Me about these things till they are brought 
to Prasanthinilayam. 

Do not bring any such things. I do not like them. I have al- 
ready told you what I like: only Love. Do not bring any mate- 
rial objects hereafter. 

I want you to acquire wisdom. That wisdom leads you to 
liberation. To reach this state of Liberation, offer yourself 
completely. Just as the essence of food you partake gets mixed 
in your blood and becomes one with your body, likewise let 
your Love be unified with My Love. Then you will become 
one with Me. 

In the morning during the paduka worship, Punditji spoke 
on the importance of unity, giving the example of bees col- 
lecting honey. The honey bee collects honey from different 
flowers and stores it at one place, which becomes the panacea 
for all diseases. Where there is Unity, there is Purity; and 
where there is Purity, there is Divinity. Understand the rela- 
tionship between Unity, Purity and Divinity. 

Pundits have been telling you these things, but you do not 
seem to practice at least one or two. By announcing the pres- 
ence of light, would ever the darkness be dispelled? By listen- 
ing to the efficacy and grandeur of medicine, will the disease 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 368 


be cured? To dispel darkness you should light at least a small 
lamp. 


Let every activity be pleasing unto God 


You all know that Deepavali is approaching. With one 
candle you can light the other lamps. That candle is Divinity 
,and the lamps are individuals. It is only one Divinity that pro- 
tects and sustains all. Light the lamp of Love in you. 

Even worldly activities will become spiritual if you have 
Love. You can do your office work or business, you can also 
take care of your family; but whatever you do, do it as an of- 
fering to God. Let every activity be pleasing unto God. That is 
true devotion. Wherever you go, do not offer any material ob- 
jects to God. You all know that people go to Tirupathi and of- 
fer crowns and jewelry to God in the name of devotion. All 
these jewelry hide the pristine beauty of the idol. Wherever 
you go do not take jewels for God. Do you consider God 
poorer than you? Offering jewels to God is a narrow-minded 
idea. 

Charity is the true ornament for the hand. Truth is the true 
ornament for the throat. Listening to sacred texts is the true 
ornament for the ears. Why do need any other ornaments? Of- 
fering all the jewelry to God is nothing but pomp and show. 
Devotees should not make such offerings. 

You should offer only your pure love and sacrifice. The 
relation between a devotee and God is only heart to Heart and 
Love to Love. By offering jewelry, you are making God also a 
beggar. You should always keep in mind that God is bigger, 
never a beggar. 

Today we find many swamijis going abroad whenever they 
are in need of money. It is a matter of shame; there is no spiri- 
tuality at all. There is so much restlessness in our country. First 
they should spread the message of peace in Bharat. Charity 
begins at home. Yesterday I have told Srinivas to take back all 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 369 


that they have brought. Whatever they eat they have brought 
for Me. I do not eat anything. I eat your love. I hear only good 
words. Offer only these two to Me. Do not bring anything else. 
Let love be the underlying principle in whatever you do. With 
love and devotion even a small sadhana (spiritual exercise) 
will yield great results. 

Many people wonder that I look so young even at the age 
of 73. The reason is I have three P’s in Me. One is Purity, the 
second is Patience, and the third is Perseverance. It is because 
of these three that I shall remain like this for any number of 
years to come. So, everyone should cultivate these three. 


To pray for the well-being of everyone is a noble quality 


Give up all your mean and low desires and cultivate love 
for God. Dr. Gadia has prayed for good health and long life for 
Chettiar. To pray for the well being of everyone is a noble 
quality. But well-being cannot be obtained by recommenda- 
tions. The noble feelings of Chetty Garu have made him the 
recipient of God’s grace. His Heart and My Heart should unify. 

Last week, Allopathy, Homeopathy and Ayurvedic doctors 
all sent letters to Me. “Swami, we hear that there is going to be 
a very big function on 10th. Send Chettiar back to Madurai 
immediately. He may not live till 10th.” 

I said, “As a result of his bhakti (devotion) and My shakti 
(power) he will certainly live.” Though he is pretty aged and 
very weak, still he continues to come here with so much love. 
His devotion protects him. 

Thyagaraja also has undergone many trials and tribulations. 
His wife died, and his elder brother has subjected him to many 
ordeals. His elder brother cast the idols of Sita, Rama, and 
Lakshmana into the Kaveri River. Thyagaraja could not bear 
the separation from Rama and, feeling frustrated, said, “O 
Rama! Why am I being subjected to these ordeals? Is it be- 
cause my devotion has weakened? Or has your power de- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 370 


clined?” He feels that his devotion has not diminished. So, 
Rama's power must have got weakened. 

But pondering over it further, he realised how foolish he 
was to criticise Rama. He began to sing a song in praise of 
Rama’s prowess. “Without Rama’s power, could a monkey 
have crossed the ocean? Or would the Goddess of wealth have 
chosen to be his consort? Or would Lakshmana serve him, or 
the supremely intelligent Bharata revel in beholding Him and 
worshipping Him?” Thyagaraja ecstatically extolled the infi- 
nite prowess of Rama and blamed his own ignorance for hav- 
ing doubted Rama’s prowess. Nothing is greater than divine 
power. Once you have the anugraha bala (strength of divine 
grace), what harm can the navagrahas (nine planets) do to 
you? So work for God’s grace and surrender to Him com- 
pletely. There lies the true Bliss. 


11 October 1998 
Sixth Anniversary of Paduka Pratishta Mahostav 
Prasanthi Nilayam 


38 


Install God’s Feet in your heart 


Whether one is a great scholar in the Vedas and sacred texts, 

Or a hero who has won great victories, 

Or a destitute gruelling in poverty, 

Without devotion he is worthless. 

A servant with devotion in his heart 

is worthier of veneration than a king bereft of devotion. 
[Telugu Poem] 


Right from the beginning of creation, human life has been 
the rarest and most valuable of all living beings. Having taken 
such a noble birth, if one fails to know one’s innate divinity, 
life becomes meaningless. When the diamond is cut repeat- 
edly, it shines with added brilliance, and its value also in- 
creases. Similarly, in order to experience divinity within, one 
has to face many obstacles. So, devotees naturally face all 
types of trials and tribulations. But devotion should never di- 
minish. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 372 


Devotion alone bestows the supreme good; 
Devotion alone is the destroyer of the disease 

of the repeated cycles of birth and death; 
Devotion alone is the means of recognising divinity; 
Devotion alone is the means of liberation. 
[Sanskrit sloka] 


The Story of Manikavachagar 


One may face problems, blames, and accusations of all 
types, but it is devotion that protects one from all these. Once 
upon a time, the Pandya kingdom in Tamil Nadu reigned su- 
preme. The Pandya king was very fond of horses. Once, he 
sent his minister to buy horses. He gave him all the money and 
manpower required to procure the horses. 

The minister reached a village named Perundurai. There he 
came across a holy man, Balayogeeswara. He did not want to 
waste that pleasant evening, so he joined the congregation and 
listened to the discourse of the holy man with rapt attention. 
He forgot himself as he listened to the discourse. He developed 
strong faith in that holy man. He forgot even the task assigned 
to him by the king, spent his time listening to the discourses, 
and got immersed in the contemplation of God. One day, he 
found a Siva temple in a dilapidated condition. He used the 
money given to him by the king for renovating the Siva tem- 
ple. 

The king came to know that the minister had used all the 
money given to him to buy horses, to renovate the Siiva tem- 
ple. The king was also a devoted man. But since the minister 
disobeyed his command, he sent his soldiers to bring him back. 
The king summoned the minister to his presence and asked 
him what he had done with the money given to him for pro- 
curing horses. The minister said, “O king, I used the money for 
God. Everything is God’s gift. What God had given, I gave it 
back to Him. Not only that I have offered myself to Him.” 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 33 


The king asked, whether he was justified in spending the 
money for a different purpose other than for which it was in- 
tended. The minister replied that he did not use the money for 
worldly purposes, but used it for a sacred purpose. The king 
became furious at the minister’s audacious reply, had him ar- 
rested and put in prison. 

The minister was unruffled. While in prison, he continued 
to recall the teachings of the holy man, Balayogeeswara, and 
started writing them down in the form of slokas (verses). He 
composed many slokas every day. He was immersed in bliss 
while composing hymns in praise of God and thus lost track of 
time. 

Later, the king realised his mistake and summoned him. He 
was surprised to see the aura of radiance and brilliance around 
his face. How did he acquire such an aura? It was due to the 
constant contemplation of God. That minister was none other 
than Manikavachagar. Each sloka composed by him reflected 
the essence of the Vedas and the sacred texts. This work is 
known as Thiruvachakam, meaning sacred reading. 

Since ancient times, many such great saints took birth in 
Tamil Nadu. Divinity that blossomed in sacred Tamil Nadu is 
not noticed elsewhere. Right from daybreak people go to tem- 
ples, make sacred offerings, and divinise their lives. That is 
why there are more temples in Tamil Nadu than anywhere else 
in the country. 


Thiruvalluvar reforms a young man 


There was another great saint by the name Thiruvalluvar. 
Initially, he was a weaver. He used to weave just one sari per 
day, sell it in the bazaar, and earn money for his family. Good 
and bad exist together; it would be impossible to separate 
them. In the same village, there was the son of a rich man who 
was wasting his time wandering aimlessly. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 374 


Where there is money, there is ego. Ego gives rise to bad 
qualities. Once the money is lost, all bad qualities too disap- 
pear. One day, the rich man’s son came to Thiruvalluvar and 
asked for the price of the sari. Thiruvalluvar said it cost four 
rupees. The boy was known for his arrogance and mischief. He 
picked up the sari, tore it into two pieces and asked for the 
price of one piece. Thiruvalluvar replied, it cost two rupees, 
sincehe had made the Sari into two halves. The boy tore it 
again into another piece and asked for the price. Thiruvalluvar 
replied that the price was one rupee. 

This brought about a transformation in the mind of the boy. 
He wondered how the businessman was calm and composed 
even after he tore the sari into pieces. The boy fell at Thiru- 
valluvar’s feet and repented for his behaviour. The boy said 
that due to his pride and arrogance, he made this mistake. Then 
he went to his father, got the required money for the sari and 
kept it at the feet of Thiruvalluvar. 


Not the statues but the teachings of saints are important 


Many such great saints lived in Tamil Nadu who set an 
ideal to society. Unfortunately, people do not follow the 
teachings of these saints. But their statues are installed and 
adored. It is not the statues of saints that are important, but 
their teachings. The best way to propagate their teachings is to 
practice them. 

Just as hands, legs, ears, eyes, etc., form the limbs of the 
body, human being is a limb of society. Society is a limb of 
humanity. Humanity is a limb of Nature, and Nature is a limb 
of Divinity. Nature has been sustaining humanity. 

Humanity is based on the twin principles of Truth and 
Righteousness. Without the individual, there is no society, and 
without society the country does not exist. So, the individual is 
important in society. For an individual, the limbs are very im- 
portant. So, the limbs have to be used in a sacred way. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 55 


See no evil; see what is good, 
Hear no evil; hear what is good, 
Talk no evil; talk what is good, 
Think no evil; think what is good, 
Do no evil; do what is good. 

This is the way to God. 


Here lies the sanctity of human life. “Sareeramadhyam 
khalu dharma sadhanam (body is gifted to undertake righteous 
actions.) Manikavachagar prayed, “O Lord, accept my heart, 
which You have given. The working of the heart is also Your 
gift. I cannot offer anything other than this. I offer whatever 
You have given me.” 


Only truth and good name are permanent 


Kerala is the neighbouring state of Tamil Nadu, where Adi 
Sankara was born. He said: 


Asthiram Jeevanam Loke, 
Asthiram Yauvanam Dhanam, 
Asthiram Dara Puthradi, 

Sathyam Keerthi DwayamSthiram. 


Life in the world is impermanent. 

So are youth and wealth. 

Wife and children are also not permanent. 
Only truth and good name are permanent. 


So, earn a good name, always speak the truth, and follow 
the path of truth. 


Truth is God. 

The entire creation has emerged from Truth and 
merges in it. 

Is there any place where this non-dual Principle 
of Truth does not pervade? [Telugu Poem] 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 376 


Just as the water bubble originates in water, is sustained in 
it, and ultimately merges in it, the entire world has originated 
from Truth, is sustained by Truth, and ultimately merges in 
Truth. 


Body should not be used for fleeting pleasures 


Man is born out of amrita (immortality) but is merging in 
anrita (falsehood). What is the use of leading such a life? To- 
day, man is highly intelligent and acquires all types of educa- 
tion. He should set an ideal to society. Man should understand 
that education is for sharing and serving and not for earning 
money. Education is meant for dharmacharana (practice of 
righteousness) and not for dhanarjana (acquiring wealth). 
“Dharmamoolam idam jagath” (This world is based on 
dharma). 

Body should not be used for fleeting pleasures. The Bha- 
gavad Gita declares, “Anithyam asukham lokam imam prapya 
bhajasva maam (having taken birth in this impermanent and 
sorrowful world, worship the Lord.)” Many people think that 
there is happiness in this world, but it is temporary. “Ma kuru 
dhana jana yauvana garvam, harathi nimeshath kalah sarvam 
(O man, do not be proud of wealth, relations or youth. All 
these may be taken away in a moment by the tide of time.)” 

It is the feet that help us to move. It is said, “Pada dar- 
shana papa nashanam (Vision of the Lord’s feet destroys all 
sins.)” Feet are so sacred. Feet carry the body, which is the 
temple of God. The Lord’s Lotus Feet have to be installed in 
your heart. No doubt, external worship of feet is also important 
As you continue to worship the Lotus Feet, they will naturally 
get installed in your heart. 

Once Narada went to Lord Narayana and said, “Narayana, 
I come for Your darshan whenever I have any problem. But I 
do not know where exactly You reside. Where can I find You? 
In Kailasa, Vaikunta, or Swarga?” 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 Sid 


Narayana said, “Mad bhaktha yathra gayanthi tathra 
thishtami Narada (wherever My devotees sing My glory, I in- 
stall Myself there.) Kailasa, Vaikunta, and Swarga are My 
branch offices.” 

God is not present in foreign land, He is present in our 
heart. Heart does not mean physical heart. It means spiritual 
heart. It should be full compassion. 


Man should have a strong will 


Man has all comforts and conveniences. He has good in- 
tellect. Yet, he is not able to reach his destination. Man should 
have a strong will. For example, a small ant can travel any 
number of miles if it has the will to do so; whereas an eagle 
cannot move an inch if it does not have the will to move. 

Thyagaraja said, “O Rama, you are present in all right from 
an ant to Brahma. You are present in Siva and Kesava. You are 
everywhere. There is no place where you are not there; there is 
no name that is not yours.” 

But, today, man is carried away by delusions and does not 
realise this truth. If Brahma were to manifest in front of him, 
he would offer his salutations with reverence and devotion. But 
if the same Brahma comes in the form of an ant and bites him, 
he will immediately kill it. 

The evil one is he who does not observe the unity of 
thought, word, and deed. You say God is present even in an 
ant; then why do you kill it? You are so weak that you are not 
able to bear the pain of an ant bite or a mosquito bite. In this 
modern age, man is becoming weaker and weaker. 

All our ancient rishis (sages) did penance for years to- 
gether. They were unmindful of the movement of snakes and 
scorpions on their body. But modern man has developed body 
attachment. He is not attached to the Atma. 

Today, there is no steadiness of mind in man. Some people 
think of their footwear when they sit for bhajans inside. Once, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 378 


Ramakrishna Paramahamsa was giving a discourse in a temple. 
Rani Rasamani, the owner of the temple, was sitting in the 
front row. All were listening to Ramakrishna’s discourse with 
rapt attention. 

All of a sudden, Ramakrishna got up, went to Rani 
Rasamani, and slapped on her cheek. Everyone was surprised. 
They thought Ramakrishna had become mad. Ramakrishna 
told the public, “O people, you may think it is a great mistake 
on my part to have slapped her. What for have you come? You 
are here to listen to my teachings. Whether you practice or not, 
at least you should listen to what is being said. If you do not 
like to listen to the discourse, you had better stay back at home. 
This Rani Rasamani is thinking of her legal disputes. Why 
should she come all the way to think of the court affairs?” 

She accepted her mistake and promised not to repeat it. In 
the modern age, many people attend spiritual discourses and 
get impressed by them. But they do not put them into practice. 


Education should confer humility 


Rama and Ravana were equally well versed in all forms of 
knowledge. But Valmiki described Ravana as moorkha (fool) 
since he did not practice what he learnt. Rama followed Truth. 
He put his knowledge into practice. He is therefore an ideal to 
be followed by everyone. Ravana merely accumulated knowI- 
edge without practising it. He could not digest all that he 
learnt. As a result, he suffered from ‘indigestion’. 

He is a fool who does not practice what he learns. One who 
practices is a truly educated one. Education should confer hu- 
mility. 

In society, there are agitations and disturbances. Students, 
you should join society and see that everyone follows sathya 
and dharma. You should become ideal citizens. That is what I 
desire. I do not expect anything from you. I expect only one 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 379 


thing: that you put into practice what you have studied and be 
an ideal to everyone in the society. 

“Sarveloka hithe rathah (One who delights in the welfare 
of all people.) You should aspire for the welfare of all. Do not 
hate anybody. “Sarve samudhitha gunaihi (You should have 
all good qualities.) Today, man does bad deeds but is not pre- 
pared to face the consequences. If you want to earn merit, you 
should do good deeds. Do good, be happy, and share your hap- 
piness with others; this is your duty. With such sacred feelings, 
contemplate on the Lotus Feet of the Lord. 


Gopikas’ love for Krishna 


Uddhava has described the Gopikas’ (cowherd maids) de- 
votion for Krishna in the following words. “Though their 
mothers-in-law were not happy with them and their husbands 
were against Krishna, they neither uttered a single word nor 
got angry.” They bore it all with patience. They were never 
afraid of anybody. Just as a picture is imprinted on a paper, 
Krishna’s form was imprinted in their hearts. The gopikas had 
no other thought than that of Krishna. 

Once, the gopikas came to Krishna’s house; Krishna pre- 
tended to be asleep. They tried to wake him up by catching His 
feet, but Krishna turned the other side and continued to snore. 

Then they sang, “It is possible to wake up someone who is 
in deep sleep, but it is impossible to wake up someone who 
pretends to be asleep. Krishna, You don’t sleep at all. If You 
sleep, the whole world will sleep. We know that in this world 
there is none who can understand Your mystery. You are 
smaller than an atom and mightier then the mightiest. You are 
present in all the 84 lakh species. Right from the atom to the 
entire cosmos. You are present everywhere. How can we know 
You, Krishna? Please put an end to Your pranks and make us 
happy. We cannot be separate from You any longer.” 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 380 


Every incarnation upheld the principle of Truth 


Before giving up her mortal coil, Radha was sitting on the 
bank of river Yamuna and feeling very sad that Krishna was 
not with her. She intensely prayed to Him to grant her His Di- 
vine Darshan. 

She sang, “O Krishna, speak to me and fill my heart with 
bliss. Distill the essence of the Vedas and make it flow into the 
eternal music of your flute, O Krishna.” 

When she sang like this, Krishna appeared and fulfilled her 
desire by playing on His flute. While listening to this Divine 
Melody, she breathed her last. Her Jeevan Jyothi (life princi- 
ple) merged in Krishna. Krishna threw the flute away and He 
never touched it again. 

In films, you would find Krishna with a flute, but, truly 
speaking, after Radha’s departure, Krishna never touched the 
flute again. This was the promise given by Krishna. Every in- 
carnation upheld the Principle of Truth. Anyone may forget, 
but God never forgets to keep up His promise. 

Who is Radha? People consider her to be an ordinary 
woman and distort the facts. She had no attachment to her 
body. She had attachment to Krishna alone. This dhara (na- 
ture) itself took birth as Radha. This dhara is the adhar (basis) 
for the creation. 

In the name Radha, R stands for Radha, A stands for Ad- 
har, D stands for dhara (continuous), and A stands for arad- 
hana. \t means that dhara aradhana (continuous worship) is 
the adhar (basis) for Radha. She was in constant contemplation 
of Krishna. Even in her sleep, she would chant Krishna’s 
name. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 381 


In order to please God, follow His footprints 


Krishna always eluded the gopikas after playing His mis- 
chief. One day, they all lay in wait to catch Krishna. Krishna, 
out of compassion for them, wanted to provide a clue by which 
they could trace Him. Krishna went into a house stealthily, 
broke a pot of milk, and dipped His feet in it. When the gopi- 
kas came to catch Him, He ran away. He just vanished in a 
trice. 

The gopikas followed His footprints, which revealed to 
them His hideout. Krishna revealed to them the spiritual truth 
that if they clung to the feet of the Lord, they could win His 
grace. 

In order to please God, follow His footprints. Those who 
take refuge at the feet of the Lord, will neither sin nor be mis- 
erable. With sincere devotion, when you take refuge at the feet 
of the Lord and contemplate on them, you will not have de- 
sires. 

Yesterday, Dr. Gadhia in his speech said that by worship- 
ping padukas, marriages were settled and the childless begot 
children. These are all worldly results. Is this to be expected 
from paduka worship? No. You should not worship padukas 
for worldly gains. You should worship them for gains in the 
inward path When you can get mighty results, why are you 
concerned about worldly gains? Why do you go after small 
pebbles? Aim at the meru (gold) Mountain itself, that is, the 
Lotus Feet of the Lord. 

Once upon a time, Jaya and Vijaya (doorkeepers of Vai- 
kunta) approached Lord Vishnu and asked Him, “Swami, why 
have you created the gold mountain?” 

Vishnu replied, “One who is desireless will be unmindful 
of its existence. But the one full of desires will never be satis- 
fied even if a hundred such gold mountains are given to him. 
Who is the richest man in this world? One who has much satis- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 382 


faction is the richest man. Who is the poorest man? He who 
has much desire is the poorest man. So, I have created this 
Meru Mountain in order to make people desireless.” 

God does not have any desire. His only chinthana 
(thought) is His devotee. Devotees should be good and develop 
society and should consider the welfare of the society as their 
own welfare. They should not get immersed in selfishness and 
self-interest. Their mind should be as broad as the ocean. You 
can never surrender completely to God if you are narrow- 
minded. Do not give scope for worldly desires. Develop divine 
thoughts. 


What is required is total surrender, not worship 


Though there are many devotees, so why there are difficul- 
ties in this world? It is because devotion is not proper. The 
devotees are immersed in archana (worship), but what is re- 
quired is arpitham (total surrender). Arpitham is greater than 
archana. When arpitham takes place, you and God become 
one. The fulfilment of worship of the Lotus Feet lies in the uni- 
fication of the individual with the Divine. 

Students, you should always have the welfare of the society 
and the world in view. You should not have the feeling that 
education is for a job. Always question yourself, “What is it 
that I can do for the society?” Enquire what is it that society 
expects from you. This should be your constant endeavour. 
Only then you can work for the progress of the nation. 

Devotees, Embodiments of Love! 

Many people from different countries have come here and 
celebrated their functions. For example, last year the Chinese 
came and celebrated their New Year. Devotees from Andhra 
Pradesh conducted Paduka Puja. Devotees from different 
States came here to celebrate their festivals. But one thing that 
made Me happy is that the devotees from Madurai have cele- 
brated this function in the most systematic manner. Their dis- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 383 


cipline has been exemplary. Others should learn from their ex- 
ample. Subrahmaniam Chettiar is very old. Yet everyone fol- 
lowed his word. Each one followed the discipline on their own. 
The Paduka Trust, Madurai, adheres to the principle of disci- 
pline. Not only here, wherever you go observe this discipline. 


The three D’s: Devotion, Duty, Discipline 


The three important principles of Sri Sathya Sai Organisa- 
tions are Devotion, Duty, and Discipline. These three D’s are 
to be followed sincerely. Do your duty. See that your devotion 
is steady, and observe discipline. When you follow these three 
D’s you will always be happy. 

Let this culture and tradition be passed on to your progeny. 
This culture and tradition should not end with you, it should 
continue. Under any circumstances, do not give up the chant- 
ing of God’s name. You should have fear of sin, love for God 
and morality in society. Sanctify your life by leading an ideal 
life and experiencing the divine Atmic Principle. 


12 October 1998 
Sixth Anniversary of Paduka Prathishta Mahotsav 
Prasanthi Nilayam 


39 


Light the lamp of wisdom 


In this supremely sacred land of Bharat, 
forbearance is the highest wealth. 
Of all forms of rituals, the most important 
one is adherence to truth and integrity. 
The sweetest of feelings in this country is 
love for mother and the motherland. 
In this land, character is more important 
than the life itself. 
Such sacred principles have been totally forgotten, 
and in the name of freedom 
People lead a perverted life imitating 
western culture. 
Just as the mighty elephant is not aware 
of its own strength, 
Bharatiyas are not aware of the greatness 
of their own culture. 
[Telugu poem] 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 385 


Embodiments of Love! All festivals of Bharat (India) have 
an inner divine significance. In Bharat, the festivals are cele- 
brated to prove the immanent divinity in humanity. This day’s 
festival, Deepavali, teaches a sacred inner meaning to human- 
ity. No other element in this world is as significant as light. It 
is the light that shows us the way by dispelling the darkness. It 
is because of the light that man is able to attend to his daily 
duties. 

The flame of a lamp has two significant qualities. One is to 
banish darkness; the other is a continuous upward movement. 
Even if a lamp is kept in a pit, the flame is directed upward. 
The ancients have taught that the upward movement of the 
flame denotes the path to wisdom and the path to divinity. 
However, the external light can dispel only the external dark- 
ness, but not the darkness of ignorance in man. 

When Hanuman set Lanka ablaze, though there was light 
all around, Ravana’s heart was filled with darkness. Ravana 
was no ordinary person; he belonged to the lineage of Brahma. 
He was the brother of Kubera, the god of wealth. He had a 
brother, Kumbhakarna, who was very powerful. He had a son 
by name Indrajit, who conquered the mighty Indra, the king of 
gods. He was a master of four Vedas and six Sastras. Such a 
powerful and highly educated Ravana could not get rid of the 
darkness of ignorance. 


Dispel inner darkness 


Ignorance is the cause of birth and death. One with igno- 
rance is born again and again (punarapi jananam punarapi 
maranam). But one with wisdom has neither birth nor death. 


God has neither birth nor death. 

He is eternal; he has no beginning, no end. 

He is in the form of Atma. 

That is jnana jyothi (light of wisdom). [Telugu poem] 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 386 


If you want to light a lamp, you need a container. You have 
to fill it with oil and place a wick in it. You need a matchbox to 
light the wick. Only when you have all four accessories can 
you light the lamp. This lamp dispels the external darkness. 

Similarly, to dispel the darkness of ignorance, you need to 
have vairagya (renunciation), the container; love, the oil; one 
pointed concentration, the wick; and tatwajnana (spiritual wis- 
dom), the matchbox. Only when you have all these four can 
you light the lamp of wisdom. 


Even detachment has to be within certain limits 


Renunciation is a must for every spiritual aspirant. Renun- 
ciation does not mean leading a life of seclusion, leaving wife 
and children. Giving up evil qualities is the real renunciation. 
That is the real thyaga (sacrifice) and yoga. So, first and fore- 
most, develop detachment. 

But even detachment has to be within certain limits. Ex- 
treme detachment will lead to danger. It is impossible to live in 
this world giving up everything. So lead your life with equa- 
nimity. 

Once, the gopikas (cowherd maids) prayed to Krishna thus: 
“O Krishna! Your mother is trying to catch you to chastise you 
for your mischievous deeds. You don’t need to run hither and 
thither to hide yourself. There is a place that is beyond the 
reach of your mother, that is our Heart. Our Heart is filled with 
the darkness of ignorance. So enter our Heart and banish the 
darkness of ignorance.” 

What is the inner significance of Deepavali? The capital of 
the kingdom ruled by Narakasura was known as Pragjyotisha- 
puram. The name consists of four syllables: prag, jyothi, sha, 
and puram. Prag means before, jyothi means light, and sha 
refers to forgetting. The inner meaning of this name is that the 
inhabitants of this city have forgotten the ancient and eternal 
light (Atma Jyothi). Narakasura, the king of Pragjyotishapu- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 387 


ram had totally forgotten the Atmic principle and was identi- 
fying himself with the body and leading a life in darkness of 
ignorance. 

One has to develop attachment to the Self, not to the body. 
Attachment to the body is the main cause for all sufferings. 
One who travels toward ignorance is Naraka, and one who 
travels toward wisdom is Nara, the human. To travel along the 
path of wisdom one needs to develop sacred thoughts, sacred 
words, and sacred actions. 


God has His own master plan for everything 


God does not like to kill the wicked Himself. So Krishna 
devised a master plan to kill Narakasura. Since Narakasura was 
very strong both physically and mentally, Krishna decided to 
weaken him gradually by subjecting him to fits of anger. The 
modus operandi was to provoke Narakasura, and when he 
would come chasing in a fit of anger, Krishna would withdraw. 

Anger is the main cause for man to lose his physical and 
mental powers. If one gets angry, one loses the energy ob- 
tained from the food partaken over a period of three months. 

When Narakasura lost all his strength due to his anger, 
Krishna made Sathyabhama kill him. God has His own master 
plan for everything because He is the master of everything. 

Narakasura committed many sins in his life. He imprisoned 
thousands of women and tortured them. They were the sixteen 
thousand gopikas (cowherd maids). They could neither live nor 
die. Such was their pitiable condition. 

After Narakasura was killed, Krishna freed them from 
prison and asked them to return to their respective homes and 
lead a peaceful life. But all the gopikas fell at Krishna’s feet 
and pleaded that it would be impossible for them to live in dig- 
nity in their homes after being prisoners of Narakasura. They 
said that Krishna was their only refuge and prayed that He 
would take care of them. Krishna agreed to take the responsi- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 388 


bility of protecting them. Then the gopikas sang in praise of 
Krishna thus: 


O Krishna! 

It is impossible to describe Your glory in words. 

Even Brahma, the Creator cannot understand You. 

We have been longing for your divine grace. 

Listen to our prayers and protect us. 

You freed Devaki- Vasudeva from prison. 

You saved the honor of Draupadi and 

Protected the Pandavas. 

You removed the poverty of Kuchela. 

You turned ugly Kubja into a beautiful woman. 

You freed sixteen thousand gopikas from prison. 
[Telugu song] 


It is ignorance that makes one suffer. Only the external 
world is seen, but not the Atmic principle. The human being is 
like a bridge between the seen and the unseen. That which is 
seen is bound to perish. It is the unchangeable and eternal wis- 
dom that is important, not the transient world. 

When Narakasura was killed, all those who suffered under 
him were overjoyed. Having led a life of darkness till then, 
both internally and externally, they celebrated the occasion by 
lighting lamps. 


Significance of lighting lamps 


There is significance in lighting lamps. The flame of one 
lamp can light the whole array of lamps. That one lamp sym- 
bolizes the paramjyothi (supreme effulgence). The others sym- 
bolize the jivanjyothis (lights in individual selves). Deepavail 
is celebrated in order to teach this truth to the world. People 
celebrate this festival by bursting firecrackers, signifying the 
victory of good over evil. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 389 


The inner meaning underlying the Bharatiya (Indian) festi- 
vals should be rightly understood. On each festival day, people 
have a sacred bath early in the morning, wear new clothes, and 
keep their houses and surroundings clean. Thus, the festivals 
teach us the importance of internal and external cleanliness. 

The Vedas declare, “Anthar Bahischa Tat Sarvam Vyapya 
Narayana Stithaha.” God is present within and around. So one 
has to be pure both internally and externally. It is the water that 
helps to keep your body clean. But it is love that keeps your 
heart clean. You should celebrate the festivals in full realisa- 
tion of their inner significance. 

Because man has no purity of heart, he has become the 
cause of all the restlessness in the world. What is the reason of 
all suffering? It is the polluted mind. Never blame the world 
for your suffering; blame yourself. “Yad bhavam tat bhavathi 
(As the feeling, so is the experience).” If your heart is pure, 
you will find purity everywhere. So, purity of heart is essential. 
Only when you have purity of heart can you attain wisdom. In 
the absence of purity, you will be immersed in ignorance and 
restlessness. 


Man can accomplish anything if he puts in effort 


Ignorance leads to suffering. We do not know what igno- 
rance is. We should try to know what we do not know. That is 
the true sadhana (spiritual exercise). It is only through effort 
that man can achieve anything. Even a small ant can travel 
miles together if it makes an effort, but a bird cannot move 
even an inch if it does not make an effort. 

Man can accomplish anything if he puts in effort. He is 
able to travel lakhs of miles into space, spending crores of ru- 
pees. But he is not making an attempt to travel at least half an 
inch into his heart. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 390 


Yantra, Mantra, and Tantra 


Man is undertaking space travel with the help of yantra 
(machine). It is the mantra that is important, not the yantra. 
Hiranyakasipu could even reach the pole star with the help of 
yantra, but what is the use? 

It was child Prahlada who could win the grace of God with 
the help of mantra. The power of Hiranyakasipu was related to 
yantra; whereas, the Prahlada’s power was related to mantra. 
Yantra may fail, but not mantra. 

Yantra, mantra, and tantra —all the three are latent in hu- 
man beings. We are repeating the mantra Soham 21,600 times 
a day. Soham means “I am God.” There is no better mantra 
than this. 

The human body is the yantra. Who is responsible for 
making the heart beat? Who is responsible for digestion and 
blood circulation in the body? The eye, which is not even an 
inch in size, is able to see the stars, which are millions of miles 
away. The eardrum, which is small in size, is able to receive 
sounds from far off distances. Television and telephone are 
within the body. 

Having been endowed with such a powerful yantra, the 
body, and the sacred mantra, Soham, it is a shame if we do not 
work for the redemption of our life. Hridaya is the tantra, So- 
ham is the mantra, and body is the yantra. Though all three are 
within man, yet he is in search of them outside. 

Man is encased in five koshas (sheaths): annamaya, 
pranamaya, manomaya, vijnanamaya, and anandamaya ko- 
shas. The physical body is the annamaya kosha (the sheath 
based on food). Subtler than this is pranamaya kosha. Still 
subtler is manomaya kosha. Today, man has progressed up to 
the level of the mind. The moment he progresses to the level of 
vijnanamaya kosha (wisdom sheath) he will experience anan- 
damaya kosha (sheath of bliss). That is the non-dualistic bliss. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 391 


“Ekam Eva Adviteeyam Brahm (God is one without a sec- 
ond.)” That is the Atmic principle. Just as the same current 
flows in different bulbs, the same Atma exists in all the beings. 
The culture of Bharat (India) speaks of this unity in diversity. 
Unfortunately, in the modern age, unity is viewed as diversity. 
It is this mistake that puts man to suffering. 


Nations are many, but earth is one. 
Being are many, but breath is one 
Stars are many, but sky is one, 
Jewels are many, but gold is one. 


Once you understand this basic unity, you can understand 
the divine principle. You should not hate anybody. Hate your 
own anger. Do not fight with others; fight with your bad quali- 
ties. Give up your bad qualities. How is it possible? It is possi- 
ble only if you surrender yourself to God. 


Once you are unified with God, there is no separation 


Markandeya was the son of Mrukandu. He was to live only 
for sixteen years, but he was not aware of this. One day he 
found his parents in a very dejected mood. When he asked the 
reason, they revealed that his end was approaching. On hearing 
this he immediately rushed to the temple of Lord Siva, hugged 
the Siva Linga, and started chanting His name. When the Lord 
of death came and cast the noose, even Easwara was caught up 
in it because Markandeya was holding fast to the Linga. Then 
Easwara manifested and burnt the Lord of death to ashes. 

This means that once you are unified with God, there is no 
question of separation. How can this unification take place? 
For this you need not do any sadhana (spiritual exercises) It is 
enough if you have total and pure love. 

All the worldly sadhanas are only to sanctify the time. 
Time is God. Do not waste time. Be happy. This is the sad- 
hana you should do. Never be narrow minded. Expansion of 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 392 


love is life; contraction of love is death. Expansion of love is 
possible only if you have love for God. God can confer any- 
thing if you have love. There is nothing that He cannot give. 
God is always ready to give Himself. 

“Ask and it shall be given. Knock and it shall be opened.” 
But man does not ask, does not knock. He asks only demons 
and knocks at the doors of hell. You should call out to God 
whole-heartedly. You should knock the doors of liberation. 
The moha (attachment) has to be reduced in order to attain 
moksha (liberation). To reduce attachment, renunciation is 
very important. 

In one of his songs, Bhadrachala Ramadas has compared 
human life to a lighted lamp and has declared that when the oil 
of life ebbs away none will follow the departed. Do not depend 
on this ephemeral world. Depend only on God. God is the ba- 
sis for everything. If you totally rely on God you can achieve 
anything. 

Since you rely on padartha (material world), you forget 
parartha (spiritual knowledge) and yathartha (the reality). All 
your material and secular knowledge are of no use in the field 
of spirituality. Give up materialistic thinking. Develop spiritual 
knowledge. 


Removal of immorality is the only way to immortality 


Pray to God, saying, “Tamasoma jyothir gamaya (Lead us 
from darkness to light.)” and “Mrithyorma amritham gamaya 
(Lead us from death to immortality.)” What is the way to Im- 
mortality? Removal of immorality is the only way to Immor- 
tality. Give up all bad qualities such as lust, anger, greed, etc., 
and install God in your heart. Do as I say. 


Some people do not listen to good words, 
Though they are said whole-heartedly. 
They readily pay heed to bad words. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 393 


Can such people ever know Me 
What is the use of all their education? 
[Telugu poem] 


Know thyself and you will know everything 


Ravana was a master of all sixty-four types of knowledge, 
but he could not receive God’s grace. Since he did not put his 
knowledge into practice, he suffered from ‘indigestion’. That 
resulted in the sickness of sensual desires. Rama also learnt all 
sixty-four types of knowledge, and He put them into practice. 
Ravana was interested only in aggrandizement, whereas Rama 
was interested in practice. 

Life without the knowledge of Self is useless, just like a 
tree without root, a tree without fruit, and a fruit without juice. 
If you do not know your true identity, what is the use of taking 
a human birth? Know thyself and you will know everything. 
This is the most sacred teaching of all the festivals. Think of 
God. Constant contemplation on the Divine will free you from 
all worries. 


19 October 1998 
Prasanthi Nilayam 


40 


Serve parents, serve God 


This sacred land of Bharat is the 
birthplace of great women like Savitri, 
Who could bring her husband back to life; 
Chandramathi, who demonstrated the power 
of Truth by extinguishing the forest fire; 
Sita, who demonstrated her chastity by 
coming out of blazing fire unscathed; and 
Damayanthi, who burnt a demon to ashes by 
her power of chastity and pristine purity. 
In Bharat, there have been numerous such women, 
who have been proverbial for their chastity. 
Bharat is the teacher of such virtues 
to the whole world. 
O foolish mind, why do you go seeking 
Brahman when He is right within you? 
Look within, and there you shall find Him. 
Don’t forget these profound words of Sai. 
[Telugu Poem] 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 395 


Embodiments of Love! Right from the olden days, Bharat 
has given spiritual knowledge to the other nations, thus ensur- 
ing peace and harmony for the entire world. It is not only the 
kings that protect the nation, but women of great chastity are 
also responsible. It is because of noble men and women that 
the country has been able to achieve peace and prosperity. All 
the prosperity and the good that we find in this land of Bharat 
is due to the strength of women of virtue. 


Rama’s divinity blossomed under 
Kausalya’s loving care; 

Because of the tender feelings and austerity of Sita, 
Lava and Kusha achieved name and fame; 

Fostered with the love of his mother Puthlibai, 
Gandhi became a Mahatma, 

The loving care of Jijibai made Sivaji a great warrior. 

[Telugu Poem] 


Sons become illustrious examples because of the goodness 
and strength of their mothers. Mother is the very foundation 
for the entire world. One calls one’s own country the mother- 
land, not fatherland. Even the language is called mother- 
tongue, not father tongue. 

This land is the birthplace of many noble sons, who got 
their goodness and strength from their mothers. In those days, 
mothers gave their sons good guidance by being ideal them- 
selves. 

The welfare of the son depends on the mother. It is because 
of the love of the mother that the son becomes great and emi- 
nent. So, the foremost duty of the son is to be grateful to his 
mother, respect her, and serve her. 

Divinity is immanent in every being. But who is responsi- 
ble for this divinity within? The mother who has borne you for 
nine months with many difficulties andd is even ready to sacri- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 396 


fice her life for your welfare. You owe your existence to your 
mother. 


Purity of heart is very essential for man 


Since time immemorial human being has been called Nada 
bindu kala swarupa. It is these three aspects that are responsi- 
ble for the existence of humanity. What is the meaning of 
nada? It is the primordial sound Aum, which emanates as a re- 
sult of the combination of prana (vital force) and vayu (air). 
The combination of body, mind, and intellect is called the 
bindu. Divinity that reflects in buddhi (intellect) is called kala. 
So, man is the embodiment of nada, bindu, and kala. 

The Principle of Atma transcends all these three aspects. 
That is why the sages, while offering prayers to God, used to 
say, “Nada bindu kalatheeta namo, namo (salutations to the 
One, who is beyond nada, bindu, and kala.)” These three as- 
pects pertain only to the nature. The potter makes pot by mix- 
ing water and clay. But that does not make him the creator. It 
is divinity latent in man that enables him to perform the task. 

Spiritual knowledge helps us to undertake good actions and 
cleanses the mind. But that is not enough. The heart also 
should be pure. In the absence of purity of heart, there can 
never be purity of the mind and intellect. 

We should not give scope to the creepers of bad qualities to 
entangle the heart. A creeper that goes around covering the tree 
ultimately smothers the tree itself. One should ensure that the 
creepers of lust, anger, greed, and infatuation do not get entan- 
gled to one’s own Self. 

It was lust that caused the downfall of Ravana, the one of 
great penance and the master of sixty-four types of knowledge. 
He not only ruined himself but his whole kingdom. Without 
purity of heart all spiritual practices are of no use. That is why 
Thiruthonda Alwar said, “Oh! Lord, I worship You not with 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 597 


flowers but with purity of heart.” So, purity of heart is very 
essential for man. 


Lack of sense control results in lack of respect 


Hiranyakasipu had total control over the five elements. 
Such an all-powerful one was ruined because he had the evil 
quality of anger. In spite of being a great warrior, Duryodhana, 
king of kings, was ruined because of greed. His entire clan was 
destroyed. It was moha (infatuation) of Dasaratha toward Kai- 
keyi that was responsible for Rama being sent to the forest. 

Kaikeyi’s love for Rama exceeded her love toward her own 
son, Bharata, but Manthara poisoned her mind. Consequently, 
she lost not only her husband but also the respect of her own 
son. Due to this delusion, she not only earned a bad name for 
herself but put the entire kingdom to shame. 

Today, no woman bears the name Kaikeyi, because she 
distanced herself from God. Similarly, no man bears the name 
Duryodhana, Ravana, or Hiranyakasipu because they lacked 
good qualities and developed hatred and enmity toward God. 

Hiranyakasipu was a great scientist. Ravana was a great 
engineer, and it was he who invented airplane. He had mas- 
tered the language of animals, birds, and insects. He had so 
much to his credit. But does anyone bear the name Ravana? 
No. 

People value purity of heart more than these achievements. 
It is the foremost duty of every individual to keep their senses 
under control. One can escape from the house on fire, but not 
from the senses, which are ignited by the fire of evil qualities. 

Intellect is of four types: (1) swartha buddhi, (2) swartha 
parartha buddhi, (3) parartha buddhi, and (4) niswartha bud- 
dhi. The one with swartha buddhi is always interested in his 
own welfare and fulfillment of his desires. The one with 
swartha parartha buddhi is interested equally in his own wel- 
fare and that of others. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 398 


The one with parartha buddhi does not desire anything for 
himself. Surrendering himself to God, he craves His love 
alone. He believes that God is the indweller of all beings and 
desires for the welfare of the entire world —Loka samastha 
sukhino bhavanthu. 

The one with niswartha buddhi has no sense of I and mine. 
The feeling of “I (body) is ego, and the feeling of “mine” is 
attachment. The root cause of all sorrow and suffering of man 
is this feeling of “I’ and “mine,” by giving up which man can 
purify his heart. Purity of heart is the greatest achievement of 
human endeavor. 


Divine origin of Bharat 


What is the difference between nara and Narayana? Nara 
is one who is endowed with the three aspects: nada, bindu, and 
kala. Narayana is the one who transcends all these three. The 
former corresponds to pravritti and the latter to nivritti. Nivritti 
is the state of desirelessness. One who treads along the path of 
Nivritti surrenders himself completely to God. Such a man is 
one who has absolutely no trace of selfishness. 

This sacred land of Bharat (India) is the birthplace of many 
such selfless souls. Though you call yourselves the children of 
Bharat, you tend to be selfish and full of desires. This is re- 
sponsible for leading you away from the culture of Bharat. The 
culture of Bharat is pure, unsullied, and selfless. Only when 
the young boys and girls recognise and follow this sacred cul- 
ture can this country prosper. 

A nation bereft of noble men and women can never pro- 
gress. The country needs virtuous men and women. That is 
why I have established these educational institutions. I willed 
that out of these institutions should emerge noble boys and 
girls. In a short time, all of you will realise and experience this 
happiness. Wait for the golden moment. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 399 


Discharge your duties sincerely. Do not forget your 
mother. In the world today, there may be a wicked son, but 
never a wicked mother. You owe your blood, food, and head to 
your mother. What is the gratitude you are offering to the 
mother for the sacrifice made by her? She is the one who has 
fostered and nourished you. So, never forget the love of the 
mother. First and foremost, love your mother, father, teacher, 
and God. The mother shows the father; the father shows the 
teacher; the teacher shows God. 

This day is being observed as Mothers Day, Ladies Day. 
From time immemorial, mother is considered synonymous 
with God. The Goddesses Durga, Lakshmi, and Saraswathi are 
worshipped as mothers. Saraswathi is the Goddess of Learning. 
Another name for Saraswathi is Bharati. Our country, Bharat, 
derived its name from Bharati. 

There is a misconception that Bharat refers to the name of 
Bharata, the son of King Dushyantha. In that case, what was 
the name of this land prior to Bharat? On inquiry, you will 
know that this name has originated from God. 


Purpose of Ladies’ Day 


Today, women are being looked down upon as mere work- 
ers in the kitchen. Women can study and undertake jobs, but 
they should not neglect their household duties. If both husband 
and wife go to office, who will look after the household re- 
sponsibilities? If women go to schools to teach others’ chil- 
dren, who will teach their own children? Mothers are responsi- 
ble for the well-being of their children. They also show the 
spiritual path to their children. So, never forget your mother. 

To set an ideal in this regard, I used to visit the samadhi of 
my parents on My birthday. To inculcate this good feeling in 
the hearts of people, even Sai Baba has undertaken this sacred 
activity. Every individual should adore, respect, worship and 
love their mother. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 400 


I have initiated this Ladies’ day in order to foster respect 
and love for the mother. Not only the 19th of November, but 
the 19th of every month is being observed as Ladies Day in 
some States. Whatever may be the circumstances, good or bad, 
do not forget your mother. 

Due to the effect of Kali Age, people consider their moth- 
ers as mere cooks in the kitchen. Not only that, they have been 
degraded to the level of servants. This is the misfortune that 
has befallen on man today. 


All have to ask for alms from God 


The beggar comes to the house and calls out, “Bhavathi 
Bhiksham Dehi (please give me alms.)” He cautions, “Oh! 
Master and the mistress of the house, in my previous birth I 
had not given alms to beggars as a result I am standing at your 
doorstep today begging for alms. Do not commit the same 
mistake. I am a beggar for three births. In my previous birth, I 
never doled out alms to beggars. In this birth, being myself de- 
pendent on others, I am unable to give anything in charity, and 
as a result I will again be a beggar in my next birth. Beware!” 

Whom is he asking for alms? He says, “Bhiksham Dehi.” 
Dehi refers to the indweller (God). 

This body, made of five elements, is bound to perish one 
day or the other. But the indweller has neither birth nor death. 
He has no attachment whatsoever. Truly speaking, the in- 
dweller is God Himself. So the beggar addresses the indweller, 
not the master or mistress of the house. 

He asks for alms from God. All have to ask for alms from 
God. God can give us all types of alsm —money, education, 
knowledge, intelligence, etc. 

Whatever you have acquired from God has to be shared 
with one and all. Only when your wealth is shared with others 
will it remain with you forever. Sacrifice is very essential for 
man. It is the stepping stone to immortality. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 401 


Mothers are prepared to give up their own life for the sake 
of their children. Mother is the very embodiment of sacrifice. 
That is why in this land of Bharat (India) mother is given such 
an exalted place. 

Lord Rama said that the mother and the motherland are 
greater than heaven itself. Such an ideal of Rama is forgotten 
today. Mere chanting of Rama’s name will not suffice; it is 
only when you follow His command that you can be called a 
true devotee. The Ladies Day serves as a reminder that one 
should revere and love one’s mother and never hurt her feel- 
ings. 


Love and worship your parents 


Sankaracharya posted two sentinels in his ashram, who 
went around repeating, “Thasmat jagratha jagratha (Beware.)” 
It so happened that one day Sankaracharya was thinking of his 
worldly achievements and wealth of his mutt. As he came to 
the doorstep, he heard the sentinels repeating, “Thasmat 
Jagratha jagratha,” which made him realise his folly. He de- 
clared, 


Janma dukham jara dukham 
Jaya dukham punah punah, 
Antya kale maha dukham, 
Thasmat jagratha, jagratha 


Beware! Birth, old age, and death 
Are filled with misery. 


In this context, the Vedas declare, “Arise and awake and 
stop not till the goal is reached.” 

Students! Boys and girls! Always remember your mother’s 
love. Do not hurt your mother in any way. You say Swami’s 
love is that of thousand mothers. When you are unable to com- 
prehend and experience the love of a single mother, how can 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 402 


you understand the love of thousand mothers? If you are un- 
able to please your mother, how can you make Swami, happy? 
Swami will be happy when you make your mother happy. 
Swami does not want anything. 

Many people wish Me happy birthday. You need not wish 
Me happy birthday since I am always happy. Give happiness to 
your parents, friends, and relatives. 


God is the embodiment of 
Supreme Bliss and Wisdom; beyond dualities; 
One without second; 
Eternal, pure; transcends the mind and 
the three attributes. 
[Sanskrit sloka] 


How can you wish God happiness? I often tell the students, 
“Happiness is union with God.” God is pleased only when par- 
ents are respected. I do not desire anything. My happiness lies 
in you being happy and you making your parents happy. Love 
and worship your parents. Your welfare lies in their happiness. 
God showers His grace on those who make their parents 
happy. The respect and love you receive from your children 
depends on the respect and love you show to your parents. 


Hurting others amounts to hurting God 


Have you ever visualised Viswa-virata Swaroopa (the 
cosmic form)? Earth, water, sky, etc., can be seen in it. The 
universe is made of five elements, and the same five elements 
are present in you. So, you are Viswa-virata Swaroopa. God is 
in you and in everybody. So hurting others amounts to hurting 
God. Do not criticize and find fault with others. Love all, Serve 
all. Respect, adore, and worship your parents. They constitute 
the real wealth of your life. The blessings of your parents will 
confer health and wealth on you. God comes to you on His 
own whenlove and serve your parents. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 403 


One can choose one’s wife but not one’s parents 


Pundarika used to visit the temple of Lord Panduranga 
every day. One day, he was engrossed in serving his parents 
and hence could not visit the temple. So, Lord Panduranga 
Himself came to Pundarika. At that time Pundarika was press- 
ing the feet of his parents. Since Pundarika was busy serving 
his parents, he requested Lord Panduranga to take His seat and 
wait. So saying, he passed a brick to the Lord, because there 
were no chairs and sofas in those days. 

After attending to his parents, Pundarika offered his due re- 
spects to Lord Panduranga. The Lord was immensely pleased 
with his devotion to his parents and blessed him profusely, 
saying “God comes to you on His own when your behavior is 
good. There is no service greater than service to parents. Con- 
sider service to parents as service to the Lord.” 

We need not go to God but should make God come to us. 
One can select one’s wife, but not one’s parents. Only God 
selects His parents. I wish that you obtain the blessing of your 
parents and set an ideal for the rest of the world: 

Today, I do not see parents being accorded the respect due 
to them. They are approached only in times of need and ne- 
glected later. There is a proverb in Telugu: the boat is set on 
fire once it serves its purpose of taking you across the river. 
Similarly, parents are sought after only in times of difficulties. 
Once you are highly placed in the society and accumulate 
wealth, parents are forgotten. 

Here is a small example. V. Ramakrishna was an I.C.S. of- 
ficer from Madras. His wife was Durgamba. They sent their 
son to America for higher studies. A month later when Dur- 
gamba contacted her son over phone and enquired after his 
welfare in Telugu, to which he replied that he had forgotten 
Telugu and could converse only in English. On hearing this, 
the mother was overjoyed and came to Swami to share the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 404 


news proudly. I replied that a person, who forgot his mother 
tongue in a month, was likely to forget his mother too. 

There are many such students in the world today. They 
forget their parents once they go abroad. 


Influence of western culture 


There was an orthodox brahmin who was hesitant to send 
his son abroad, fearing that he might lose his culture. On the 
insistence of his son, he reluctantly consented to send him 
abroad and exhorted him to chant the Gayathri Mantra thrice a 
day. He warned his son that he would forsake him if he failed 
to do so and extracted a promise from him. 

But the son failed to keep up his word. He did not chant the 
Gayathri Mantra even once. He was absorbed in the western 
culture. 

On many occasions, the father asked him to return home, 
but the son did not pay heed to his word. The father as a last 
resort sent a telegram that his mother had expired. Immediately 
the son rushed home and was received at the airport by the fa- 
ther, who told him that mother was brought back to life by the 
infinite grace of the Goddess. Then he took his son to the tem- 
ple of the Goddess enroute home to offer their obeisance and 
gratitude. As soon as they entered the sanctum sanctorum, the 
son greeted the Goddess, “Hello! How are you, good morn- 
ing!” On hearing this father became furious and asked him to 
get out. This is how many people change their life style once 
they go abroad. 

Our Jayamma (previous speaker) said that only Anantapur 
girls are great. What about our Prasanthi Nilayam boys? These 
boys are also good. She said that on many occasions the girls 
asked her to speak more and more about Swami and show 
them the way to please Swami. Even our boys here day in and 
day out are engaged in pleasing Swami and attending to His 
needs. Nobody is less or great; girls and boys are equally good. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 405 


Satisfaction of parents is what pleases Me 


It is not that you and I say, but the parents say. The parents 
feel within themselves that there is a transformation in their 
sons after joining Swami’s institution. Parents should be satis- 
fied, that is what I want. Only then do I feel satisfied. So, boys 
and girls should make their parents happy. 

You do not need to enquire what pleases Swami. Satisfac- 
tion of parents is what pleases Me. I do not require anything. 
When you make your parents happy I am also happy. I wish 
that you develop these qualities and set an ideal to the whole 
world. Do not try to satisfy Swami, make efforts to satisfy your 
parents. 

If your parents are not convinced about your views, try to 
explain the rationale behind them. Speaking harshly to them 
will not help them understand your views. Be calm and give 
them a patient ear. Only then will you be able to convince 
them. Try to inculcate such holy feelings; only then will your 
study in this institute fructify. 


19 November 1998 
Sai Kulwant Hall, Prasanthi Nilayam 


41 


Unity is our life breath 


Punar viththam punar mithram 
Punar bharya punar mahi, 
Ethath sarvam punar labhyam 
Na sareeram punah punah. 


Embodiments of Love! Wealth once lost can be regained by 
one way or the other. If a friend is lost, one can make many 
more through good feelings. If a wife is lost, one can marry 
again. If land is lost, it can be reacquired through some means. 
But once the body is lost. it can never be regained. 

“Sareeramadyam khalu dharma sadhanam _ (the body is 
gifted to man to undertake righteous actions.)” So, it has to be 
sanctified by performing sacred deeds. Health is very essential 
in order to do so. In fact, health is the very foundation on 
which human life rests. If health is lost, you have to suffer in 
many ways. There is no greater wealth than health. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 407 


The body is a combination of different limbs. So, only 
when all limbs are utilised for sacred purposes can one have 
pushti and santushti (good health and happiness). For a healthy 
mind, one should have a healthy body. The Atma sustains hu- 
man life on the basis of health of the body and the mind. A 
healthy human body is the very foundation for all virtuous and 
good actions. It is the primary requisite for the realisation of 
the four objectives of human life—dharma (righteousness), 
artha (wealth), kama (desire), and moksha (liberation). 


Excessive activity in any field is harmful to health 


We have to investigate why we lose our health. Excessive 
thinking, worrying, and studying is the main cause for man’s 
illness. Some students are absorbed in studies all the time, be- 
cause of which they lose their health. There a limit to every- 
thing. 

The Greek philosopher Aristotle conducted extensive re- 
search on the digestive system of man, and as a result of too 
much of thinking, his health deteriorated, and ultimately he 
died of digestive problems. Constant investigations into car- 
diac ailments made the heart specialist Dr. Herin a heart pa- 
tient and ultimately led to his death. Excessive activity in any 
field is harmful to health. Bear in mind the limitations of the 
body and act accordingly. 

The main cause for your illness is psychological. This is 
nothing but illusion and delusion. We start imagining that a 
disease that is present in another person may also be present in 
us. 80% of the diseases are psychological. If you check your 
pulse rate under anxiety, you will find it abnormal. 

Do not bestow undue attention on your health. Discharge 
your duties peacefully and happily, then everything will be all 
right. 

We are propagating principles of human values among the 
students. You should be aware of the capabilities of each stu- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 408 


dent. Weak students should be equipped adequately both 
physically and mentally before they are taught higher values. 
The truth that health is wealth should be imprinted in their 
hearts. 

The word vidya has its origin in the Sanskrit root vid, 
meaning wisdom, effulgence, and bliss. The equivalent term 
for vidya in English is education. Education is derived from 
‘educare’, meaning ‘to bring out’ or ‘to elicit’. It refers to 
manifesting that which is latent in man. 


Sacred qualities originate from the heart 


Educare comprises two aspects; one is related to the head 
and the other to the heart. Those faculties that enable man to 
carry on activities like reading, writing, undertaking a job, and 
earning a livelihood are related to the head. Sacred qualities 
like compassion, love, patience, truth, righteousness, and jus- 
tice originate from the heart. These are meant for life, not for a 
living. The former relates to pravritti, which is external and 
negative in nature; the latter to nivritti, which is internal and 
positive in nature. 

Compassion, love, truth, and patience cannot be acquired 
through the study of books. They are latent in our hearts. Edu- 
cation manifests these latent qualities in man. 

All that emanates from the head is transient. Good health is 
ensured by the proper utilisation of head and heart. There are 
many unseen qualities in man. But man values only that which 
he sees, hears, and experiences; no importance is given to that 
which is unseen. That which is unseen is actually responsible 
for experiencing the fruits of one’s action. 

All human qualities spring from the heart only; they cannot 
be obtained from teachers or texts. Today, we are human only 
in form, lacking human qualities. We should bring out our la- 
tent human qualities and start practising them. This will foster 
good health in us. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 409 


Teachers should practice before they preach. Be good, do 
good, see good, and tell good. Practice speaks louder than pre- 
cept. Modern students are highly intelligent. They observe the 
actions and behaviour of their teachers. They respect and fol- 
low their teacher only when they see harmony in their 
thoughts, words, and deeds. 

Earlier, teachers were called acharyas, meaning those who 
practice what they preach. Today, the term acharya has lost its 
significance since the teachers teach not from practical experi- 
ence but from bookish knowledge. That is why the desired re- 
sults are not realised. 


Art should come from the heart 


Everything in God’s creation follows certain rules and 
regulations. The rising and setting of the sun is regulated by 
the divine command. But man today is not following the dic- 
tates of God, though he is endowed with supreme intelligence. 
Today man is acquiring knowledge, which is information- 
oriented and not transformation-oriented. This information- 
oriented knowledge makes man a machine, a computer, 
whereas transformation-oriented knowledge makes man a 
composer. The transformation-oriented knowledge confers 
human values. 

Today, everyone is crazy after computers. What is the 
benefit accruing from it? The human brain is being underutil- 
ised. Today, people depend on calculators for simple arithme- 
tic. One should make use of the original computer, the brain, 
which was gifted by God. We are giving up the original for the 
artificial. Art is outside; heart is inside. People follow the art, 
not the heart. Art should come from the heart. 

A lot needs to be modified in the present educational sys- 
tem. Today, I do not find men taking an active part in the bal 
vikas movement. The number of certificates awarded to the 
lady teachers today bear ample testimony to this fact. The bal 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 410 


vikas movement has gained momentum because of the active 
participation of ladies. Men should take a cue from the ladies 
and play an active role in bal vikas. 

Some men excuse themselves from bal vikas activities in 
the name of office work and other responsibilities. But they 
have time for watching television, playing cards, reading 
newspapers, and attending clubs. Can they not utilise this time 
in bal vikas as the ladies do? The country will prosper on the 
day when men cultivate the qualities of sincerity and devotion 
inherent in ladies. 


Women teachers treat children with motherly love 


Take Prashanthi Nilayam as an example. There is a Pri- 
mary School, a Higher Secondary School,and an Institute here. 
There is an ocean of difference in the quality of Primary 
School students on the one hand and those of the Higher Sec- 
ondary School and Institute on the other. The reason is that all 
teachers in the Primary School are ladies, who treat the chil- 
dren with motherly love and affection. On the contrary, men 
teach like fathers with all authority and power. 

Education should be imparted with all love and concern for 
the children, which unfortunately is lacking in men of today. A 
lady teacher, if she comes to know that her student is sick, will 
visit him at home to enquire about his well-being. This type of 
love and concern for the children should develop more and 
more among men. 

Men in positions should discharge their duties commensu- 
rate with the salaries received. Women have been setting an 
example in this regard. There is a telephone factory in Banga- 
lore in which only women workers are employed. In reply to 
the question why only women are employed in the factory, the 
Chairman clarified that their output was much higher than that 
of men. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 411 


Ladies are more determined, dedicated, and devoted to 
their work as compared to men. Here is another example. To- 
day you find both men and women driving cars. But more ac- 
cidents occur when men are behind the wheel. This is due to 
the lack of concentration in men. 


The determination shown by a Mahila volunteer 


In countries like Malaysia, Singapore, Japan, Germany, 
etc., women are practising human values more than men. They 
are following Swami’s command under all circumstances. 

Here is a small example. It is not for any glorification that I 
am relating this. Last week, the mother of a Mahila volunteer 
expired suddenly. She spent that night in the hospital and re- 
ported for duty as usual the next morning. I asked her how she 
could attend to her duty immediately after the demise of her 
mother. She replied, “Swami, You have said that both birth 
and death are, but, natural. Both are like twin birds that move 
together. Anyone who is born is bound to die. Whatever had to 
happen has happened. But I must discharge my duty. This is 
duty towards God. Everything else is ephemeral and transient, 
only God’s work is permanent. So, I have come here to do that 
work.” 

She is a resident here in the mandir and has been serving 
for long. Since then she has not taken a single day’s leave The 
untimely death of her mother did not deter her from discharg- 
ing her duties sincerely. She withstood all this by diverting her 
mind to God. Women have that sort of determination. 

She is none other than Asha, seated beside Mrs.Shourie. 
Her husband, Shiv Pandit, is a lecturer in the Institute. 

There are crores and crores of such sincere workers in this 
world. They are striving not for name and fame but for 
Swami’s grace. This shows that they have received Swami’s 
teachings in their proper spirit. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 412 


Even if a man practices one or two of these teachings, he 
can achieve a lot. Lord Krishna declared in the Bhagavad Gita, 
“There is nothing in this world that I want. Yet, I am con- 
stantly engaged in activity for the welfare of humanity.” When 
God Himself is engaged in selfless activity, why not man? 
Success prevails where God and His ardent devotee come to- 
gether. So, we should determine to follow the path shown by 
God. 


Only sacrifice confers immortality 


Wealth and property are passing clouds. “Money comes 
and goes, but morality comes and grows.” Nothing is great in 
earning money. What happened to all the great kings of yore, 
who ruled over vast kingdoms? Could they take even a pie 
with them when they left this world? No! So, utilise the money 
earned for the welfare of humanity. Do not be proud of your 
wealth. 

Greatness lies in sacrifice alone. One who sacrifices is a 
true yogi. One who is immersed in worldly pleasures is a rogi 
(diseased one). It is only sacrifice that confers immortality. 

Serve in your respective villages. Service does not mean 
sweeping the roads, cleaning the temple, and feeding the poor. 
Discharging one’s duty sincerely is true service. Work in ac- 
cordance with the salary you draw. That is service to the na- 
tion. Ensure that the government is not put to loss under any 
circumstances. We are compelling the government to borrow, 
because we are not contributing our share in sufficient meas- 
ure. All those who are members of the Sai Organisation should 
work hard and wholeheartedly. 

Embodiments of Love! Develop love, take care of your 
health, and serve the society. Then God will confer on you the 
necessary strength and happiness. When God can make the 
dumb speak and the lame ascend the mountain, why will He 
forsake those who are sincere and hardworking? 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 413 


Develop faith in God. Mere chanting of the divine name 
will not confer peace of mind. Only selfless service coupled 
with total faith in God can do that. 


Differences should not divide us 


Treat everyone as your brother and sister. There may be 
difference of opinion at times but that should not lead to hatred 
and enmity. 

The Pandavas are an outstanding example of this. When 
the Pandavas were in exile, Krishna visited them. On finding 
only Dharmaraja, Krishna enquired about the whereabouts of 
the other brothers. Dharmaraja replied that four of them had 
gone to fetch food and the remaining hundred were in 
Hastinapur. Krishna chided Dharmaraja for considering the 
Kauravas also as his brothers. 

To this, Dharmaraja replied, “Krishna, don’t you know 
this? When there is an internal conflict among ourselves we are 
five and they are a hundred in number. But when there is an 
external threat, we all unite and are 105 in number.” 

Differences should not divide us. Members of the Sai Or- 
ganisation should foster such unity. Let there not be any con- 
flicts. Live like children of the same family. Get a good name, 
so that there is no other organisation comparable to the Sai Or- 
ganisation in the world. Develop love and work unitedly. 

Only when five fingers of the hand come together can any 
task be accomplished. One may be the President of the Organi- 
sation. That does not mean that one can act according to one’s 
whims and fancies. I am aware of the fact that there are no 
such people in Sai Organisation. Yet, I am cautioning you. 

Once there was a quarrel amongst the five fingers of the 
hand. Each one claimed that it was the greatest and the most 
important one. The little finger felt that it was the chief of all, 
since it always took the lead in punishing the wicked. The ring 
finger claimed that it was the king of all because it bore the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 414 


precious gems. The middle finger felt that it was the one of 
authority because it had two fingers on either side as body- 
guards. The forefinger claimed that it was the ultimate author- 
ity because it evaluated who was good and who was bad. And 
in the end, the thumb said that it was the greatest because other 
fingers were ineffective in its absence. Each finger is unique in 
its own way, but it is only when all are united that success can 
be achieved. 


Everyone is a member of the universal family 


Similarly, all are great, be it the president, secretary, co- 
ordinator, or a member. But, to make the work successful, all 
should unite. All the wings of the Organisation —samithi, seva 
dal, bal vikas, etc.— should work in harmony. Consider differ- 
ent wings as the fingers of the same hand and work unitedly. 
So, unity is very essential. You feel the stress and strain when 
you walk or work alone; not so when you are in a group. 


Let us all grow together, enjoy together, 
Let us perform heroic deeds by working together, 
Let us live without any conflict. 

[Telugu Poem] 


The Vedas echo the same sentiments in the following 
verse: 


Saha navavathu, saha nau bhunakthu, 
Saha veeryam karavavahai, 

Tejaswi navadheethamasthu, 

Ma vidvisavahai. 


This togetherness made India a land of sacrifice, a land of 
spirituality and a land of purity. 

Just as each limb is as important as any other in the body, 
so also is each individual in the society. All limbs have to work 
in unison for the effective functioning of the body. Unity is 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 415 


most essential for man. Unity leads to purity, which in turn 
leads to divinity. Cultivate the feeling of brotherhood of man 
and fatherhood of God. People may come from varied cultures, 
languages and countries, but all are the children of God. 

Since you make distinctions based on country, culture and 
language, you are unable to comprehend divinity. Everyone is 
a member of the universal family. Teachers must understand 
this truth and teach their students. 

Lack of unity can lead a country, community, or society to 
fragmentation. So, we should first and foremost achieve unity. 
Members of Sai Organisations should consider unity as their 
very life breath. They should not differentiate between people 
on the basis of caste, creed and nationality. Follow the example 
of Sai! When Sai Himself treats everyone equally, why not 
you? Never give scope for any differences. True independence 
lies in fostering unity. Therefore, to develop sacred divine hu- 
man values, you should have unity first. 

Keep in view the prestige and honour of Sathya Sai Or- 
ganisations. Whatever you do, be it good or bad, will reflect on 
Sathya Sai. To keep up the dignity of Sathya Sai, act in a truth- 
ful way. There should not be any differences or insights among 
the members of the Organisation. Resolve all conflicts through 
love and understanding. Love is God; live in love. 


Duty is God; work is worship 


Understand this point clearly. People engaged in various 
activities take at least a day off in a week. Why? For effective 
functioning of man and machine, rest is essential at regular in- 
tervals. It is good to take rest. Does Sai take any day off? No! 
Every day, every minute, every moment, I discharge my du- 
ties. Discharging one’s duty is true yoga. So, do your duty. 
Duty is God; work is worship. 

When elders set an ideal, children will follow their foot- 
steps. Elders should lead from the front. All elders should re- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 416 


solve to practice and propagate the human values. Chairmen, 
secretaries, and coordinators should plunge into action. Only 
then will there be transformation; otherwise, the whole life will 
be spent in giving and receiving information. 

Information relates to quantity; whereas, transformation 
relates to quality. Quality is essential, not quantity. Leaders 
should introspect and find out what transformation is effected 
in the individuals rather than keeping track of the number of 
certificates they have been awarded. 

There is a lot of work going on abroad. Students consider 
human values as their very life breath. Though reluctant in the 
beginning, parents are sending their children to the bal vikas 
classes after observing a remarkable change in them. Human 
values will spread on the basis of interest evinced by the teach- 
ers. Everyone should work with sincerity, honesty, devotion, 
and discipline. 

Embodiments of Love! In order to realise the goals you 
have set for yourself, work unitedly. Dr. Goldstein and Dr. Jum 
Sai spoke very lovingly. They want many more bal vikas cen- 
tres to be started and new institutions founded right from pri- 
mary school to college level. Very good. Peace will reign su- 
preme only when such noble things take place in this world. 


Seva is for the benefit of one’s own self 


If you all stand united, these things can be achieved in a 
moment. I am always in you, with you, around you, above you, 
and below you. I am not confined to Prashanthi Nilayam and 
India alone. I am there wherever you are. Your heart is my 
temple. 

There will be no scarcity whatsoever. You will never fail in 
your endeavours. Work with total faith. Have total love. You 
are bound to achieve success. The whole world itself will be 
transformed into a Sathya Sai Organisation and Sathya Sai will 
be installed in the hearts of one and all. Realise that seva 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 417 


(selfless service) is for the benefit of one’s own self and not for 
others. You need not wait for My approval of your projects. I 
bless all your projects and plans. 

Embodiments of Love! Just as all of you joined together in 
perfect harmony and unison in following My bhajan, have the 
same principle of unity in undertaking service activities. You 
should take part not only in community singing but also in 
community work. Only then you will be blissful. I wish that 
you have this kind of harmony, integration, and unity in sing- 
ing bhajans and rendering service to society and derive the joy 
therefrom. 


20 November 1998 
First Overseas Convention of Chairs of Sai Centres 
Sai Kulwant Hall, Prasanthi Nilayam 


42 


Fuse spirituality with education 


Bharat has men who are capable of educating 

Even the ancient sages about the essence of scriptures; 

Men who sacrificed their lives for the uplift of society; 

Men who have immense administrative capabilities. 

Bharat has many such eminent personalities. 

Alas! Of what use are such men in Bharat 

If they have no awareness of the wail of the oppressed? 

When will they respond to the heart-rending cries of the poor? 
[Telugu Poem] 


Students! Arise, awake and stop not till the goal is reached. 
The need of the hour is men who set an ideal by their valor and 
courage in the battle of life, and not men who pursue physical, 
ephemeral, fleeting pleasures. 

Students! Investigate the concept of ideal education propa- 
gated by the ancient sages. They enthroned righteousness and 
welcomed truth. They enshrined valor and courage. You 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 419 


should emulate such people, who strove for the glow of Indian 
culture. In fact you are the true inheritors of the legacy of In- 
dian culture. You should resolve to uphold dharma and work 
for the welfare of the country. 


Absence of human values leads to decline in spirituality 


Science and technology has improved by leaps and bounds 
over the past 200 years, yet no sanctity has been attached to it. 
This has stimulated development in human civilization, but not 
within man. The absence of human values will lead to a de- 
cline in spirituality. Develop the strong faith that the body has 
been gifted to uphold human values. 

Since ancient times, Bharatiyas (Indians) stood for peace, 
forbearance, and forgiveness. A study of the history of Bharat 
will reveal the fact that many invaded Bharat and plundered its 
wealth, but never has Bharat invaded any foreign land on its 
own. Bharatiyas have considered divinity and purity as their 
two eyes. In such a sacred land, justice and righteousness have 
been consigned to flames, resulting in trials and tribulations, 
turmoil and unrest on a large scale. 

Education does not mean mere bookish knowledge. Ac- 
quired knowledge should be put into practice and shared with 
the rest of the community. Does the ability to read and write 
make one educated? Does securing college degrees make one 
educated? If education is for a living, are not birds and beasts 
living? There are millions of educated men and women all over 
the world, but what is the benefit accruing to their respective 
nations? None. They are utilizing their education for selfish- 
ness and self-interest alone. 

Embodiments of Love! Boys and girls! Eschew selfishness 
and self-interest and resolve to serve society. 


The eternal and long lasting values 
have disappeared into thin air. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 420 


Good nature in men and women is on the decline. 
Ancient Aryan wisdom is frittered away 
Western education is on the rise. 

[Telugu poem] 


Bharatiya education makes one ideal and self-reliant. It in- 
culcates the sense of sacrifice in man. Having called your- 
selves children of Bharat, you should keep in mind the welfare 
of Bharat Matha. Modern education enhances the intelligence, 
but not broadmindedness. It makes the students stonehearted. 
True education is one that instills compassion in you. Patriot- 
ism coupled with sacrifice; devotion coupled with love should 
become a part and parcel of your life. Education confers hu- 
mility. Humility confers deservedness; deservedness secures 
for you wealth as well as divinity and devotion to God. 


In this sacred land of Bharat, 

Forbearance is our best wealth; 

Of all forms of rituals, the highest is 

The observance of truth and morality; 

Of sweetness of disposition, 

The greatest is maternal love. 

Jettisoning the national ideal 

That honor is greater than life itself, 

What a pity people have fallen 

a prey to exotic practices 

What can I say about the plight of Bharat! 

Like the elephant unaware of its strength, 

Alas! Bharatiyas have become docile today. 
[Telugu Poem] 


Since ancient times, Bharat has stood as an ideal for the 
rest of the world. Unfortunately, we witness a different sce- 
nario today. We find educational institutions proliferating in 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 421 


every street, in every village. What is the gain therefrom? Ab- 
solutely nil. 


Humility, the hallmark of a true student, is not noticed. 
Harm is done to those that help, 
A sense of gratitude is lacking. 
Teachers are made a laughing stock. 
This is the progress of modern education. 
[Telugu Poem] 


To realize the purpose of education, serve society. Cleanse 
the country of all evils. True education is that which makes one 
a complete man. Only when one gets transformed into a com- 
plete human being is the purpose of education fulfilled. 


Education is meant to broaden the mind 


Students! Resolve to make the best use of the education 
that you have received. Respect and revere elders and set an 
ideal to humanity. Let your conduct befit the degrees you have 
acquired. Nothing great in obtaining good marks, see that you 
do not invite bad remarks. In the modern system of education, 
a student is declared pass if he secures just 35% of marks. 
What about the balance 65%? If a person completes only 35 
out of 100 tasks assigned to him, can you call him a successful 
one? One should secure 100% marks. That is true education. 

Attaining high marks is not the aim of education. Educa- 
tion is meant to broaden the mind. Education and discrimina- 
tion should go hand in hand. The prosperity of the nation de- 
pends on the progress you make in the field of education. 


The future of the nation rests on the students. 

Moral and ethical values are confined only to books. 
Heart has become a dwelling place for evil qualities. 
Actions have become completely self-centred. 

This is the progress of modern education. [Telugu Poem] 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 422 


Education acquired should be translated into action. When 
you put your knowledge into practice, only then do you be- 
come an ideal person. 

Students! As I have told you repeatedly, knowledge can be 
classified into five categories: bookish knowledge, superficial 
knowledge, general knowledge, discrimination knowledge, and 
practical knowledge. General knowledge and common sense 
are very much essential. 

You should set an ideal by exercising practical knowledge 
and following the four Fs. The first F is Follow the Master. 
Who is your master? Conscience is your master. So, follow 
your conscience. The second F is Face the devil. The third F is 
Fight to the end. The fourth F is Finish the game. Play the 
game of life in the true spirit of sportsmanship. 

Students lack self-confidence. Confidence in the Self is 
very essential. Lack of confidence in Self will lead to depres- 
sion. Today, 90% of the people are afflicted with depression. 
Depression will lead to weakness of mind. “Na ayamatma 
balahinena labhyah (a weak-minded one cannot realise the 
Atma.)” If you have confidence in the Self, you will never be 
weak-minded. 


Render service to others till your last breath 


Bharat has stocked plenty of wealth for you. What is this 
wealth? It is the spirit of sacrifice, which can be acquired 
through service to society. Do not waste time. “Karmanuban- 
deeni manushyaloke (human society is bound by action.)” 
“Sareeramadyam khalu dharma sadhanam (body is gifted in 
order to undertake righteous actions, not to eat, drink, and 
make merry.)” Render service to others till your last breath. 

The essence of 18 Puranas can be summed up in one 
phrase: “Paropakarah punyaya papaya arapeedanam.” Help 
ever; hurt never. Set an ideal that is helpful and delightful to 
one and all. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 423 


Education is for life and not for a living 


Students! “Janthoonam narajanma durlabham (human 
birth is the rarest of all.)” Human life should be one of charac- 
ter, good actions, and good qualities. It should be dedicated to 
the service of society, not for amassing wealth. Education is 
for life and not for a living. One need not strive for money. If 
education is properly utilised, money will come on its own. 
Today, educational institutions have become business centers. 


Money has become our God; 

Pride has become our creed; 

Selfishness sits supreme in the minds of men; 

Egotism has become our fashion; 

Greed has become our beauty; 

Dharma has come to naught; 

Compassion has sunk low; 

Morality forever is lost; 

Hypocrisy has become the light of our life; 

Love and kindness lie sick and diseased; 

Modern education has blinded men with lust; 

Life has become a burden; 

Minds have gone astray; 

Delay no more, for delay is disastrous; 

Fuse morality with education in sweet harmony; 

Live up to the reputation as children of Bharat. 
[Telugu Poem] 


Moral values should be the underlying current in each and 
every action of man. Only when you have moral and ethical 
values can you deserve to be called children of Bharat. 

Embodiments of Love! Loka samastha sukhino bhavanthu 
(Let the whole world be happy) has been the motto of Bharat 
since ancient times. Resolve to revive and rejuvenate the pris- 
tine glory of Bharat. Propagate these noble ideals in every vil- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 424 


lage, every street, and every house. Observe unity in every ac- 
tivity of yours. Believe in the dictum, “Brotherhood of man 
and Fatherhood of God”. 

Do not feel jealous of anyone. Jealousy is an incurable dis- 
ease. Praise and censure are inevitable for man. Only the tree 
that bears fruit is stoned. Likewise, only the good face prob- 
lems. Do not attach importance to these trials and tribulations. 

A Tree welcomes stoning because it is aware of the fact 
that people have recognised its value. Similarly, man should 
not feel dejected when he is censured. Treat dualities like pain 
and pleasure with equal-mindedness. Develop this broad- 
mindedness. Divinity blossoms in those with such a sacred at- 
titude. 

All are the embodiments of God. Krishna declared, 
“Mamaivamso jivaloke jivabhuta Sanathanah (All are sparks 
of My divinity.) Do not consider yourselves as mere mortals. 
Have firm faith that you are divine. Only then will you be able 
to work for the emancipation of this country, and it will be re- 
stored to the status of teacher to the rest of the world. 


Education is the very form of God 


The Vice Chancellor quoted from the Taittiriya Upanishad, 
“Matrudevo bhava, Pitrudevo bhava, Acharyadevo bhava, 
Atithidevo bhava (revere your mother, father, preceptor, and 
guest as God.)” This was the teaching given to the students at 
the time of leaving the portals of Gurukul in ancient times. 
This act of benediction is termed Convocation today. 

Education is the very form of God. The word “education” 
originated from the root word “educare”, meaning “to bring 
out” or “to elicit”. Educare has two aspects: that which relates 
to the head and that which relates to the heart. That which 
emerges from the head is pravritti (external); that from the 
heart is nivritti (internal). 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 425 


Unless the head is empty (free from evil) it cannot be 
stuffed with good. Modern education relates to the head, but 
true education relates to the heart. Sacred qualities like com- 
passion, truth, forbearance, and love originate from the heart. 

Here is a small example. Physical features like height, 
weight, and complexion can be seen by the naked eye, whereas 
there are innumerable qualities like compassion, truth, and love 
that are unseen. Merely acquainting oneself with the physical 
features of an individual does not make one aware of one’s 
true personality. 


Essence of Bharatiya vidya 


Hiranyakasipu’s scientific achievements far exceeded those 
of the modern scientists. He could even reach the Pole star, 
whereas the modern scientists have traveled only up to moon. 
Prahlada cautioned his father Hiranyakasipu, “Oh! Father, you 
have conquered all the worlds but not your senses. The same 
sentiment was expressed by the Prime Minister of England, 
Churchill, “Man has conquered all, but he has not conquered 
himself.” On being questioned by a westerner as to why he was 
in a pensive mood, Gandhi replied that he was ruminating over 
the modern educational system, which was making him stone- 
headed. 

Education should fill one’s heart with love and compas- 
sion. Two parts of hydrogen and one part of oxygen add up to 
make water. Greatness lies in sharing water equally, not in 
making it. Everyone has an equal right to water. Today, every- 
one is fighting for rights, but what about responsibility? 

Students! You do not need to fight for rights. Discharge 
your responsibilities, and rights will follow. Do your duty. 
Duty is God; work is worship. 

What is your right? To make everybody happy is your 
right. Serve everybody and make everyone happy without ex- 
pecting anything in return. Service is God. The best way to 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 426 


love God is to love all and serve all. Speak softly and sweetly. 
You cannot always oblige, but you can speak always oblig- 
ingly. That is the essence of Bharatiya vidya. 

Education does not mean, “Twinkle, twinkle little star, how 
I wonder what you are.” All this is artificial education. True 
Bharatiya vidya is one, that fosters spirituality and human val- 
ues. 


Our institute is based on sacrifice 


Students! Propagate the ideals of true education in the four 
corners of the world. Sacrifice everything for the sake of truth, 
and tread along this sacred path. Truth is God; Love is God; 
Live in Love; Live in Truth. Imbibe these principles. Once you 
are along the path of love and truth, you will gain all wealth 
and wisdom. Be steady, do not waver. 

Students of our institutions live up to these ideals and bring 
a good name to the institute. There is no institution comparable 
to our institution in this country. Business has taken over edu- 
cation right from K.G. to P.G. in other institutions. But our in- 
stitute is based on sacrifice. Foster this sacred quality of sacri- 
fice. Offer education to your fellow beings free of cost. 

The Vedas declare, “Na karmana, na prajaya, danena 
tyagenaike amrutatwa manasuh (Immortality can be attained 
only through sacrifice and not through wealth, progeny, or ac- 
tion.) Be prepared to sacrifice, True yoga lies in sacrifice. 

First and foremost, make your parents happy. Make every- 
body happy and be an ideal. The Vedas declare, 


Sahanavavathu, sahana bhunakthu, 
Sahaveeryam Karavavahai 
Tejaswi navadheethamasthu 

Maa Vidhvisaavahai. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 427 


May the Lord protect and nourish us! 
May we grow in intelligence and valour working together! 
May we live in friendship without any conflict! 


I wish that you practice and propagate these sacred ideals. 


Blessing you, I bring this discourse to a close. 


22 November 1998 
Sai Kulwant Hall, Prasanthi Nilayam 


43 


Fill your heart with noble feelings 


This Motherland of ours gave to the world 

Noble souls renowned in all the continents. 

It is the land that ousted the 

Foreign rulers and achieved freedom. 

This Bharat is reputed for its scholarship. 

It is the sacred land that stood forth 

As the exemplar in the realms of music, 

literature and sacred lore; 

Born in the land of Bharat, 

noted for its fine arts and natural beauty, 

Oh devotees! It is your bounden duty to foster 

The glory and prosperity of the Motherland. 
[Telugu poem] 


Divinity is more resplendent than the sun, 
Purer than the purest snow, 
Subtler than the sky and space, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 429 


And is immanent in all living beings. 
Divinity pervades the microcosm and the macrocosm. 
God is unattached, though He is present in all. 
You are in Brahmam and Brahmam is in you. 
In fact you and Brahmam are one. 
What else is to be conveyed? 
[Telugu Poem] 


Embodiments of Love! Bharat is the birthplace of spiritu- 
ality, righteousness, charity, nonviolence, and peace. Adher- 
ence to these qualities as observed in Bharat is not found else- 
where. It is the birthplace of saptha rishis (seven sages) and 
the first poet, Valmiki. This is the sacred land ruled by the very 
embodiment of dharma, Rama. This is the land where the Song 
Celestial, the Gita, was sung by Krishna. It is the land where 
the oneness of the individual soul and the Cosmic Soul was 
proclaimed. 

There is no other land like Bharat, the land of sacredness, 
righteousness and peace. Truth permeates the atmosphere of 
Bharat. Compassion pervades the dust of Bharat. Love fills the 
Ganges of Bharat. Forbearance dwells in the heart of man in 
this land. Such noble, divine, unique qualities are manifest in 
Bharat alone. 


Divine magnetic power 


God is all-powerful and all pervasive. “Sarvam khalvidam 
Brahma (Verily all is Brahman.) An enquiry into science and 
spirituality will reveal that both affirm the same Truth. The 
existence of God is visualised by science in the form of elec- 
tric, magnetic, laser, radio, heat, and light waves, which are all- 
pervasive. This is the direct evidence for the existence of God. 
Divinity is present in the food you eat, the water you drink, and 
the air you breathe. There is no place in this world devoid of 
magnetism. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 430 


What is a magnet? It is not merely the one that attracts iron 
filings; everything in this world is suffused with magnetism. 
Mother is a magnet for the child and vice-versa, similarly hus- 
band and wife are attracted to each other. Grass is the magnet 
for the cow. Flower is the magnet for the honeybee. When we 
investigate on these lines, it is evident that everything is gov- 
erned by the principle of magnetism. 

Vedanta declared, “Ramayathi ithi Raamah (that which at- 
tracts is the Principle of Rama.)” The magnetic power acts as 
the link between that which is apparent and that which is non- 
apparent. The philosophers term it divine magnetic power, 
whereas the scientists term it bio-cosmic or super power. 
Therefore, scientists as well as Vedantins experience the same 
divine power in varied names and forms. 


Experiencing omnipresent divinity 


In this fleeting world, there are many mysterious powers 
unknown to man. These are referred to as transcendental and 
hidden powers; not all can understand them. Every creature is 
endowed with divine power. That is why I always address you 
as Divyaatma Swarupulara (Embodiments of divine Atma). 

Doctors are unable to comprehend the secrets and myster- 
ies of the human body. Take for example, the tongue. There 
are 40,000 taste buds in the tongue. There are 25,000 buds that 
generate heat in the tongue. The eye, which is hardly an inch in 
size, can cognise 13 crore types of light rays. There are mil- 
lions and millions of cells in your body, and each cell id divine 
and contains your complete form. Is it not awe-inspiring? 
Whose creation is this? This is the transcendental power of Di- 
vinity. 

It is foolish to consider Divinity to be non-existent. Those 
who are not able to understand this transcendental power deny 
the very existence of God. Do not pretend to know what you 
do not know in reality. No one has any right to deny the exis- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 431 


tence of God. “Munde munde mathir bhinnah (Thoughts vary 
from head to head.)” Each has their own faith. 


“No” is the reply for those that say “no”. 
“Yes” is the reply for those who say “yes”. 
“No” and “yes” pertain to you. 
But for Sai, it is always “yes, yes, yes”. 
[Telugu Poem] 


People tend to deny the existence of all that is formless. 
The fact that radio waves are invisible does not mean that they 
are non-existent. The program that is being broadcast in the 
Delhi Radio station can be heard anywhere if the radio is tuned 
to that frequency. 

The human body can be compared to a radio. It has to be 
tuned to the formless God in order to experience Him. The 
human body is a computer, which has so many hidden secrets. 
The mind is like a television set. Many names and forms are 
displayed in it. Body is a generator. The sum and substance of 
all this is that all powers are latent in man. 

Einstein showed that matter could be converted into energy 
and energy into matter. Energy is all encompassing. Newton 
said that energy could be neither created nor destroyed. How- 
ever, energy could be converted from one form to another. 
Philosophers explained this in varied ways. 


God has neither birth nor death. 
He has neither beginning nor end. 
He is present everywhere. 
He is the eternal witness. 
[Telugu Poem] 


Modern scientists are not able to comprehend this truth. 
What they have known and understood is just a fraction of to- 
tality. What is awareness? It is total understanding. Total un- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 432 


derstanding denotes knowing and experiencing the omnipres- 
ence of Divinity. 

Minister Sri Vajpayee, who spoke earlier, has made men- 
tion of the efforts being made by the people to attain moksha 
(liberation). What is the meaning of moksha? moha kshayam is 
moksham (Absolute detachment is liberation). What does this 
mean? 

Air mixes with air, fire mixes with fire, water mixes with 
water easily; similarly, God is the very form of Light. Become 
Light yourself. You will become one with the cosmic light. 
God is formless. In order to merge in the formless God, you 
have to give up identification with the body. Concentrate on 
the principle of Atma. When you are always attached to body, 
how can you realise the Atma, the Cosmic Principle? Concen- 
trate on the Atma. Only then will your conscience merge with 
the cosmic consciousness. This unification is called Sayujya 
(mergence with the Divine). 


Only ONE is the hero, and that is Divinity 


“Ekatma Sarvabhoothantaratma (The same Atma dwells in 
all beings.)” There is only One, but it has been attributed by 
different names and forms. Only One exists. Zero gains value 
when one precedes it. World, life, sun, moon, sky, and every- 
thing else is zero. Only ONE is the hero, and that is Divinity. 
Man, who is inherently Divine, becomes zero if he forgets 
God. 

Embodiments of Love! God is not separate from you. You 
are God. Enquire and understand this truth. If the whole life is 
spent in research and experiments, when are you going to 
practice? Individuals may differ in names, forms, and attitudes, 
but the Atma remains unchanged. Water is referred to by dif- 
ferent names in different languages. It is called neeru in 
Telugu, pani in Hindi, thanni in Tamil, and vari in Sanskrit. 
Names vary, but water remains unchanged. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 433 


Similarly, God has different names and forms, but the Ar- 
mic principle remains the same. This Atma is common in one 
and all, and it is termed conscience, which originated from 
consciousness. Be it theist, atheist, theist-atheist, or atheist- 
theist, all have to admit this fact. Be it a bhogi (one of worldly 
pleasures), rogi (one of disease), yogi (one with equal- 
mindedness), viragi (one of detachment), or anuragi (one of 
attachment), the atmic principle is the same in all. 

The body can be compared to a color balloon. Balloons dif- 
fer in size and color, but the air within them is one and the 
same. The same air is present inside as well as outside the 
balloon. The air within the balloon can be compared to con- 
science, and the all-pervasive air to consciousness. When more 
and more air is blown into the balloon, ultimately the balloon 
bursts and the air within (conscience) merges with the air out- 
side (consciousness). 

Similarly, expand your love so that the balloon of your 
body attachment bursts and the conscience within merges with 
the consciousness outside. The difference between conscience 
and consciousness is only in quantity, not in quality. 


Attraction of love is Divinity 


The power of attraction is divinity. A small example: 
Thousands have gathered here today. Who invited you? Has 
anybody sent invitations to you? No invitations have been sent. 
Then how have you come here? Your love for Swami is the 
main cause. Nobody has brought you here by force. You all 
know this. 

People are brought in lorries for political meetings. In spite 
of repeatedly requesting you not to come, you still come here. 
Attraction of love is Divinity. This is the divine magnet. 

Here is a similar illustration from the Ramayana. Janaka 
resolved to give his daughter Sita in marriage to one who could 
lift the Siva Danush (bow) as done by his daughter. Since Sita 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 434 


was Bhujatha (daughter of Mother Earth), she had the mag- 
netic power inherent in her, which enabled her to lift the Siva 
Danush effortlessly. It was only the divine magnet Rama who 
could lift the bow and string it. 

This divine magnet is present in one and all; the difference 
lies only in intensity. This intensity can be developed only 
through love. Cultivate the sense of unity that I and you are 
one, Experience the bliss of unity. God is in you. You are God. 
When you recognise this truth, there will be no scope for 
doubts of any kind. 


The mistake lies in your vision, not in creation 


Praise and censure are reflections of the inner being. A 
virtuous one never criticises others. It is only the mean who 
indulge in such unsacred activities. The color you see depends 
on the color of the glass you wear. Wear the glasses of love, 
and you will see love all around. The mistake lies in your vi- 
sion, not in creation. 

Do not attach importance to criticism. If someone criticises 
you loudly ,it goes into the thin air. If he accuses you within, it 
goes to himself. Is he criticising your body? The body is inert. 
Is he criticising the Atma? The same Atma dwells in both. It 
amounts to criticising one’s own self. One who realizes this 
fact is the true seeker of truth. 

Man does not recognise hundreds of faults present within 
him. But he tends to point out the most insignificant fault in 
others. The bad in you is reflected as the bad in others. Correct 
yourself in the first instance. Only then will your mind become 
pure. So, develop sacred thoughts. 

Man has many powers in him. Here is a small example. 
When I went to East Africa, Dr. Patel, a great devotee, gifted 
to Me a hairbrush made of iron. When I comb My hair, it 
automatically gets attracted to the hairbrush. Even boys have 
witnessed this. Today I am making it public so that you will 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 435 


understand the existence of divine magnetic power in Me. It is 
this power that has attracted all of you here. My love is my 
greatest property. 


Love is My form, 
Truth is My breath, 
Bliss is My food. 

My life is my message, 
Expansion is my life. 
No reason for love, 
No season for love, 
No birth, no death. 


The divine power has neither birth nor death. I do not feel 
elated when praised or depressed when blamed. I treat these 
dualities of life with equanimity. I am happy both in pleasure 
and pain. There is only love in Me. My love lives by giving, 
giving and giving. It never receives. This is the difference be- 
tween My love and the worldly love, which believes in re- 
ceiving alone. That is why My love is ever expanding. 

A small seed becomes a gigantic tree with many branches 
and fruits. All of them have their origin in the seed. Likewise 
out of love has emerged the creation. Love is God, live in love. 
Develop love. Love everyone wholeheartedly. Only when love 
is manifested will you attain self-realization. 

In the first instance, develop self-confidence. Self- 
confidence is the foundation. Self-satisfaction is the wall. Self- 
sacrifice is the roof. Self-realisation is the mansion(of life). 
Everything is contained in the Self. Self means Atma, the 
Spirit. With this Atmic Principle, acquire the spiritual knowl- 
edge. 

The power in spirituality is limitless. The Power of Love 
far exceeds the power of the atom bomb. It transforms even 
those who hate. Develop such sacred love. Only then will there 
be harmony among Bharatiyas (Indians). 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 436 


Chavan, who spoke earlier, has mentioned that violence is 
rampant everywhere. The wicked thoughts in men are respon- 
sible for this. Once man develops love, there will be no hatred 
in the community. That is why I tell the students repeatedly, 


Start the day with love, 
Fill the day with love, 

End the day with love, 
This is the way to God. 


Same divine power assumes different names and forms 


God is the primordial cause for Creation, Organization, and 
Destruction. The same divine power assumes different names 
and forms. For example, we have only one Chief Minister for 
Andhra Pradesh. Every department is governed by a minister, 
who is under the direct supervision of the Chief Minister. 

Similarly, the whole world rests upon three basic activities: 
Creation, Organization and Destruction. The creation aspect is 
governed by Brahma, organization by Vishnu and destruction 
by Siva. This division of powers is essential for the smooth 
functioning of the world. 

The collective aspect of the three is God. The word GOD 
comprises three letters: G O D. G stands for Generation, O 
stands for Organization, and D stands for Destruction. These 
three aspects of Brahma, Vishnu, and Maheshwara constitute 
God. 

None can deny the existence of God. If someone argues 
that there is no God, tell him that he has no right to question 
your conviction. God may not exist for those who deny His 
existence, but He exists for those who have faith in Him. 

One may say “God is nowhere.” Take the letter “w” away 
from the word ‘*‘where” and join it to “no,” which will make it, 
“God is now here.” All this is word building. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 437 


Understand the Divine Principle 


Man is wasting his life with narrow-minded feelings. He is 
concerned only about himself and his family. This is contrac- 
tion of love. Consider the whole world as one family. That is 
expansion of love. 

Different countries are like different rooms in the mansion 
of the world. Consider all those that live in these rooms as your 
brothers and sisters. When you develop such relationship with 
your fellow human beings, you will not hate anybody. 

Embodiments of Love! Try to understand the principle of 
Divinity. In this world, there is none else other than God. Some 
may say that the world consists of matter and energy. Truly 
speaking, there is only energy, no matter. Whatever matter you 
see will be transformed into energy after some time. 

This is a cloth; it is made of threads. Threads are made 
from cotton. So, cotton, thread and cloth are one and the same. 
Similarly, name and form vary, but there is only one funda- 
mental principle, and that is Divinity. Today, there are many to 
criticise those that do good, but very few involve themselves in 
good actions. 

Students! Boys and girls! You are the emancipators of 
Bharat and the world. You are the leaders and the pleaders of 
the future. Develop the quality of leadership. “Loka samastha 
sukhino bhavanthu (Let the whole world be happy.)” 

Vajpayee said, “Sarva bhootha hithe ratah (aspire for the 
welfare of all living beings.)” Everybody should be healthy 
and happy. That is My true birthday. 

Many people have wished Me “Happy birthday”. Convey 
that wish for those who are not happy. Where is the need to 
wish for Me when I am always happy? 

Prahlada said that a father rejoices only when the son earns 
a good name in society, not on the day of his birth. Who is 
“Manava”? Manava is the very embodiment of God. Ma 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 438 


means ignorance, na means without, and va means to conduct 
oneself. So 'Maanava' means the one who conducts himself 
devoid of ignorance. You are Awareness embodied. Act ac- 
cording to the name you bear. It is not enough if your bear the 
name of Thyagaraja or Rama, you should live up to their ide- 
als. 

There are divine powers in the food that we consume. 
Every student must have a balanced diet. Orange juice, tomato 
juice, lime juice, and apple juice are very good for health. 
Leafy vegetables contain vitamins as well as iron and hence 
are of high nutritive value. The body should be healthy. With a 
healthy body, you can undertake any task. 


My Birthday message 


You do not need to search for God anywhere. God is im- 
manent in every inch and every hair of your body. That is why, 
when Sita offered her pearl necklace as a token of apprecia- 
tion, Hanuman bit the pearls of the necklace and threw them 
away because they did not resonate with the name of Rama. 
On being questioned by Sita as to why he had acted in such a 
foolish manner, Hanuman replied: “You go by the value of the 
pearls, whereas I listen to the holy sound of the Lord’s name. 
Any jewel bereft of the name of Rama is as good as a stone for 
me. Every hair of my body is suffused with the name of 
Rama.” 

Therefore, divinity pervades every cell, every hair of 
Bharatiyas (Indians). It is for this reason that many foreigners 
like Max Mueller desired to be born and die in this sacred land. 

Having been born in this sacred land of yoga and tyaga, it 
will be a pity if you do not adhere to these sacred values. Lead 
the life of a true Bharatiya. Set an ideal for others and make 
everyone happy. This is My birthday message. 

This is the birthday of this body. Truly speaking I have no 
birthday. Since all of you have assembled here, I am celebrat- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 439 


ing this day as birthday. This birthday is not important to Me. 
The day when all of you are happy is My true birthday. 

I desire nothing. I will be happy when you imbibe prema, 
thyaga, and yoga and experience divinity therefrom. I wish 
that you all live an ideal life in peace and security. On this aus- 
picious day fill your hearts with noble feelings and chant the 
name of God. 


23 November 1998 
Birthday discourse 
Sai Kulwant Hall, Prasanthi Nilayam 


44 


Love God wholeheaertedly 


Manam Hithva Priyo Bhavathi, 
Krodham Hithva Na Sochathi, 
Kamam Hithva Arthavan Bhavathi, 
Lobham Hithva Sukhi Bhavathi. 


Embodiments of Love! As long as a person is egotistic, no 
one will love him including his wife and children, though they 
may pretend to do so. As long as there is anger in an individ- 
ual, grief is inevitable. Satisfaction eludes one who is full of 
desires. One with greed can never be happy. Ego, anger, desire 
and greed are the root cause of restlessness in the world. 

Man feels that happiness and peace of mind result from 
spiritual practices, but in reality it is not so. Mind is the source 
of happiness and sorrow. So, conquer the mind. Conquering 
the mind will lead you to the state of equanimity, wherein you 
treat the dualities alike. Vedanta has declared, “Manayeva 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 44] 


manushyanam karanam bandhamokshayoh (mind is the cause 
of both bondage and liberation.)” Once you control your mind, 
you will grow beyond the dualities of sadness and happiness. 


Happiness is derived from pain and suffering 


Welcome sorrow, just as you welcome happiness. In fact 
the happiness that you derive out of pleasure is negligible 
compared to the happiness that results from difficulties. His- 
tory is replete with examples of people who stand testimony to 
this fact. All noble and ideal people had to undergo ordeals be- 
fore they experienced happiness. Na sukhath labbyathe sukham 
(happiness is not derived from happiness). It is derived from 
pain and suffering, but man wants only happiness, not difficul- 
ties. This is quite contradictory to the principles of spirituality. 
People should understand this truth. 


Punyasya phalamichchanthi 
Punyam nechchanthi manavaah 
Na papaphalamichchanthi 
Papam kurvanthu yathnathahaha. 
[Sanskrit verse] 


Man desires to have fruits of meritorious deeds but does 
not perform any. He does not want the fruits of sinful actions, 
yet he indulges in them. 

Whatever you want to achieve, you can do so by proceed- 
ing along the right path. Do not go on the wrong path if you 
are not prepared to face the consequences of it. All spiritual 
practices today are going in the wrong direction. 

There are nine paths of devotion for man to experience di- 
vinity and to achieve self-realisation. They are: sravanam (lis- 
tening), keerthanam (singing), Vishnusmaranam (remem- 
brance), Padasevanam (serving the Lotus Feet), vandanam 
(salutation), archanam (worship), dasyam (servitude), sneham 
(friendship), and atmanivedanam (surrender). Love is the life- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 442 


breath of all these forms of devotion. It is the inner current 
passing through all these nine paths of devotion. It is their car- 
dinal principle. 

How can one attain the Principle of Brahma? Brahma 
means the all-pervasive cosmic principle. According to the Pu- 
ranas, Brahma originated from the navel of Vishnu. Who is 
Vishnu? He is the one who is all-pervasive. Vishnu and 
Brahma are synonymous with the Atma. 

Atma is derived from the root word Ahas, meaning ‘day 
time’. Ahas dispels darkness of ignorance. Therefore, the cos- 
mic form is described as the Effulgent One. 

This Brahma is not limited to a specific name and form. It 
is also referred to as Brihat, meaning all-pervasive. One has to 
follow the truth to attain the Effulgent One. “Yath drisyam 
thannasyam (all that is seen is bound to perish.)” 


Asthiram Jeevanam Loke, 
Asthiram Yauvanam Dhanam, 
Asthiram Dara Puthradi, 

Sathyam Keerthi Dwayam Sthiram. 


Only truth and good name are permanent 


Life in the world is impermanent. So are youth and wealth. 
Wife and children are also not permanent. Only truth and good 
name are permanent and remain forever. That is why Brahma 
is referred to as Sathyam (Truth). 

Jnanam (wisdom) emerged from Sathyam. Sathyam and 
jnanam are all-pervasive. That is why the Vedas have declared, 


Sathyam Jnanam Anantham Brahma. 
God is Truth, Wisdom and Eternity. 


The embodiment of Truth can be experienced only by fol- 
lowing the path of Truth. Truth transcends time — past, present, 
and future. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 443 


Why does God incarnate? To enable man to understand 
and experience his latent divinity, and unity in diversity. The 
essence of spirituality lies in visualising unity in diversity. This 
is the goal of human life. 

The Atma is the same in all irrespective of their name, 
country, and life style. This Atma is referred to as conscience, 
which permeates the body from top to toe. The goal of spiritu- 
ality is to realise oneness of the Atma in all. 

Man, on account of attachment to body, is oblivious of his 
innate divinity and visualises diversity in unity. This is due to 
ignorance. God incarnates in order to teach the underlying 
unity in diversity. Krishna declared, “Mamatma Sarvabhoo- 
thantharatma (I am the indweller in all beings).” 


Chinmaya is within mrinmaya 


Body can be compared to a mirror. This mirror (body) is 
made of clay. This body, mrinmaya (made of clay) has to be 
transformed into chinmaya (one of awareness). No spiritual 
practices are required to do so. Realise the truth: chinmaya is 
within mrinmaya. 

But you are not making any effort to realise the true nature 
of yours. Ash covers the neglected embers. The embers can be 
seen only when the ash is blown away. Similarly, the Atma, 
which is inherent in man, can be seen only when the ash of 
ego, anger, desire, and body attachment is blown away by 
chanting the name of the Lord. 

Body attachment gives rise to ego in man. Success eludes 
one who is egotistic. Egolessness is true humanness. There is 
no trace of ego in man at the time of birth, but it develops as he 
grows up. Feelings of I and mine are responsible for man’s 
bondage. Man will enjoy bliss only when he gets rid of ego 
and attachment. Bliss cannot be achieved through any other 
spiritual practice. Spiritual practices confer only temporary 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 444 


mental satisfaction. Only awareness of the Atma is true and 
eternal. We should develop this awareness more and more. 


The final goal of life is to attain the Atma 


As pointed out by Bozzani (previous speaker), each indi- 
vidual should question himself, “who am I?” On the contrary, 
each one asks “who are you?” which is information-oriented. 
No gain accrues from acquiring this information. What is re- 
quired today is transformation, which can be effected by ques- 
tioning oneself “who am [?” 

Once you know the answer to this and reach the state of 
transformation, you need no further spiritual practices. This is 
possible only when you control your mind. Sage Patanjali has 
enunciated the same: “Yoga chitta vritti nirodha (controlling 
thoughts and aberrations of the mind is true yoga).” Yoga does 
not mean physical exercise. Yoga means “to unite wit the 
Atma. There is no greater happiness than being one with the 
Atma. But today, no one is making any effort to attain the 
Atma, the final goal of life. 

The senses are above the body, the mind is above the 
senses, the intellect is above the mind, and the Atma is above 
the intellect. Man does not travel even up to the level of the 
intellect. He travels only up to the level of the mind. Since man 
is unable to control his mind and senses, he is subjected to con- 
fusion and depression. As a result, he forgets the Principle of 
the Atma. 

Body, which is made up of the five elements, is transient 
and may perish at any point of time. Attachment to body brings 
in attachment to money, which leads to multifarious attach- 
ments. Today, people value education and money more than 
anything else. Money and education by themselves are not bad. 
Good or bad lies in their utilisation. 

Water by itself is colourless, but it assumes the colour of 
the container in which it is poured. Similar is the case with 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 445 


money and education; their value depends on the nature of the 
person who has acquired them. Good and bad are the reflec- 
tions of our mind, they do not exist in the persons around. De- 
fect lies in vision, not in creation. So, purify your vision and 
sanctify your heart. Only then you can experience unity in di- 
versity. 


Serious clarification for doubts 


I have received letters from delegates to this conference 
seeking clarification of their doubts. What is the root cause of 
doubt? It is the absence of total faith. Jesus had a disciple, 
Thomas, who doubted everything he came across and was ap- 
propriately called “doubting Thomas”. In the path of spiritual- 
ity, doubts do arise at times, even though one may have faith in 
God. One of the doubts is this: 


Did Jesus really declare that He was the Truth, the 
Path, and that none was superior to Him? 


Enquire into the truth yourself. Jesus was never egotistic at 
any point of time and never made any such declarations. There 
was a tax collector who recorded the conversation between Je- 
sus and the fishermen. It was during one of those conversations 
that Jesus assured them that He would take care of them, but at 
no point of time did he mention with a sense of ego that He 
was the only One and the ultimate One to protect them. He did 
this only with a view to increase their confidence and enthuse 
them into action. 

At the time of divine birth, three wise men visited Jesus in 
the manger. One of them, looking at child Jesus, remarked; He 
looks as though he was a “Messenger of God”. The second 
wise man exclaimed that the child looked as though he was the 
“Son of God”. The third wise man disagreed with both and 
concluded that He and God were one and the same. These 
three statements have been interpreted in varied ways. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 446 


Jesus had no trace of ego in Him. He was filled with com- 
passion at the sight of the meek and the afflicted. Paul opposed 
Jesus in all matters from the very outset. Once Jesus appeared 
in the dream of Paul and questioned him, ’ What harm have I 
done to you? Why do you criticise Me so?” This caused Paul 
to ponder and realise that his ignorance and ego blinded him to 
reality. Thereafter he became an ardent disciple of Jesus. 

In every age, every noble soul had to put up with criticism. 
People always have mistaken notions about good and bad. If 
only we understand the truth in the Bible, we will come to the 
conclusion that there was no fault in Jesus at all. Jesus always 
aspired to put people in God consciousness. 

At the time of crucifixion, Jesus prayed: “O Father! What 
sin have I committed? Why am I put to suffering thus?” When 
Mother Mary stood crying at the foot of the Cross, an ethereal 
voice was heard. “All are one, My dear Son; be alike to every- 


” 


one. 
Do not give room for any constriction of thought 


In the Bhagavad Gita, Krishna declared, “Chaaturvarnyam 
mayasrishtam (All the people of four varnas were created by 
Me).” What is varna? Varna means colour, but it has been 
misunderstood to be caste. Therefore, do not make any dis- 
tinction based on colour. The four colours are: black, yellow, 
white, and red. The Negroes and the Bharatiyas (Indians) are 
black in complexion. The Japanese and the British are white in 
complexion, while the Chinese are yellow and the Russians are 
red. 

What God has declared is broad in nature and not narrow. 
Do not give room for any constriction of thoughts. You may be 
a Christian, a Muslim, a Hindu, or a Zoroastrian, but you must 
consider yourself to be a child of God. 

Jesus said that He was “persona”, meaning that He was the 
spark of the Divine. This Roman word has been translated by 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 447 


the British as “Person”. “Persona” originated from the Roman 
language. “Persona” means that which is sacred. Since man 
has divinity inherent in him, he is called a person. 

In Hindu scriptures, e.g., the Puranas, the Vedas, the Sas- 
tras, and the Ithihasa, this has been declared as Purusha. Yal- 
labdhwa Puman Ichcharamo Bhavathi Trupto Bhavathi Mat- 
tho Bhavathi Atma Ramo Bhavathi (After attaining That, man 
gets total satisfaction, fulfilment, ecstasy and bliss). It means 
God is in everyone. We should visualise this unity in diversity 
and try to experience it. Consider this as the chief goal of 
Sathya Sai Organisations. 

You should not give rise to differences or hatred of any 
sort. There is only One that is present in all. If you realise this 
Truth, that in itself would be spirituality in practice. Practice is 
more important than publicity. 


Experience the divinity in various names and forms 


There are two mikes in front of Me. There is one mike in 
front of the translator. The words that emanate from the mikes 
may differ, but the underlying sound principle is the same. 
Similarly, we must experience the divinity in various names 
and forms. 

Words that emerge from the heart constitute expansion 
talk. Some people speak only from lips in order to suit the 
situation. Such words constitute contraction talk. Such con- 
traction talk is equivalent to death. People who indulge in such 
contraction talk have no connection between their speech and 
heart. When all that which is in the heart finds expression in 
speech, that is termed as expansion talk. 

Those who speak from the heart speak the truth; others, 
whose speech does not come from the heart, speak untruth to 
suit the occasion. Your words should emanate from the heart. 
This is possible only when there is complete confidence in the 
Self. One with total conviction does not give room for doubts. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 448 


The enquiry into the fact whether that which is applicable 
to others is applicable to individual self also constitutes a 
search for Truth (Sathyanveshana). One may ask why there 
should be a search for Truth, when Truth is all-pervasive. 

In each human there is the dual aspect of truth - untruth; 
righteousness - unrighteousness; and nonviolence - violence. 
There is an example to illustrate this. Suppose you have pure 
24 carat gold with you. After some time, you add copper to it. 
Later you add silver to it, and then aluminium and brass. As 
and when new metals are added to the gold, its true nature un- 
dergoes a change and it loses its value. 

Today man is undergoing such a change. When he is a 
child, he is pure. As he associates himself with others, he ac- 
quires violence and nonviolence, righteousness and unrigh- 
teousness, truth and untruth. This is the root cause for the cycle 
of birth and death. 

When you are one with the Self, there is no scope for birth 
and death. Body attachment, educational and monetary at- 
tachment reduce the Self to the present state of man. Man thus 
forgets his true nature. Man has to be cleansed by the process 
of samskara (refinement) to get rid of all the bad qualities and 
regain his resplendent pristine purity. 

Man has been acquiring evil qualities such as jealousy, ha- 
tred, and ego. Due to such a tendency, man destroys his very 
human nature. Do not let it be debased by evil tendencies. We 
have to foster our faith firmly. Only pure gold should be mixed 
with pure gold and truth should be mixed with truth. Similarly, 
one should join good company and run away from the bad 
company, which is harmful. 


Tyaja Durjana Samsargam, 
Bhaja Sadbu Samagamam, 
Kuru Punyamahorathram, 
Smara Nithyam Anithyathaam. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 449 


Run away from bad company; 

Join the good; 

Do meritorious deeds day and night; and 

Ponder over what is permanent and what is transient. 


Quality should be preferred to quantity 


Some may appear very pious through their words and 
deeds, but if you observe their behaviour, it is demonic in real- 
ity. Do not have faith in such people, and do not lose your pu- 
rity. Impure gold of this nature is increasing. You must become 
pure gold. Even a small quantity of pure gold is better than a 
mound of debased gold. Quality should be preferred over 
quantity. Half an acre of fertile land is better than ten acres of 
barren land, so that you can grow crops on it. 

Man today is proceeding on the wrong path. You need not 
follow anybody. You should follow your conscience, which is 
your master. 


Follow the Master, 
Face the devil, 
Fight to the end, 
Finish the game. 


Your duty is to follow the four F’s. Since you respect and 
follow the words of those who have disharmony in their 
thought, word, and deed, you tend to forget your Swami, your 
true Self. This situation is of your own making. Follow your 
conscience. 

I never force anybody to do anything. What is the reason? 
The reason is that one has to follow the dictates of one’s 
source, conscience. Force connotes external imposition. Source 
relates to the Atma, which is verily love. So, cultivate love. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 450 


This is the answer to the first question about Jesus. Jesus 
said, all are the embodiments of truth and purity, all are chil- 
dren of God. His teachings were based on such broad-minded 
feelings. He emphasised the need for refraining from hurting 
others. 


Dream are reflections of the subconscious mind 
The second question raised is this: 


Swami appears in the dreams of many persons. Why 
Swami doesn’t appear in my dreams? 


It is naive to think in such a manner. You cannot have such 
dreams as and when you would like to. You think of many 
people, but do they all appear in your dreams? No. It is a mis- 
take to think that Swami does not have compassion on you just 
because He does not appear in your dreams. Dreams are noth- 
ing but reflections of the subconscious mind. Swami appearing 
in dreams is very auspicious. 

Now I will explain the different types of dreams. Some- 
times you experience nightmares, and at times you experience 
dreams that fill you with happiness. All these dreams occur 
because they are accumulated in your subconscious mind. It is 
good that they find expression in dreams. Dreams are the re- 
flection, reaction, and resound of that which is within you. 

The same does not apply to the dreams in which Swami 
appears. Swami appears in dreams only when He wills it and 
not when you want. 

The Mohammedan musician who performed yesterday had 
not seen Me on any prior occasion. I asked him, “Son, do you 
remember that when you met with a car accident in America I 
appeared before you at that very instant?” 

Hearing this revelation, he exclaimed, “O my God!” and 
shed tears of joy. The same night, I appeared in his dream and 
told him that he would be coming to Puttaparthi for the ensu- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 451 


ing Birthday celebrations. It happened accordingly; he came 
here yesterday. 

There are certain confusing dreams in which your feelings 
play an active role. You may be seeing Swami but at the same 
time your feelings get mixed up and cause confusion. You may 
see yourself in Puttaparthi at one point of time and in America 
in the very next, so on and so forth. These dreams are not 
willed by Swami. These result from indigestion and improper 
food. Dreams that are willed by Me are very clear and give no 
room for confusion or doubt. I come to you and convey what I 
want to in the most direct manner. 

Swami’s grace is very much there on one and all whether 
He appears in their dreams or not. 


Work with the conviction that you and God are one 
The third question: 


Everyone is undertaking spiritual practices, but I am 
unable to do so for lack of time. Due to my preoccupation 
with my business and profession, I am unable to think of 
Swami and participate in service activities. 


It is a big mistake to think on these lines. There is no need 
for a specific time and place to think of Swami. Discharge your 
duties sincerely with the conviction that everything is Swami’s 
work. “Work is worship, duty is God.” 

You do not need to sit and chant “Sai Ram” repeatedly. 
Sarva karma Bhagavad preethyartham (do all acts with the 
feeling that they are for pleasing God.) That is the greatest 
sadhana (spiritual exercise). Suppose on a Sunday, you sat for 
meditation. But could you concentrate even for a minute? So, 
instead of wasting your time in meditation devoid of concen- 
tration, it is better to attend to your household work. Karmanu- 
bandheeni manushyaloke (human society is bound by karma 
(action).) 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 452 


What is karma and what is its inner significance? Karma 
does not mean sweeping the roads and serving the sick. Vibra- 
tion is karma. Even your breathing process, batting your eye- 
lids, eating, sleeping, reading can be termed karma. Life with- 
out karma is impossible even for a moment. Life will be sanc- 
tified only when you do all karma (actions) to please God. 

Do not make any distinction between God and yourself, 
His work and your work. Work with the conviction that you 
and God are one. Then even a small work will assume mag- 
nificence. 

Greatness lies in small things. No doubt, sweeping the 
roads and visiting hospitals are good deeds but they in them- 
selves do not constitute service. Discharging one’s duty prop- 
erly is true sadhana. In the name of sadhana or spiritual prac- 
tices, if you neglect your office work and if your work is not 
commensurate with the salary you draw, then it would amount 
to cheating the government. True service lies in discharging 
one’s duty properly. Hence, service can be done even in office. 
Any work undertaken without discriminating it to be a per- 
sonal work or God’s work would become service. Suppose you 
work in office for eight hours and you need six hours for sleep. 
Then what do you do in the rest of the time? Never give an ex- 
cuse of lack of time. 


Set aside sufficient time for spiritual practices 


There is a small story. A devotee wanted to know his life 
span so that he could set aside sufficient time for spiritual 
practices. He prayed to God to let him know his life span. God 
replied that he was given 80 years. The devotee felt happy, but 
he continued, “Out of 80 years allocated to me, 20-25 years 
will be spent in studying and playing. The next 25 years are 
required for family and household activities. The next 25 years 
are needed for planning my future and for the well-being of my 
children. So, I am left with practically no time for spiritual 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 453 


practices. Therefore, O Lord! Grant me 20 more years so that I 
may think of You and attain You.” 

God laughed and said, “O mad man! Do you need 20 years 
to attain Me? Even two seconds are enough. How long does it 
take to put on the switch to get light? Not even a second! 
Granted that you need 20 years to think of Me wholeheartedly, 
what is the guarantee that you will not use it for other activi- 
ties?” 

It is nothing but laziness. Slow and steady wins the race. 
Even a second spent in contemplation of Me with a steady 
mind is enough to draw you to Me. Do not waste time; Time is 
God, time waste is life waste. Proper utilisation of time is true 
spiritual practice. Consider time as the very form of God and 
your life will be sanctified. Some people lament saying that 
they do not have enough time to contemplate on the Lord. 
Whoever has raised this point is lazy by nature. Once you give 
up laziness, you can easily tread the path of sacredness. Lazi- 
ness is rust and dust; realisation is best and rest. 


God is everywhere 
The fourth question raised is: 


Being in a foreign land, we are unable to do Swami’s 
work. So, we want to come and stay in Bharath to serve 
Swami wholeheartedly. 


This is another sign of laziness. To do a service activity can 
there be a distinction between a foreign land and Motherland? 
God is everywhere. Whether the service is done abroad or in 
Bharat, it does not lose its significance. It is utterly selfish to 
come to Prashanthi Nilayam to do service activity. You may 
come after retirement for service at Prashanthi Nilayam. But 
now you have your own duties to your children, for their edu- 
cation and career. If you were to come here without fulfilling 
the same, you would begin to develop frustration after some 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 454 


time. Don’t come now. It is better that you stay in your place 
and serve. 

Swami does not expect any service from anyone. Many of 
my boys are here, but I attend to My own work. They all aspire 
to do service to Me. Only a few noble souls have the opportu- 
nity to serve Me. Others, for this reason, should not get dis- 
heartened. Attend to your own duty. That is service in itself. 

I am 73 years. My legs, hands, eyes are in perfect condi- 
tion. I attend to My own work. So, serve those who are inca- 
pacitated and weak. This can be your service to Swami. 

You may wonder that Swami may suffer from leg pain as 
He moves around much. Let Me tell you, I have never suf- 
fered, nor will I ever suffer. Only when I take upon Myself the 
suffering of others do I appear to be suffering; otherwise this 
body does not have any suffering. I call Dr. Alreja to check the 
blood pressure. He always replies, “Swami! Normal, perfect 
normal! 120/80.” Not even that, it is 117/78, which is abso- 
lutely correct blood pressure. Then I ask him to check My 
pulse. Normal pulse rate is 70. But not so with Me. My pulse is 
always 68—perfect normal. I may move about or speak for a 
long time, but My blood pressure does not increase. 

Three qualities keep My body perfect. They are: Purity, 
Patience, and Perseverance. None of you ever need to serve 
Me. You may perform your own duties and look after the wel- 
fare of your family. 


Do your spiritual practices with a steady mind 
The fifth question: 


How are we to clear the debts of the consequences of 
our actions? 


In order to be free from the consequences of your karmas, 
you have to use the medicine of Love. There is nothing greater 
than Love. Love God wholeheartedly. All the effects of your 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 455 


action will be nullified. All your diseases will be cured. If it 
does not happen so, you should not think otherwise. But, if you 
pray wholeheartedly, it would come to pass. 

Some people sit for prayer in the puja room chanting “Sai 
Ram.” Suddenly their mind wanders toward the washerman, 
and they enquire if he has brought the clothes. If you are really 
chanting the Lord’s name wholeheartedly, why should the 
mind go to the washerman? 

Some others sit in meditation but are easily distracted by 
the smell from the kitchen. If this is the nature of your spiritual 
pursuit, how can it be termed as a prayer to the Lord? All your 
spiritual practices are done with a wavering mind. Do them 
with a steady mind. You are bound to reap the fruits. 

You may undertake any type of spiritual pursuit, but love 
wholeheartedly. Love can eradicate any type of disease and act 
as a panacea for all afflictions. You must, in the first instance, 
develop love. This can be possible if you believe that God is 
the embodiment of Love. How can you develop love when you 
do not believe that God is the embodiment of Love? 

Love is the perfect medicine. If you were to put a plant in a 
tin and water it, the plant would die in due course of time; but 
if you were to plant the same in the soil and water it, the plant 
would grow into a fine tree. Similarly, God’s name and form 
should be implanted in the soil of your heart and nurtured with 
water of love. This will ensure good results. If one cultivates 
love, one need not undertake any other spiritual pursuits. 


Undercurrent of divinity is the same in one and all 
The sixth question is very strange. 


In our puja room, we have photographs of Rama, 
Krishna, Shiva, and Jesus. We also keep Swami’s photo- 
graph amidst them. Is it right or wrong?” 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 456 


Once you are convinced that all forms are of one God, why 
should you fear to keep any particular photograph? You may 
worship Rama, Eswara, Jesus, Allah, Zoroastra, or Sai! De- 
velop the feeling that all are one. 

I often give a small example. In Bharat, there are various 
types of sweets, viz., godum halwa, badam kheer, gulab 
jJamoon, jilebi, laddu, mysore pak. Though their names and 
forms are different, the sugar in all of them is the same. You 
may worship Rama, Eswara, Vishnu, Allah, Jesus, or Sai. But, 
you should realise that the undercurrent of divinity is the same 
in one and all. Then the difference of name and form will not 
affect you in any manner. 

If you do not like other gods, you can remove their photo- 
graphs and replace them with those that you like. If you do not 
like Sai Baba’s or Rama’s photograph, you may remove the 
same. But this will not serve any purpose. What is essential is 
recognising unity in divinity. 


Story for recognising unity in divinity 


Here is a small story. A student was to appear in an exami- 
nation. He was weak in mathematics. Since the exam was the 
next day, he worshipped Swami and went for the exam. He 
failed in mathematics. With the result he removed Swami’s 
photo in the altar and placed it in a cupboard. 

The second day, he had Mathematics Paper Part II. That 
day he worshipped Rama’s photograph. He fared even worse. 

The third day, he was to go for the accounts examination. 
Thinking that Mother Goddess would be more benevolent 
compared to other gods, he brought Devi’s photograph and did 
puja. That day, he could not even understand the questions in 
the examination. He came back and put this photograph also in 
the cupboard. 

Fourth day was Accounts Paper, Part I. Realising that Vi- 
nayaka is the remover of all obstacles, he brought incense 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 457 


sticks and coconut and garlanded the idol. When he lit the in- 
cense sticks, the smoke began to waft toward the cupboard in 
which the discarded photos were placed. Then he thought, “I 
brought incense sticks for Vinayaka; why should I let the bene- 
fit of the fragrance be experienced by these gods— Rama, Sai 
Baba, and Devi, who have betrayed me?” He went into the 
house and brought a piece of cloth to tie the nose of Sai Baba, 
Rama and Devi. Having assured himself that the fragrance 
would not reach them, he sat down for prayer. 

At that very moment, Sai Baba, Rama, and Devi appeared. 
He was amazed and questioned the deities: How is it that you 
did not appear when I worshipped you and now that I have 
punished you, you have appeared before me? 

Sai Baba replied, “Son, till this day you had limited Me to 
a picture. Today you have got the feeling that this photo is a 
living entity, so you tied a cloth around the nose to prevent the 
fragrance from reaching Me. The photographs will not help 
you. Picture will remain a picture. You may worship picture as 
God, but not God as a picture. Today, you have begun to be- 
lieve the picture as God Himself and tied the cloth. So, I have 
appeared before you.” 


Worship of God as a picture 


Nowadays, we worship God as a picture. It is only when 
we take picture as God in form that our desires will be ful- 
filled. It does not matter what form you worship or what name 
you chant. Realise that all names and forms are His. Nothing is 
wrong with any name. All are the forms of the same Godhead. 
You may even worship your own parents. 


Mathru Devo Bhava, 
Pithru Devo Bhava, 
Acharya Devo Bhava, 
Atithi Devo Bhava. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 458 


In such a case, how can you have doubt about various 
forms of God? At no point of time, you should entertain doubts 
regarding God. God is God. Never comment or criticise the 
names or forms of God. Have any photograph and chant any 
name. God is one; Truth is one. “Ekam Sath Viprah Bahudha 
Vadanti (Truth is one, but scholars refer to it by many 
names).” Do not go about changing photographs. Have the 
photograph of your choice and worship. 


Do unto others what you do unto yourself 
The seventh question: 


In the worldly path, which spiritual practice will satisfy 
Swami? I am ready to do the sadhana that pleases Swami. 


There is only one answer to that. I do not advocate any 
specific sadhana. Consider all people to be the forms of Di- 
vinity. Have faith that God is in all. That pleases Me the most. 

Refrain from doing that which causes grief to others even if 
it were to give you happiness. Do unto others as you would 
like to be done by. “Help ever; Hurt never.” Help everybody. 
Do not harm or hurt anyone. Do not develop ill feelings toward 
anybody. Even if people were to hurt you or curse you, do not 
refrain from loving them. This is the main point of Swami’s 
teachings. That is what Swami expects of you. 

There are people, who do not worship Swami. Some wor- 
ship and some others criticise. I remain unaffected by both. I 
do not take note of any of these. I continue to love all. Each 
one has to bear the consequences of their actions. 

If you do good deeds, you would reap good results, and 
bad results if you have done bad deeds. Realise this in the first 
instance and act accordingly. I do not hate anybody. I do not 
doubt anyone. I love even those who do not believe in Me. 
That is My nature. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 459 


Some tend to doubt My power because I repose faith in 
them, though they themselves do not have faith in Me. That is 
a mistaken notion. My Love is the same for all. I desire that all 
be blissful. 


Even if you were to hate Me, I shall love you 


Water is colourless, but it assumes the colour of the bottle 
in which it is poured. Good or bad are within you and not in 
Me, and they shall never be in Me. 

I am always for the maxim, “Loka samastha sukhino bha- 
vanthu (May the whole world be happy).” Even If you were to 
hate Me, I shall love you. That is My nature. That is the divine 
quality. You may worship Me today and censure Me tomor- 
row, and vice-versa. When drunk, one talks in a certain man- 
ner, while when sober, in another. When you are deeply drunk 
with worldly desires, the mind oscillates from one side to an- 
other. But one who is filled with wholesome and unsullied love 
remains the same under all circumstances. 

You may forget Me, but I will never forget you. I am al- 
ways with you, in you, around you, and above you. People 
who are in divine proximity are extremely fortunate. It is a 
culmination of the merit acquired in various births. It has not 
come in this birth. Therefore, do not waste your energy 
brooding over what pleases Swami and what displeases Him. 
Do not entertain such doubts. I am pleased with whatever you 
undertake with purity of heart I desire only the purity of your 
heart. 

With pure love in your heart, you may undertake any type 
of service. Have total faith in Swami’s words, implicitly obey 
His commands. 

I do not misguide anyone at any time. Whatever I say is for 
your own good. Whatever I tell, whatever I do is good for you; 
not for Me. I do not have any work of My own. Everything is 
done for your sake. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 460 


On no account should you entertain the thought that I do 
not have love for you. Fortunate people get a chance to under- 
take sacred deeds in close proximity to the Divine. But those 
who do not get such an opportunity should not entertain any 
jealousy that others have received what they have not. The 
most incurable disease of all is jealousy. Cancer may have a 
remedy, but not jealousy. Cancer may be canceled, but jeal- 
ousy has no remedy whatsoever. Jealousy would frustrate and 
depress one to such an extent that one would perish in the 
process. 


Teach good virtues to children 


Embodiments of Love! Members of Sai Organisation 
should develop broadmindedness without giving room for 
jealousy, hatred, and ego. Consider all as brothers and sisters 
and immerse yourselves in bliss by doing service. 

Today, you have resolved to bring change in the education 
system. Education is very essential. It can neither be stolen by 
thieves nor burnt by fire nor diminished by sharing with others. 
Education always grows. Share this eternal wisdom with one 
and all. Practise all that you have learnt. Teach good virtues to 
the children, “Son! Do not study for money. Affluence, friend- 
ship, and physical strength are of major importance in a 
worldly sense. But money is here today and gone tomorrow. 
Money comes and goes. A friend may turn into a foe in a day. 
You are strong today, but you may become weak tomorrow. 
However, your virtues will never desert you. Develop that 
permanent character which does not desert you. Develop sa- 
cred virtues.” 

Enter society with noble virtues. Help everyone. Do you 
know why the hands are given? Is it for eating? It is for help- 
ing others! Charity is the ornament for hand. Do you know 
why the throat is given? Not to sing cinema songs! Not to criti- 
cise or blame others, but to chant the name of God. That in it- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 461 


self is the beautiful necklace. Wear that necklace and sanctify 
your throat. Do you know why intelligence is given? Is it for 
becoming egotistic? It is to ponder over the means of contem- 
plating on Divinity and reaching and experiencing the same. 
One must engage each limb and all senses in sacred activities. 


Be good, do good, and set an ideal 


Embodiments of Love! Delegates from 180 countries have 
assembled here. All occupy exalted positions. If you tread the 
right path, you can mould thousands of people in turn. Office- 
bearers should be very careful, because if one office-bearer 
goes wrong, many people can go astray. Help ever; Hurt never. 
Be good, do good, and set an ideal; then all would follow the 
ideal path. Without practising, if you were to tell others, it 
would be of no avail. If you are unable to follow all the teach- 
ings, practice at least one or two. That is enough. 

Be ideal members of Sathya Sai Organisation and bring 
about proper development and transform the nation itself. I do 
not desire for My name to be upheld. I do not require any name 
or fame. If only I wanted, the whole world would have been at 
My feet by now. But I do not want. I want only to help you. 
Foster the sense of service amongst yourselves. Entertain noble 
thoughts. 

Goldstein said that Swami always gives and does not take 
anything. Except for one, I do not ask for anything. That which 
I ask for is your love. I do not desire anything else. Whatever 
you ask, I will give. But I aspire only for one thing: Love. 
Therefore, give your love and accept everything. 

Strive to develop and bring about transformation in the 
system of education. Members belonging to the Organisation 
should discuss among themselves and do what they consider 
good. They need not wait for orders from the Centre. In fact, 
the Centre would be happy to know of such an initiative. What 
else can give Me more joy than the news that you do not have 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 462 


any differences, jealousy, in-fights, and are conducting your- 
selves as brothers and sisters. 

Work in accordance with Swami’s ideals. This gives joy to 
Swami. Happiness lies in union with God. That is true happi- 
ness. You cannot attain happiness by experiencing worldly 
comforts. 

Leaving aside all differences, you must mingle with each 
other and undertake service activities. You should not form 
separate groups. Realise that pain inflicted on others is pain 
inflicted on Me. If all are united, I shall be extremely happy. If 
you were to meet someone whom you may have hated, greet 
him lovingly. You must conduct yourself with love. This is 
real penance, meditation, japa, and sadhana. 


Talk sweetly and smilingly 


One should give and take love for love’s sake. If you con- 
tinue this way, the entire country will become happy. We can 
experience that kind of joy that has not been experienced hith- 
erto in any previous yuga (era). 

When you greet others, do so wholeheartedly. Let there be 
no disharmony in your thoughts, words, and deeds. Talk 
sweetly and smilingly. This makes all happy. Happy mood, 
happy face, happy talk, and happy work should be your guid- 
ing force. You should not smile artificially; smile wholeheart- 
edly. Forget your past differences and live in the present. This 
present is not ordinary, it is omnipresent. 

Develop unity. There is immense strength in unity. In 
unity, not only you, but also the country would have a chance 
to develop. Only love brings about unity. For the past four 
days, you have been debating and discussing various issues. 
Keep away all the hatred. Cleanse yourselves. Be pure, be 
happy. Go back happily. 

This is a big workshop. Your body is like a car. All the 
worn-out bolts, nuts, brakes, springs, and seats have been re- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 463 


paired and replaced. When you get back to your places fully 
transformed, people should observe this transformation in you 
and emulate you. I am teaching you all this prompted by love, 
so that you also develop love. 


24 November 1998 

Valedictory of First Overseas Convention 
of Chairs of Sai Centres 

Sai Kulwant Hall, Prashanthi Nilayam 


45 


Sacrifice leads to immortality 


Adored by the Muslims as Allah, 

As Jehovah by the Christians, 

As the lotus-eyed Lord Vishnu by the Vaishnavites, 
And as Sambhu by the Saivites, 

God is worshipped as the one Supreme Self, 

Who confers health and wealth. 

People may worship God in various names and forms, 
But the very same God responds to the prayers of all. 
[Telugu Poem] 


Embodiments of Love! Everyone is aware of the fact that 
human life is highly valuable, noble, and sacred. Keeping in 
view the welfare of society, the alumni of Sri Sathya Sai Insti- 
tute of Higher Learning, Anantapur, calling themselves “Mes- 
sengers of Sathya Sai’, are undertaking many service activi- 
ties. 

First and foremost, one has to understand the true meaning 
of the term “messenger”. Every human being is a messenger of 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 465 


God. Everyone is born in this world by the Will of God. Only 
constant enquiry will reveal the reason behind God sending 
His messengers to the world. 


Man’s foremost duty is to make the 

stream of Divine Love flow to one and all. 

Man is born not merely to live for himself. 

Only by dedicating his life 

to the service of the society will he 

Ennoble himself and achieve self-satisfaction. 

God has sent man to this world 

to practice and propagate this message. 

Of what avail is human birth if man remains 

like a lump of clay without serving the society? 
[Telugu Poem] 


All are messengers of God 


Having taken birth as a human being, one has to realise the 
divinity within. The primary duty of every individual, as a 
messenger of God, is to practice and propagate the principles 
of truth, love, and peace and to experience the bliss and share it 
with others. The one who propagates the worldly, fleeting, and 
ephemeral matters cannot be called a messenger of God. 

When Jesus was born, three Arabian kings came to see 
Him. They were overjoyed on seeing the new-born babe. 
While returning, the first king said to Mother Mary, “Mother, 
you have given birth to a child who loves God.” 

The second king said, “Mother, you have given birth to a 
child who will be loved by God.” 

The third king said, “Mother Mary, your child is not differ- 
ent from God; both are one and the same.” 

Once we understand the inner meaning of these three 
statements, we will know the truth. The one who loves God is 
the Messenger of God. The one whom God loves is the Son of 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 466 


God. The one who understands the principle of unity becomes 
one with God. 

Today, there are only a few who are propagating the mes- 
sage of God, but the majority of the people are doing just the 
opposite. Having been the recipient of divine love, man should 
propagate the same principle to his fellow men. This is what 
Jesus proclaimed at the time of leaving his mortal coil, “All are 
one, my dear son! Be alike to everyone.” 

Give up body attachment. The body is bound to change and 
will ultimately perish. God is the embodiment of Truth. Truth 
is that which does not change in all the three periods of time. 
One has to follow the path of truth to propagate the Principle 
of Truth and Divine Love. God loves those who follow the 
path of truth. Jesus propagated the divine message of Love. He 
said, “Death is the dress of life.” So, He said, one has to give 
up body attachment and develop attachment to the spirit. Body 
is like a water bubble. It is merely a vesture of the individual 
soul. 


Every activity of man should reflect the divine message 


The culture of Bharat (India) declares, “Deho Devalaya 
Proktho Jeevo Deva Sanathana (Body is the temple of God 
and the indwelling spirit is eternally divine).” The ancient and 
eternal Divinity assumes human form in order to show the Path 
of Truth to man. Just as the son is the rightful heir to the fa- 
ther’s property, man has equal claim to God’s property of love, 
truth, forbearance, peace, and empathy. The Principle of Love 
is supreme. Love is the underlying principle of all human val- 
ues. Love is God, live in love. 

Every human being is a messenger of God. Man should not 
waste his life in merely eating, drinking, and sleeping. In fact 
such a life is a blot on human nature itself. Every activity of 
man should reflect the divine message. Unfortunately, this is 
not the case today. Some people claim that they have dedicated 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 467 


their lives to the mission of God. But in reality it is not so. 
They are wasting their precious time in materialistic pursuits. 
There is nothing wrong in studying, doing jobs, and earning 
money provided they are done in the right spirit, which is 
beneficial to one and all. 

You see many people suffering. In what way are you 
helping them? Jesus opposed the practice of animal sacrifice in 
Jerusalem. As a result, he had to face strong opposition. People 
who help mankind are put to harm. 

The dualities of life such as pain and pleasure go hand in 
hand. 


Pain and pleasure coexist. 
It is impossible to separate them. 
Pleasure does not exist separately. 
The fructification of pain is pleasure. 
[Telugu Poem] 


This message of truth must be taught to the entire world. 
Without pain, one does not realise the value of pleasure. The 
value of light can be realised only when there is darkness. This 
was the teaching of Jesus. 

One has to overcome difficulties to be successful in life. 
Give happiness to those who are suffering. Consider every ac- 
tivity as God’s work. Right from birth, man has been experi- 
encing pain and pleasure. But, he is unable to realise that there 
is happiness in pain. What type of happiness? Is it related to 
the body or the mind? No. It is related to the Atma. 

Peace is essential for man at all the three levels: body, 
mind, and spirit. This is the reason we chant santhi (peace) 
three times. Man can attain peace at these three levels only by 
developing love for God. 

The one without love for God will never be peaceful. All 
worldly pleasures are fleeting momentary. The same sentiment 
was echoed by Sankaracharya: 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 468 


Ma kuru dhana jana yauvana garvam 
Harathi nimeshath kalah sarvam. 


Do not be proud of your wealth, progeny and youth. 
The tide of time may destroy them in a moment. 


What is happiness? Is it sitting in an air-conditioned room 
or partaking of delicious food? These confer happiness only at 
the physical and mental levels, not at the level of the Atma. 
True happiness is that which is related to the Atma. You should 
not be afraid of difficulties; they are passing clouds. Do not 
waver. Follow the heart, which is steady and unwavering 

Unity of head, heart, and hand is essential for man. This is 
the true significance behind the Christians making cross sign. 
Install God in your heart. Contemplate on Him and undertake 
good deeds Consider every activity as God’s work and act ac- 
cordingly. Merely feeding the poor and distributing clothes to 
the needy do not constitute seva (selfless service). Along with 
this, one has to cultivate love, which is eternal. Right from 
dawn to dusk all our actions should be suffused with love. 


Start the day with Love, 
Fill the day with Love, 
Spend the day with Love, 
End the day with Love. 
This is the way to God. 


There are very few who publicise this message. It is not 
enough if you call yourself a messenger; you have to spread 
the divine message. Fortunate are those who pay heed to God’s 
words. Whether people listen or not, discharge your duty of 
spreading His message. 

Many people call themselves devotees without under- 
standing the meaning and significance of the term devotion. 
Devotion does not mean performing rites and rituals. True de- 
votion lies in obeying the command of the Lord and spreading 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 469 


His message. In spite of innumerable difficulties, King 
Harischandra never swerved from the path of truth. 

One has to worship God both in times of pain and pleasure. 
Unfortunately, due to the effect of the Kali Age, people wor- 
ship Him when everything goes well but criticise Him in times 
of difficulties. 

When it was ordered that all devotees of Jesus should be 
crucified along with Him, even His closest devotees, Peter, 
Matthew, and Paul, refused to identify themselves as His fol- 
lowers. Can these be called true devotees? One should be pre- 
pared to sacrifice everything for the sake of God. Under any 
circumstances, do not disobey the command of God. That is 
determination. Determination gives rise to sacrifice, which 
leads to immortality. 


Truth and divine love constitute one’s wealth 


“Na karmana na prajaya danena thyagenaike amrutathwa 
manasubu (It is only sacrifice, not wealth, progeny, and action, 
that confers immortality.)” If money and health are lost, they 
can be regained, but if character is lost everything is lost. 

Today man is striving hard for wealth and happiness, while 
neglecting character. Truth and divine love constitute true 
wealth. If you earnestly follow the path of truth, you will not 
encounter any difficulties. How can you expect God to protect 
and confer His grace on you if you do not adhere to truth? True 
devotion lies in accepting both pleasure and pain with equal- 
mindedness. Such a divine message should be passed on to 
others. 

The true message is the message of Love. Share love with 
everybody. There is no greater wealth than love. 

Once, an angel appeared in the dream of John and handed 
him a book, asking him to read and digest its contents. Here, 
digestion means putting into practice the essence contained 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 470 


therein. Valmiki described Ravana as a fool, though he had 
mastered sixty-four types of knowledge, because he did not 
practice what he had learned. Rama on the other hand practised 
what He learned. 


Follow the ideals of Jesus 


Vedanta says, “Brahmavid Brahmaiva Bhavathi (the 
knower of Brahman becomes Brahman himself.)” John resem- 
bled Jesus in all respects, because he constantly contemplated 
on Him. “As you think, so you become.” If you think of God 
incessantly, you will assume His form. 

Prahlada never gave up the Lord’s name even in times of 
adversities. As he surrendered himself to Lord Narayana com- 
pletely, he was protected. When he was thrown into the ocean, 
the waves assumed the form of Lord Narayana. When he was 
pushed from a mountain top, Lord Narayana held him in His 
arms, and when he was bitten by venomous snakes, the poison 
became nectar. 

Never feel depressed when you are weighed down by diffi- 
culties. God will never impose on you ordeals that you cannot 
bear. He tests his devotees in various ways. Test is the taste of 
God. Never fear any test. Be ready to sacrifice even your life 
for the sake of God. Only then will God protect you. 

Initially, Paul hated Jesus. One day Jesus appeared in his 
dream and asked him lovingly, “Paul, what harm have I done 
to you? Why do you criticise Me? All your travails are conse- 
quences of your own actions. I am not responsible for your suf- 
fering.” 

Paul was transformed and attained sainthood. Thus, Jesus 
transformed many sinners into saints. Worship Jesus by fol- 
lowing His ideals. 

Jesus pointed to three stages. The first one is “I am the 
Messenger of God.” He wanted to propagate the message of 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 471 


God. The second one is, “I am the Son of God.” The son has a 
claim to father’s property. What is the property of God? Truth, 
love, forbearance, peace, and righteousness are the properties 
of God. So, man has to strive to attain these qualities. He has to 
practice, experience, and propagate these virtues. Only then 
does man deserve to be called Son of God. 

The third one is “I and My Father are one.” This stage is 
attained when the principle of unity is realised. When Jesus 
reached this stage, He had no suffering at all. He was always 
blissful and was prepared for anything. Even at the time of 
crucifixion, he was smiling, because he realised that He was 
not the body. Body is bound to perish, but the indweller has no 
birth and death. Truly speaking, the indweller is God Himself. 
Jesus understood that the body was merely a vesture and He 
was the indweller. 


Propagate Swami’s message to the entire world 


You should have the firm faith that you are the Messenger 
of God. Propagate Swami’s message to the entire world. Some 
people may like it and some may not. Do not bother about 
what others say, be it ‘yes’ or ‘no’. ‘No’ and ‘yes’ relate only 
to you, but for Sai everything is yes, yes, yes. 

There are no defects in God. All words and deeds of God 
are perfect. You see the reflection, reaction and resound of 
your feelings. They are psychological in nature. God always 
gives good alone. Understand and experience this truth. 

Matthew was a tax collector. He would meet fishermen 
regularly and enquire as to how they acquired faith in Jesus. 
Thomas used to doubt the divinity of Jesus. Such doubting 
Thomases are on the rise in this Age of Kali. Never be in the 
company of such people. God is like fire and you are like coal. 
When coal comes in contact with fire, coal becomes one with 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 472 


fire. Similarly, when you come in contact with God you be- 
come one with Him. Have total faith in God. 

Embodiments of Love! All are messengers of God. All are 
embodiments of love. There is nobody without love. But you 
are misusing it by diverting it to worldly relations. No doubt, 
you need to take care of your wife and children. But that is not 
all. God alone is important. 

Zero gains value when one precedes it. Moon is zero, sun 
is zero, world is zero, only God is the Hero. Everything comes 
to nought in the absence of this Hero. A hero becomes zero if 
he forgets God. Have total faith in the Hero, God. Never give 
scope for any doubt. Then you are bound to be successful. Je- 
sus experienced and propagated this truth. 


Divine proximity, the greatest wealth 


The term Christmas was derived from the Roman lan- 
guage. Truly speaking, Christmas falls in the month of March, 
not in December. Since it is very cold in December and people 
are confined to their homes, they utilise this time to celebrate 
Christmas. Actually, Jesus was born in the month of March. 
With the passage of time, this fact has been distorted and mis- 
represented in the Bible. 

“Munde munde mathir bhinnah (Opinions vary from per- 
son to person).” Each one interpreted the Bible in their own 
way. Some wrote that Jesus was never born. Some wrote that it 
was the brother of Jesus who was crucified, not Jesus, and that 
He was in Japan at that time. This is all imagination. Jesus is 
Truth. 

When Jesus was a small boy, His parents took Him to Jeru- 
salem to attend a fair. After some time, Mother Mary, not 
finding her son Jesus by her side, believed that He had lost His 
way in the crowd and searched for Him frantically. Ultimately, 
she found Him listening with rapt attention to the sermon of 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 473 


the priest in a temple. That scene reminded her of the prophetic 
words of one of the Arabian kings, who visited Jesus at the 
time of His birth, that He would love God. She hugged her son 
and shed tears of joy. Jesus said, “Mother, you can find Me in 
the company of God, but you have been searching for Me 
elsewhere. I consider divine proximity as My greatest wealth.” 


How can you search for God, who is all-pervasive? 


There is a profound message in this. Man is in search of 
God without realising that He is all-pervasive. He is the em- 
bodiment of love and can be attained only through love. When 
you realise that you are with God, for God, from God, you will 
find God everywhere. Strengthen the feeling that God is in 
you, with you, above you, below you and around you. 

How can you search for God, who is all-pervasive? Saint 
Thyagaraja expressed the same feelings in a song, “Nenendu 
Vedakudura Rama... (O Lord Rama! Where am I to search 
You?)” “You are my only refuge. I cannot live without You,” 
so saying he jumped into a river. 

To his joy, he found the idol of Lord Rama in the river. “O 
Rama! You are so great and compassionate; you are with me 
always. Not realising this truth I have spent my life in total ig- 
norance.” He extolled Rama in manifold ways and expressed 
his feelings in a song, “Raara Maa Intidaaka... (O Lord! 
Please come to my residence). 

Only an ardent devotee can understand and experience the 
bliss of oneness with God. Sugar tastes bitter to a person suf- 
fering from malaria. The defect lies in their tongue, not in the 
sugar. So is the case with a person immersed in worldly de- 
sires. He cannot experience the sweetness of Divinity. Have 
the firm conviction “God is in me, with me, around me, behind 
me.” When you think on these lines, you become divine. Never 
entertain the thought that you are separate from God. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 474 


Total surrender earns divine grace 


When I distributed saris to the “messengers” yesterday, 
they expressed their gratitude by saying, “Thanks, Swami.” I 
exhorted them, Do not thank Me. I am not a third person. Do 
you thank your mother who serves you food every day? You 
may thank an outsider from whom you receive a favour, but I 
am not an outsider.” So, never say thanks to Swami. 

Consider Swami as your own. Only then will you have the 
right to approach Swami. I do not desire anything from you for 
Myself, nor do I say or do anything for Myself. I do not want 
anything except one—your love. Even that is not your prop- 
erty; that also is My property. 

Love cannot be earned by any means. It is a gift of God. 
Gift this gift of love to God. Only then you will have self- 
satisfaction. That is your duty. The ancients used to pray, 


Oh Lord! 
I offer you my heart, which is but your gift. 
I offer you what you have bestowed on me. 
What else can I offer you? 
Kindly accept my humble and prayerful saluta- 
tions. 
[Telugu Poem] 


A person with such noble feelings is a true devotee and the 
one of sacrifice. 

Extolling one’s own devotion to the exclusion of others 
amounts to being egotistic. Never give scope for ego. Great 
devotees like Tukaram, Ramadas, and Thyagaraja had to face 
many ordeals before they could win God’s grace. Difficulties 
are part and parcel of lives of great devotees. God subjects His 
devotees to tests so that their faith in Him can be strengthened 
and their hearts are purified. It needs a great effort on your part 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 475 


to cleanse a stained vessel. Difficulties are meant for cleansing 
the vessel of your heart. 

When the idol of Rama was taken away from Thyagaraja, 
he was grief-stricken. He questioned the divinity of Lord 
Rama. “Don’t you have the power to solve my problems, or do 
I lack devotion? Definitely I have devotion, it is only you who 
lack power.” He continued in this vein extolling his devotion 
and in the process, he became egotistic. 

When he sat in meditation, wisdom dawned on him. He re- 
alised his folly in doubting Rama’s divinity. He reflected, 
without the grace of Lord Rama, could a monkey cross the 
ocean? If Rama lacked power, would Lakshmana worship Him 
or for that matter Lakshmi, the goddess of wealth, serve Him 
and the extremely intelligent Bharata offer his salutations? “Oh 
Rama! Certainly your power is immense. It is because of my 
ignorance and meanness that I doubted your Divinity.” He 
sought His pardon and surrendered himself to Lord Rama. 


The power of devotion 


When you purify your heart and surrender yourself com- 
pletely to God, He manifests instantly. He does not delay even 
for a moment. This was proved in the case of Ramadas also. 
When Ramadas surrendered himself to the Lord completely, 
Rama and Lakshmana went to King Thaneesha in disguise and 
paid the tax on behalf of Ramadas. On being questioned as to 
who they were, they replied that they were the servants of Ra- 
madas. Thus, we find that the Lord becomes the servant of His 
devotee, when there is total surrender. This is the power of de- 
votion. 

There are many obstacles along the path of devotion. Some 
people accuse, criticise, and censure God in times of difficul- 
ties. Each one has to bear the consequences of his own actions. 
God remains unaffected. God is pure, unsullied and sacred. Let 
people say anything, be cool and calm. Do not enter into un- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 476 


necessary arguments with them. It only breeds enmity. Speak 
softly and sweetly with a smiling face. That will silence the 
critic. Smile is the best answer to criticism. 

When Paul went on accusing Jesus, He lovingly went up to 
him and gave a pleasing smile. The sweetness in the nectarine 
smile of Jesus transformed the poisonous heart of Paul. Be al- 
ways cheerful, even in times of adversities. Always put up a 
smiling face, never a castor-oil face. “Happiness is union with 
God.” 


True Christmas in Prasanthi Nilayam 


Embodiments of Love! We have been celebrating Christ- 
mas every year here. True Christmas is celebrated only in 
Prashanthi Nilayam, where people of all religions join together 
to celebrate it. Generally, the Hindus celebrate Hindu festivals, 
the Muslims celebrate their festivals, the Christians celebrate 
their festivals, and so on and so forth. It is only in Prasanthi 
Nilayam that people of all religions —Hindus, Muslims, 
Christians, Parsis, etc.— come together to celebrate Christmas. 

Prashanthi Nilayam symbolises the unity of all religions. 
Elsewhere people drink, eat non-vegetarian food, and make 
merry in the name of Christmas. But Christmas in Prasanthi 
Nilayam is celebrated in a holy atmosphere. Christmas in Pras- 
anthi Nilayam is a “holy day”, not a “holiday”. 

Practise whatever you have learnt here, even after you go 
back to your respective countries. Strengthen the feeling that 
you are the messenger of God and propagate the divine mes- 
sage far and wide. That is your primary duty. There is no 
greater service than this. Strive for the welfare of the whole 
world. 

The world is like a big mansion. Countries may be com- 
pared to its different rooms. Do not have the narrow feeling 
that only your country should be happy. Be broad-minded. 
Pray for the welfare of all nations. On this basis, the ancients 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 31 477 


prayed, “Loka samastha sukhino bhavanthu (Let the whole 
world be happy.)” Cultivate love. That is true sadhana. 

Yesterday, children presented a magnificent drama, 
wherein the power of love was depicted. Love can transform 
even the wicked. It is only a matter of time before the wicked 
are transformed. Be patient. Develop love more and more. 
None can comprehend the divinity and sanctity of Swami. 
Twenty years ago, when Christmas was celebrated for the first 
time in Prashanthi Nilayam, I sang a song: 


Love is My form, 

Truth is My breath, 

Bliss is My food, 

My life is My message, expansion is My life, 
No reason for Love, no season for Love, 

No birth, no death. 


If anyone asks you to tell about Sai Baba, sing this song. It 
will convey the whole message. Tell him, Love is His form 
and His life is His message. Develop the feeling of brother- 
hood of man and fatherhood of God. 


25 December 1988 
Christmas Discourse 
Sai Kulwant Hall, Prasanthi Nilayam 


