SATHYA SAI SPEAKS 


VOLUME - 42 


Discourses of 
BHAGAWAN SRI SATHYA SAI BABA 
Delivered During 2009 





S ~ 
9 y? 
Shana * 


Publications Division 


PRASANTHI NILAYAM 


SRI SATHYA SAI SADHANA TRUST 
Publications Division 
Prasanthi Nilayam - 515134 
Anantapur District, Andhra Pradesh, India 
STD: 08555 : ISD : 91-8555 Phone: 287375, Fax: 287236 
Email: enquiry@sssbpt.org URL www.sssbpt.org 


© Sri Sathya Sai Sadhana Trust, Publications Division, 
Prasanthi Nilayam P.O. 515 134, Anantapur District, A.P. (India.) 


All Rights Reserved 


The copyright and the rights of translation in any language are reserved 
by the Publishers. No part, passage, text or photograph or Artwork of 
this book should be reproduced, transmitted or utilised, in original 
language or by translation, in any form or by any means, electronic, 
mechanical, photo copying, recording or by any information, storage 
and retrieval system except with the express and prior permission, in 
writing from the Convener, Sri Sathya Sai Sadhana Trust, Publications 
Division, Prasanthi Nilayam (Andhra Pradesh) India - Pin Code 515 
134, except for brief passages quoted in book review. This book can be 
exported from India only by the Publishers - Sri Sathya Sai Sadhana 
Trust, Publications Division, Prasanthi Nilayam, India. 


International Standard Book Number: 978-81-7208-853-8 


978-81-7208-543-8 (set) 





First Edition: July 2010 


Published by: 

The Convener, 

Sri Sathya Sai Sadhana Trust, 

Publications Division 

Prasanthi Nilayam, Pincode 515 134, India 

STD: 08555 ISD: 91-8555 Phone: 287375 Fax: 287236 
Printed at: 


Publisher’s Note 


Bhagawan Sri Sathya Sai Baba has been giving divine 
discourses and sharing His divine Wisdom for the benefit 
and well being of the entire humanity for the past several 
decades. Seekers have sought His teachings and guidance 


even when He was a lad of 14 years. 


Several hundreds of His discourses have been brought 
out in a series under the title “Sathya Sai Speaks” for the 
benefit of humanity that has been thirsting for solace, inspi- 
ration and true guidance to get relief from the difficulties 


faced in daily life. 


The Publications Division of Sri Sathya Sai Sadhana 
Trust is happy to bring out the 42" Volume in the above 
series, containing eighteen chapters of precious discourses 
given by Bhagawan Baba during the year 2009. We have 


used bigger fonts and avoided use of phonetic spelling for 


non English words, as was done in earlier volumes, so as 
to enable smooth reading. We are sure that all those who 
read this book will immensely benefit from Bhagawan’s 


divine wisdom. 


May all those who read His teachings and _ practise 
them 1n life in a prayerful attitude receive Bhagawan’s grace 


and blessings in plenty. 


With salutations at the lotus feet of Bhagawan, 


13.06.2010 Convener 
Sri Sathya Sai Sadhana Trust 

Publications Division 

Prasanthi Nilayam 515134 


Contents 

1. Know Thy Self! You Will Know Everything ............. l 
2. Money Comes And Goes; Morality 

Comes: And Gro WS icccapictccs eeeices ee eis 19 
3. Lead Your Life With Self-Confidence, 

Faith AnG (DC y OU ON ico.oncassiceotoonmeveareuaseadaevseuiecotetenie: 33 
4. Develop Self-Confidence To Gain 

SUCCESS [TiN cs depen cnsraieevemboaneesperautseriexmacnse catnteees 45 
5. Love God And Meditate On Him ........ ee eeeceeeee 55 
6. No Society Can Exist Without Morality ................ 69 
7. Develop Love And Consider All As 

BrOtMerS ATi SIS (60S ssc vasrcuas Seniarsensetvnccesinesiienaseees 79 
8. Students Should Set Ideals For Others ..................... 93 
9. Three Assets That You Must Safeguard ................. 107 
10.Be Exemplars Of Selfless Service ..........cceeeeeceeees 121 


11.Realise Atma Tattwa By Constant Practice ........... 133 


12 Vinayaka Principle Is All-Pervasive ..................... 145 


13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 


Uphold Ethics And Morality .............ccceeeeeeeeeees 155 
Live Up To The Expectations Of Emperor Bali ... 169 
Respect Mother - First And Foremost .................. 179 
Love Is The Royal Road To Reach God .............. 197 
Be Good, Do Good And See Good ..............ec eee. 207 
Install God In The Altar Of Your 


ACT CCC seer ciesssesesacecvaizue dae waesacesaditlaebuedeecbesbees 22) 


1 


Know Thyself! You Will Know 
Everything 


The sun appears serene and peaceful 
The days have become shorter and 
The cool wind is blowing, 

The fields are ripe with golden crops, 
Marigold flowers are blossoming like 
Garlands of pearls on the banks of rivers. 
The farmers are rejoicing and singing; 
the sweet festival of Sankranti has come in the 
Pushya month, filing the granaries in our 
homes with the freshly harvested grain. 


(Telugu song) 
Embodiments of Love! 


2 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


THIS is the Sankranti festival time. Sankranti is a 
great festival. It 1s a day on which the farmers bring home 
the harvested crops consisting of all varieties of food grains 
and pulses needed for the household. The farmers, having 
finished a hectic schedule of harvesting the crops and 
becoming free from agricultural operations, enjoy good 
food and rest in their homes. They spend a leisure time, 
happily with their family and friends indulging in fun and 
frolic. They invite the newly married sons-in-law to their 
houses, present them with new clothes and the entire house 
abounds with joy. In this context, there is a folk song in 
Telugu depicting the festival atmosphere in the villages: 


As Sankranti ts the festival of festivals, 
Oh, newly wedded bridegroom, 
Visit your in-laws house; 

Come, spend your time in fun and frolic with 
Your brothers-in-law and sisters-in-law, 
The entire household and the neighbourhood 
Will honour you with love and affection. 


In the earlier days, the means of transportation were 
not much developed. The sons-in-law used to visit their 
in-laws’ houses by walk or on bullock carts. Hence, the 
entire village used to shower a lot of affection on them and 
respect them by attending to their needs. They used to be 
fed with a variety of tasty dishes. 


The Sankranti festival 1s also an occasion, when the 


Know Thyself! You Will Know Everything 3 


bullocks are decorated elaborately and taken to various 
houses in the village. The bullocks are worshipped and 
fed sumptuously as an expression of gratitude for all the 
hard work they have done in the fields. Even the bovine 
members of the household are feted. A symbolic marriage 
is performed between a pair of bull and cow, naming them 
as Rama and Sita. They are taken along the streets and made 
to dance to the delight of every one. The cow named Sita 
is enquired, “Rama is black. Do you like him?” Sita would 
swing her head in disagreement. Then, she is counselled, 
“please do not say no; Rama is great. He is handsome and 
respectable!” Then, Sita would nod her head in agreement. 
An elder brother watching this beautiful show invites his 
younger brother to witness this symbolic marriage and offer 
gifts to the ‘couple’, thus: 


Oh, my dear brother, 
here comes the Gangireddudasu. 
Come, let us go and see him. 
He wears a silver medallion and a waist belt. 
He carries a decorated staff and 
He wears special marks on his forehead. 
He brings with him richly caparisoned 
sacred cow and bull and 
performs their marriage. 
Let us see the marriage and offer our gifts. 


(Telugu folk song) 


4 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


Thus, the Sankranti festival is celebrated 1n the villages 
with a lot of religious fervour and fun. The festivals like 
Sankranti and Sivaratri are meant to contemplate upon and 
realise one’s innate Divinity. 


People say idi na dehamu (this is my body), very 
casually. But, people well-versed in Sanskrit language 
would interpret the expression na dehamu (my body) in a 
different way. They explain that ‘na’ means ‘not’ based upon 
the literal meaning and conclude na dehamu means ‘I am 
not the body’. Similarly the Telugu expression na manasu 
(my mind) can be interpreted as ‘I am not the mind’. Same 
is the case with buddhi (intellect). The sum and substance 
of all these expressions is ‘I am not the body, I am not the 
mind, I am not the buddhi (intellect)’ etc. In the same logic, 
one has to maintain a state of perfect equanimity unaffected 
by pain and pleasure at all times affirming, ‘these sorrows 
and difficulties as well as happiness and pleasure are not 
mine. I am beyond these dualities’. 


The Need For Ceiling On Desires 


‘It 1s my body’ means ‘I am different from the body’. 
When you consider yourself as separate from your body, 
why should you feel the pain out of it? The situation, 
however, is that you are unable to bear the pain caused to 
the body. Hence, you remain at the level of a human being 
only. You are unable to come out of the delusion of body 


Know Thyself! You Will Know Everything 5 


attachment. As long as you are attached to the body, these 
sorrows and difficulties as well as pain will haunt you. 
These are all your own making. 


Supposing you get angry. From where did this anger 
come? This has come from you only. Similarly, jealously 1s 
a quality that manifested from your mind. Thus, each one 
of these bad qualities are the result of your own thoughts. 
Hence, if only you are able to control your thoughts properly 
you will be able to achieve anything in life. The mind, 
intellect and chitta are the reflections of Atma. The mind 
has no stability. It 1s the repository of thoughts and desires. 
It is said ‘Manayeva manushyanam Karanam bandha 
mokshayoh’ (the mind 1s the root cause of either bondage or 
liberation). Hence, one has to keep the mind under proper 
control by putting some ceiling on desires. 


Attachment Of Oneself With The Body Results in Ego 


Both the body and mind undergo change constantly. 
However, there 1s one entity inside which is changeless, that 
is Atma. It has no form. But, it has a name, Atma. Self and 
Atma both mean the same. Atma 1s also called Aham. One 
should not confuse himself in this context that this Aham is 
Ahankara (ego), which is identified with the body. God has 
no name and form and He is always referred to as Brahman. 
If God were to reveal His true nature, He will say ‘Aham 
Brahmasmi’ (1 am Brahman). The same Brahma Tattwa 1s 
permeating all beings as Atma Tattwa. 


6 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


We say, “So and so is my wife; so and so 1s my son; so 
and so 1s my daughter-in-law” etc. These are all illusory and 
bodily relationships. They are acquired by us and not God 
given. Similarly God 1s not granting you either pleasure or 
pain. All are your own making only. They are due to your 
body attachment. As long as you are attached to the physical 
body, you will experience pain only. Once this physical 
body is consigned to flames, nothing comes along with 
you. Atma, Self, I - these are the different names given to 
the same Atmic principle. The identification of One (Self) 
with the body is done by the individual, thereby resulting 
in Ahankara (ego). That 1s why Jesus advised (main) to 
cross the little I (ego), so that he may become God himself. 


Who Are You? 


Your own Self (Atma) directs all your activities from 
within. This Self has no birth and death, just as Brahman 
has no birth and death. It 1s eternal, true and changeless. We 
have to attach ourselves to such an everlasting principle; 
not to the constantly changing and ephemeral objects. 
Supposing you married a girl, you call her your wife. Prior 
to the marriage who was she? Who were you? There was 
absolutely no relationship between you. It is only after 
your marriage, you became husband and wife and acquired 
marital relationship. The relationship is acquired by you. 
God has nothing to do with these worldly relationships. Yet, 


Know Thyself! You Will Know Everything 7 


He 1s the eternal witness to all that goes on in this world. 


Dhyana (meditation), Japa (constant repetition 
of God’s name) or yoga are of no help in realising 
the Atma Tattwa. Nor the nine forms of devotion like 
Sravananm (listening), Kirtanam (singing), Vishnusmaranam 
(contemplating on Vishnu), Padasevanam (serving His 
Lotus Feet), Vandanam (salutation), Archanam (worship), 
Dasyam (servitude), Sneham (friendship), Atmanivedanam 
(self-surrender) are of any help. They are different forms of 
Sadhana which we ourselves have taken up. They are not 
God given. How many ascetics are not there in this world 
who do severe penance? How many people are not there 
who constantly do japa’?? Even when they are sleeping, 
the japamala rotates in their hand. Do all these spiritual 
exercises confer Moksha (liberation) on oneself? Never! 
One has therefore to constantly contemplate on the Atma 
Tattwa. If someone enquires who you are, you should be 
able to reply ‘Iam God!’ with all the faith and confidence at 
you command. The Atmaswarupa in all the human beings 
is one and the same. He is eternal and changeless. 


I have told you several times about the story of 
Alexander the Great. Though he conquered large parts of the 
world, he could not take with him even an iota of property 
that he accumulated. He had to leave this world with empty 
hands. In order to demonstrate this truth to the world, he 


8 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


instructed his ministers to take his dead body in a procession 
through the streets of his capital keeping both his hands 
in a raised position pointing the sky. When the ministers 
were curious to know the reason for this strange request 
from the Emperor, Alexander replied, “I have conquered 
several countries and accumulated great wealth. There is a 
vast army under my control. Yet, none will accompany me 
at the time of my leaving this mortal body. I will be going 
with empty hands. This truth has to be demonstrated to all 
people.” 


Have Pure Resolves To Attain Atma Jnana 


We may acquire a lot of wealth and deposit in the 
banks or lend it to others for interest. Yet, we cannot take 
even a handful of earth along with us at the time of leaving 
our body. Nothing of this world comes along with us. We 
are unnecessarily struggling and planning several schemes 
constantly thinking about them day and night. In spite of 
all our struggle, what has to go out of our hands will go. 


The body 1s like a water bubble. The mind is like a mad 
monkey. If you follow this mad monkey, you will get into 
trouble. On the other hand, if you believe in the body, you 
do not know when this body, which 1s like a water bubble, 
will burst. Nothing is permanent. Only the Atma is eternal 
and immortal. That is God. The ‘I’, ‘Self’, ‘God’ are all the 
different names by which Divinity is referred to. The Atma 


Know Thyself! You Will Know Everything 9 


that 1s referred to as ‘I’ 1s donning the different names and 
forms. God had incarnated as Rama, Krishna etc. Rama 
underwent several difficulties and demonstrated greatest 
ideals. Krishna demonstrated several /eelas and attracted 
several people. Finally, He left His mortal coil. The physical 
bodies of the Avatars undergo changes, but the Divine Atma 
in their bodies remains the same. The Atma 1s omnipresent. 
However, 1n order to attain Atma Jnana, your resolves have 
to be pure. You have to constantly contemplate upon the 
Divine Atma. Your thoughts and actions may change; the 
methods of your Japa, Tapa and Yoga may change, but 
Divinity will not undergo any change. That is why Divinity 
has been described as Nirgunam, Niranjanam, Sanatana 
Niketanam, Nitya, Suddha, Buddha, Mukta, Nirmala 
Swarupinam (God 1s attributeless, pure, final abode, eternal, 
unsullied, enlightened, free and embodiment of sacredness). 


Good Character Is Very Essential 


People pray, “Oh! God! Grant me your Divine 
darshan’. Even if He grants you His divine vision, it is only 
momentary. It comes and goes like a flash. In fact, God is 
very much immanent in your own heart. He 1s hearing all 
your prayers. He 1s answering your prayers. Even when 
your physical body ceases to exist, the Atma remains. 
That Atma (Self) is eternal. It assumes different forms. We 
witness several objects in this Universe, like the stars, the 
sun, the moon, etc. Though they appear to be static, even 


10 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


they undergo changes. Only Divinity, which is the basis of 
all these, remains changeless and eternal. 


One should always maintain purity. In fact, this land 
of Bharat has earned great name and fame, for purity and 
character: 


This land of Bharat has given birth to many noble 
women like Savitri who brought her dead husband 
back to life; Chandramati who extinguished wild 
fire with the power of truth; Sita who proved her 
chastity by coming out of blazing fire unscathed 
and Damayanti who reduced an evil-minded 
hunter to ashes with the power of her chastity. 
This land of piety and nobility attained plenty 
and prosperity and became the teacher of all the 
nations of the world because of such women of 
chastity. 


(Telugu poem) 


Good character is very essential not only for ladies, 
but for gents too! If only one has character, you can call 
him or her as a man or a chaste woman. Today, we find 
boys and girls, moving very close and behaving as though 
they are husband and wife. But, for how long? Only for a 
short period. Thereafter, the situation changes. Once they 
are married, the boy will be somewhere and the girl will go 
somewhere else. However, there will be no change at all 


Know Thyself! You Will Know Everything 1] 


in the Divine nature. It is customary to exchange diamond 
rings between a boy and girl when they marry. The diamond 
ring which is a permanent object is symbolic of Divinity, 
which is changeless and 1s available to people at all times. 
We should safeguard our character like a diamond. It is 
the custom of even overseas people to exchange diamond 
rings at the time of marriage. Thus, there 1s a meaning in 
every custom and tradition not only in India, but also in 
all countries. 


What Is Educare? 


As I have already mentioned above, you say that 
this is “my body’ (na dehamu). Here ‘na’ refers to self in 
Telugu language. But, in Sanskrit language ‘na’ refers to 
‘no’. Hence, it means ‘I am not the body.’ Thus, there is 
a lot of meaning in every expression. God 1s described as 
“Sahasra seersha Purushah sahasrakshah sahasra pad” 
(The Cosmic Being has thousands of heads, eyes and feet). 
You have only one head whereas God has thousands of 
heads. What does it mean? All heads 1n the entire creation 
are His! Likewise, it 1s not correct to say that Swamy has 
seen a thousand full moons (Sahasra Chandra darshan). | 
have seen not just one thousand full moons but crores and 
crores of full moons. As the Veda declares “Chandrama 
manaso jatah”, moon is the presiding deity of our mind. 
You all have a mind each. I have been seeing all your minds. 
I have been seeing the minds of crores of people all over 


12 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


the world. Thus, it amounts to seeing of not merely one 
thousand moons but crores and crores of moons. 


The boys sang a song a few minutes ago: 
“Neeku maku unnadi oke bandhamu, 
Ade Prema Bandhamu.”’ 


(“The only bond that units us with You is the bond of 
Love’). You should ensure that this bond of love lasts 
forever. Outwardly, we may display several qualities. But, 
the inner thoughts or values are only five Sathya (truth), 
Dharma (righteouness), Santi (peace), Prema (love) and 
Ahimsa (non-violence). These are innate qualities, not 
super imposed from outside. Neither they can be purchased 
from any shop. They are very much ingrained in the core 
of our personality. Our duty is to manifest those qualities 
and reflect them in our daily life. That is ‘Educare’. On the 
other hand, education refers to acquiring knowledge relating 
to the physical and secular world. 


You Should Love Your Neighbours 


Truth is eternal. It has to manifest from within. Same 
is the case with Dharma. It 1s said “Dharmamoolam idam 
Jagat”. In fact, it is “Sathyamoolam idam jagat’’. Truth 
is righteousness. All other values are contained in and 
originate from Truth. Love 1s another quality that is innate 
in human beings. It should be manifested and shared with 
one and all. Where there is love, there cannot be hatred. 
Love transforms itself into non-violence. When a person 


Know Thyself! You Will Know Everything 13 


is suffused with love, he cannot indulge in any kind of 
violence. Where there is no love, people cause harm to one 
another. From truth emerges righteousness. When these two 
qualities go together, peace is the result. Peace manifests as 
calm and serene behaviour. A person 1n that state says “I am 
peaceful”. Several people when enquired about the purpose 
of their sadhana, reply “for attaining peace of mind”. But, 
where is peace? There are only pieces in the outside world. 
A mother loves her child. She will not forsake her child 
under any circumstances, even when provoked to get angry. 
Love drives it away. If non-violence is to reign supreme 
in the world, the quality of love must be cultivated by all. 


It is not enough if you love yourself. You should love 
your neighbours too. You must develop the feeling that 
everyone belongs to you and the same Atma resides as the 
indweller in all people. For example, there is only one moon 
in the sky. The same moon 1s reflected in a thousand pots. 
You will see the moon reflected in each of the thousand 
pots separately. Can you therefore say there are thousand 
moons. No! Similarly, there are no separate suns in different 
countries like India, USA, Japan, etc. There is only one sun 
illuminating the entire world. However, the time at which 
the sun rises in different parts of the world differs. Now it 
is 6QO’clock in the evening for us, whereas it is 6 O’clock 
in the morning in America. In Japan, it is 12.00 noon. On 
the basis of this difference in time, you cannot say that 
there are more than one sun in the sky. There is only one 
sun illuminating the entire world. Similarly, there is only 


14 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


one God residing as the indweller in different people. Each 
one worships Him in his own way ascribing a particular 
name and form to Divinity. Several people are trying to 
ascertain from Me the birth place of Lord Rama. During 
the past several years a number of people approached Me 
and pleaded with Me, “Swami! You please tell us where 
exactly Rama was born”. I told them, “Rama was born in 
the womb of mother Kausalya’”’. In fact, do you search for 
yourself in the outside world? No! Your true nature is to 
be found in yourself only. You are you only. Similarly, it is 
futile to search for God, enquiring ‘Where can I find God?”’ 
God is omnipresent. 


Sarvatah Panipadam Tat Sarvatokshi 
Siromukham, Sarvatah Srutimalloke 
Sarvamavrutya Tishttati 


(with hands, feet, eyes, head, mouth and ears pervading 
everything, He permeates the entire universe). 


Hence, there is no use enquiring,” Where 1s God?” 
You try to know about yourself, in the first instance. Then 
you will know everything. Unfortunately today people 
are trying to know about everything in the outside world, 
without first knowing about themselves. No purpose will 
be served by such an exercise. Know thyself! Then you will 
know everything. Remind yourself “I am the Embodiment 
of Divine Atma; the Atma 1s immanent in me”’. 


People often say “This is my....; this is my...” But, 


Know Thyself! You Will Know Everything 15 


who is that ‘my?’ To whom does it refer? The feeling of 
‘my’ 1s Maya (illusion). However, people do not make any 
effort to understand this. Since you are an individual, you 
say “My....’ But, God is not confined to a particular name 
and form. He 1s the principle of ‘I’, which 1s all-pervading. 
Several names and forms are ascribed to Him, but He is 
one and only one! “Ekam sat viprah bahudha vadanti”’ 
(truth is one the wise say it in different ways). The different 
expressions like ‘I’, ‘I am God’, ‘I am Brahma’, I am 
Vishnu’, etc. refer to only one God. Unfortunately today 
people are ‘dividing’ the ‘Divine’. You should treat Divinity 
as only one. 


You should not differentiate between people, saying, 
“This man is my brother, this person is my son-in-law etc.” 
All are brothers and sisters only. When you consider all 
people as your brothers and sisters, where is the feeling of 
difference between individuals? Spirituality teaches exactly 
this feeling of oneness among human beings. People say 
that they could realise God by doing japa, dhyana and such 
other sadhanas. But, when and where? How? They will not 
be able to see even the person standing right 1n front of them 
when they close their eyes. How then can they see God in 
meditation? These are all sadhanas (spiritual practices) 
meant to control the mind. The mind 1s very unsteady. It 
is always affected by bumps and jumps. How then can 
you control such an unsteady mind? It is not possible. 


16 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


There is only one way the mind can be controlled, that ts 
by constant contemplation on God. We often see people 
changing the names and forms of God for contemplation, 
frequently. One day they contemplate on Rama; the next 
day on Krishna and yet another day on Venkateswara, etc. 
Mind control is not possible by such contemplation. If you 
consider Rama as the God of your liking, then stick on to 
that name and form till your last breath. Then, surely you 
will have the Sakshatkara (vision) of Rama. 


Install the Form Of God In Your Heart; Develop 
Oneness With Him 


Great painters like Ravi Varma portrayed Rama in a 
particular form. But, Rama and Krishna are not confined 
to such forms only. In fact, God has no particular form. He 
assumes a particular form at a particular time, for the sake 
of devotees. Thereafter, even that form vanishes. Several 
pictures and paintings of God in a particular form are sold 
in the market. They are done by painters like Ravi Varma. 
Did Ravi Varma actually see Rama or Krishna? No; he 
only heard stories about Rama and Krishna and painted 
their forms based upon his imagination. These pictures and 
paintings only remind you about Divinity. Neither Ravi 
Varma nor any other person did actually see God. You are 
God, verily! Do not think that God 1s somewhere in a distant 
place. You yourself are God. Develop that confidence. 
However, when you consider yourself as God, you must 


Know Thyself! You Will Know Everything 17 


develop divine qualities. Then only you are entitled to 
consider yourself as God. Since no one had ever explained 
the nature of Divinity in this manner, people have fallen 
into dogmatic theories. 


Spirituality Will Reveal Your True Nature 


God is immanent in every human being, nay, all living 
beings. There 1s no place where God 1s not present. Wherever 
you see, God is present there. In fact, you need not come 
over here to see God. He is very much present in the place 
where you reside. Without realising this truth, people are 
spending a lot of money and going on pilgrimages. That is 
not what you are expected to do. Develop the quality of love 
in you and share it with all. Then all people can become 
one. All are one, be alike to everyone. No living being can 
ever live, without love. Living is possible only with love. 
Hence, develop a loving nature. When you go home, close 
your eyes and contemplate upon God. You are sure to find 
Him in your own heart. When you open your eyes to the 
outside world, you see all and sundry. What do you think 
is the purpose for which you are endowed with eyes? It 1s 
only to see God. 


If you go to a doctor complaining about some problem 
in your body, he will take an X-ray of your heart, liver or 
kidney etc., and decide about the particular malady from 
which you are suffering. Spirituality 1s like an X-ray photo 
that will reveal your true nature. Install the form of God 


18 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


in your heart and contemplate on Him incessantly. Never 
change that form for any reason. You are sure to realise 
God. You need not search for Him elsewhere. If you wish 
to see Swami, install the form of Swami in the altar of your 
heart. You can surely visualise Swami there. If you develop 
a feeling of oneness with Him, everything will turnout to 
be good for you. This 1s what you have to realise today. 
Festivals come and go. Sunday, Monday, Tuesday days 
roll on like that. Saturday lapses into Sunday. But, God will 
never change. He 1s eternal. Realise this truth. 


New Year Message,Prasanthi Nilayam, 1-1-2009. 


ou can win the Grace of the Lord only 

by dharma. Dharma induces the spirit 
of self-surrender and develops it. Without 
the training that the practice of dharma gives 
to your senses, your feelings and emotions, 
you cannot have steady faith and steady 
detachment. The Lord is Dharma conceived as 


a personality. Rama is known as Vigrahavan 
Dharma (Righteousness personified). If you 
step across the bounds of Dharma and play 
foul, you cannot win the game of life. 


Sri Sathya Sai Baba 





2 


Money Comes And Goes; 
Morality Comes And Grows 


Bharat ts the motherland of many noble souls who 
earned great name and fame in all the continents 
of the world. This is the land of valorous people 
who vanquished the foreign rulers in the 
battlefield and attained independence. This ts the 
land which excelled in music, literature and other 
fine arts. Having been born in this great land of 
Bharat, oh, boys and girls, if is your sacred duty 
to protect its rich cultural heritage. 


(Telugu poem) 
DEAR students! Be prepared to uphold the honour 
and glory of this country of Bharat! You are sure to come out 


victorious in this effort. Today, people are able to achieve 
ereat progress in secular and scientific fields. But, they are 


20 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


unable to march forward in the field of spirituality. One has 
to progress in spirituality, more than in other fields. People 
used to give great importance to progress in the spiritual 
arena in the ancient times. In fact, it used to be the goal of 
their life. However, there 1s a decline in the spiritual outlook 
of people in recent times. In these days a lot of effort is 
made to achieve progress in secular, physical and worldly 
matters. Whatever achievements made in these areas are 
only temporary and transitory; they are not permanent. 
While people are able to make giant strides in secular areas 
all over the world, there is decline in the importance given 
to spiritual and moral progress. This tendency is in sharp 
contrast to the culture of Bharat in ancient times. 


This land of Bharat has given birth to many noble 
women like Savitri who brought her dead husband 
back to life; Chandramati who extinguished wild 
fire with the power of truth; Sita who proved her 
chastity by coming out of blazing fire unscathed 
and Damayanti who reduced an evil-minded 
hunter to ashes with the power of her chastity. 
This land of piety and nobility attained plenty 
and prosperity and became the teacher of all the 
nations of the world because of such women of 
chastity. 


(Telugu poem) 
Signs Of Kali Age 


Savitri, a great woman of chastity brought her 


Money Comes And Goes; Morality Comes And Grows 21 


deceased husband back to life by the power of her chastity. 
Such women brought great name and fame to the country 
of Bharat. Can you find parallels to her anywhere in this 
world? No doubt, whoever is born must die. But, is there 
a woman in any country in the world who could bring her 
dead husband back to life, except in Bharat? The whole 
world is falling to abysmal depth due to transgression of 
the righteous path, lack of character and bad behaviour. 


Once, Arjuna was narrating to King Dharmaraja a few 
strange incidents he observed while going on a tour of the 
Kingdom. A farmer reported to Arjuna, “Swami! Yesterday 
I left the implements in the field itself after ploughing, since 
it was getting dark. Today when I went to the field to pick 
up those implements, they are not to be found there.” On 
another occasion he noticed some ladies putting locks to 
their houses and going out. On enquiry they informed him, 
“Swami! We wanted to go out on some work and unless we 
lock our houses, we will not be able to keep our belongings 
safe.” This was stunning news to Arjuna, since no house 
in the kingdom used to be locked in those days unlike in 
present times and people were able to move very freely 
without any worry. Later, when King Dharmaraja himself 
went on a stroll, he observed a lady talking to a man in 
public standing in the middle of the road. Such type of 
behaviour went against the custom prevailing in the country. 
Dharmaraja was taken aback at these developments and felt 
that the age of Kali had begun. He therefore decided that it 


22 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


was time that the Pandavas leave for their heavenly abode. 
Ladies and gents engaging themselves in conversation in 
full view of the public was a taboo in those days. 


Peace Emanates From One’s Heart 


Bharat is a land where noble thoughts and feelings 
are cultivated right from childhood. In fact, Bharat is the 
spiritual teacher for the entire world. Even now, you will 
find Bharatiyas do not go astray in their behaviour, as it is 
happening in some other countries 1n the world. They are 
decent and courteous in their behaviour at least in public. 
Even an aged son dare not talk to his mother standing 
in front of her. In the earlier days of Swami, the Raja of 
Venkatagiri used to visit Puttaparthi. He used to bring the 
heir apparent and his other son along with him. Before 
their departure, the sons took the blessings of their mother, 
who used to sit behind a screen and stretch her legs for her 
sons to offer their obeisance to her. Such were their noble 
feelings and exemplary character. 


Today, you will find boys and girls moving together 
even in public places. If someone makes enquiries, they 
reply that so and so was their classmate. Such acts in the 
old days were considered as highly improper. In fact, the 
term ‘classmate’ itself is a wrong expression. You should 
not use the word ‘classmate’. You should say ‘a fellow 
student in the class’. The rules of conduct in the earlier 
times were very strict. The situation has changed now. Boys 


Money Comes And Goes; Morality Comes And Grows 23 


and girls visit each other’s houses without any inhibition 
and even dine together. This is highly improper. Before 
doing such things, one has to enquire into oneself. “Am 
I a human being or an animal or a beast?” Animals have 
animal qualities. But, you are a human being. Hence, you 
should possess human qualities. You say you are a human 
being. Therefore, you have to enquire into yourself, “Do I 
possess human qualities?” 


What are those human qualities? You should never 
hurt anyone. You should not speak harsh words against any 
individual. You should have compassion and a charitable 
disposition. Only such a person can be said to be a human 
being. Sathya (Truth), Dharma (Righteousness), Santi 
(Peace), Prema (Love) and Ahimsa (Non-violence) are the 
five qualities a human being should possess. Giving a go- 
bye to Sathya and Dharma, people pray for peace (Santi). 
Is it possible? Can anyone get peace outside? Peace is a 
state of mind that is very much inside one’s own self. It 
emanates from one’s heart. People are now searching for 
peace in the outside world. 


Follow Your Inner Voice; That Is Real Education 


There is reaction, resound and reflection for everything 
in the world. It is only when you develop the quality of 
hatred in yourself, you will see hatred in others. Even when 
no one causes any harm to you, you try to hurt others. 
Whatever you do to others, surely you will experience 


24 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


the result of that action. Whatever you hear, whatever 
you experience, it is all due to the reaction, reflection and 
resound of your own actions and feelings. Others are not 
responsible for it. You forget this simple truth and lament, 
‘So and so is accusing me; so and so is causing pain to 
me; so and so is hurting me’, etc. No one is responsible 
for either your good or bad. Neither it is God’s creation; 
for, God is Nirgunam, Niranjanam, Sanatana Niketanam, 
Nitya, Suddha, Buddha, Mukta, Nirmala Swarupinam 
(God 1s attributeless, unsullied, final abode, eternal, pure, 
enlightened, free and embodiment of sacredness). 


You go on fighting with others and try to hurt them. 
Then you are not a human being at all! You should always 
help others, you should not hurt anyone. “Help Ever, 
Hurt Never’. It 1s said, Paropakara Punyaya, Papaya 
Parapeedanam (one attains merit by serving others and 
commits sin by hurting them). Sarva Jiva Namaskaram 
Kesavam Pratigachchati (whomsoever you salute, it reaches 
God) and Sarva Jiva Tiraskaram Kesavam Pratigachchati 
(whomsoever you criticise, it reaches God). You think you 
are accusing someone or making fun of someone. It 1s all 
your illusion. In fact, you are accusing yourself and making 
fun of yourself in the process. Everything has reaction, 
reflection and resound. You yourself are responsible for 
either good or bad. If you wish to enjoy good things in life, 
you should do good to others in the first instance. 


Today’s education is information-oriented. It 1s 


Money Comes And Goes; Morality Comes And Grows 25 


bookish knowledge. It is not real education. It is not this type 
of education that you should pursue. You have to pursue 
‘Educare’. Educare manifests in one’s own heart. Education 
relates to gathering information by reading several books 
and storing them in your brain. Whatever you remember out 
of that knowledge, you will reproduce in your examinations 
and acquire degrees. You call that education. That is not real 
education. You have to follow your inner voice. That is real 
education. In the recent sports day, you played many games; 
you displayed beautiful gymnastic skills; you sang several 
songs. These are all the activities relating to the body, which 
is the result of your past karmas (actions). However, you 
should not repose absolute confidence in the physical body. 
The body is given to you for discharging your duty as a 
human being. You should not misuse your body. It is the 
responsibility of teachers, headmistresses, principals, vice 
chancellors and chancellors to teach the students the value 
and purpose of human birth. 


Treat Your Parents With Love And Respect 


Your duty is to follow your conscience. Your 
conscience helps you manifest noble qualities. But, you do 
not pay heed to the voice of your conscience and go against 
the human values. Hence, you should never ignore your 
conscience. Your conscience is your most valuable property. 
You need not have to do japa, tapa, dhyana or yoga. You 
will achieve a lot of progress in your Sadhana, 1f only you 


26 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


listen to your inner voice. Whatever comes from the depth 
of your heart, will do good for you. Whatever goes against 
the dictates of your conscience 1s worldly, whereas inner 
voice or conscience 1s spiritual. “Help Ever; Hurt Never’, 
is the cardinal principle of spirituality. Whoever follows 
the inner voice will always be safe. You should never go 
against that inner voice. That is true spirituality. 


Spirituality does not mean just conforming to 
worship and meditation. These practices have degenerated 
into several undesirable activities these days. The 
underlying principle and the purpose of these Sadhanas 
are totally forgotten. It is said, Manasyekam Vachasyekam, 
Karmanyekam Mahatmanam; (Those whose thoughts, 
words and deeds are in perfect harmony are noble ones). 
Unless there is perfect accord between your thoughts, 
words and deeds, you are not a human being at all! You get 
very angry against someone and slap him. But think for a 
moment; for, it is a great sin to hurt others. In the process, 
you are hurting not your enemy, but God verily! All are 
divine. Hence, you should never hurt anyone. It is natural 
to help those who help you. But, you should be able to help 
even those who harm you. 


There is nothing great in helping 
Those who have helped you. 
He is a noble one who helps even 
Those who have harmed him. 


Money Comes And Goes; Morality Comes And Grows 2) 
(Telugu poem) 


It is only Sai in this world who helps even those 
who try to harm Him, ignoring their faults. I never mind 
the harm done to Me by others. We must always be calm, 
serene and peaceful under all circumstances. If only you 
maintain the quality of peace, you can achieve anything in 
life. Wherever you see in the outside world, it is only pieces 
and pieces! Do not hurt the feelings of others, come what 
may. Always treat your parents with love and respect. 


Money Is Not Important, Your Mind Is Important 


In fact, your parents are your first teachers. Respect 
them. Any amount of your good work by inconveniencing 
your parents is of no avail. That cannot be considered 
good work at all. Though it may appear to be yielding 
some benefits temporarily, the end result of all this work 
will turn out to be very bad. Hence, you must ensure that 
you do not cause any inconvenience or suffering to your 
parents. The more you inconvenience them the more you 
will suffer. With regard to charity, the more you give in 
charity to others, the more benefit you will receive later. 
Therefore, try to help others, always. Do any kind of seva 
that you are capable of. When you thus go on doing help 
to others, you will be progressing in the path of Truth. As 
you travel in the path of Truth, Dharma will automatically 
follow. Where Sathya (truth) and Dharma (righteousness) 
go together, Santi (peace) will reign there. Then Prema 
(love) will follow. Where there is love, there cannot be 


28 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


hatred. You will not have enemies then. It is only when 
the spring of love gets dried up in your heart that you will 
try to cause suffering to others. Hence, develop love for 
all. Sathya, Dharma, Santi, Prema and Ahimsa are human 
qualities. 


Today, there is rampant violence everywhere in the 
world. People are afraid to stay alone even in their houses. 
Several changes are taking place all over the world. Earlier, 
the United States of America was considered to be a super 
power and a wealthy country. But, now all that glory is gone. 
As a result, people who were going to their workplaces 
in cars earlier are now going by walk. We think money 
and wealth can do anything. But, money is not important; 
your mind is important. If only you can control your mind, 
everything will turn out to be good for you. 


Always Remember The Society And Its Welfare 
Dear students! 


Whatever work you undertake, do it with a sense of 
dedication to God. Sarva Karma Bhagavad Preetyartham 
(do all actions to please God). Always remind yourself 
that God is the doer and you are just an instrument in 
the hands of God. You can achieve anything in life, only 
when there is the Will of God. You perform your duty and 
remain as a witness to all that goes in the world. It 1s said, 
“Paropakaraya Punyaya Papaya Parapeedanam”’. Always 
follow the principles of “be good, do good and see good”’. 
Let your tongue speak only the truth. Let all your deeds be 


Money Comes And Goes; Morality Comes And Grows 29 


helpful to others. Whoever undertakes service in society 
with such a motto will always be happy. 


Pride, jealousy, etc, are all bad qualities. They drive 
away good qualities. They do harm to you as well as to 
society. Hence, be good and do good to others. If someone 
is in a difficult situation, go all out to help him even at the 
cost of your own work. This 1s the foremost duty of a human 
being. “Help Ever, Hurt Never” should be your motto. It 
is enough if you remember these two commands always. 
Do not cause harm even to your enemy. Hurt never. Do 
not cause even the slightest inconvenience to others. This 
is true education. 


You make your parents suffer in the house, come to the 
office and show your egoistic power on your subordinates 
and draw a huge salary for your so-called work and 
responsibility. This 1s a great mistake. As you go up in 
your career and life, your ego and jealousy must come 
down. Then only will you earn respect from one and all. 
You should always remember the society and its welfare. 
You are a member of the society and therefore you have 
a social responsibility. You owe your very existence to 
society. Similarly, society is not separate from you. The 
individuals make a society. You and society are inseparable 
and mutually dependent. It is only when fellow members 
of the society prosper that you too will prosper. 


Develop Faith In Your Motherland 


30 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 
Dear students! 


You all have done well in your studies, getting good 
marks and securing ranks. You brought good name to the 
Institution in the fields of education, sports and cultural 
activities. Yesterday, you witnessed a play on Bhakta Potana. 
He did not feel bad, in spite of criticism and belittling from 
his brother-in-law, Srinatha, also a great poet. Since, Potana 
was a great devotee of Rama and surrendered himself 
totally to the Lord, Rama Himself composed the great epic 
Bhagavatam on his behalf. Potana always believed that his 
poetry, his life and even his very existence were all the gift 
of Lord Rama. He was a true devotee. When Potana was 
suffering from acute poverty and finding it very difficult 
to make both ends meet, his brother-in-law advised him 
to dedicate his works to the King and make a comfortable 
living with the money and jewellery gifted by the King. 
Potana refused to do so saying that he would take refuge 
only in Lord Rama. Instead, he decided to live by cultivating 
his small piece of land. 


One day, while Srinatha was going by the side of 
the fields in a palanquin he saw his brother-in-law Potana 
working in his field. He derisively passed a comment on 
Potana addressing him as ‘Haalika!’ meaning, ‘Oh farmer! 
Are you Ok?’ Potana gave an apt reply saying, “How did 
it matter if | am a farmer? I feel it 1s better and nobler to 
make a living by farming than dedicating my poetry to 
earthly kings and living upon their charity. That gives me 





Money Comes And Goes; Morality Comes And Grows 31 
great satisfaction!’ 


The earth 1s the basis for all the objects and all activities 
in the world. Whoever reposes his faith 1n the land will never 
undergo any difficulties. Hence, I advise the students to 
develop faith in their motherland and pursue their vocations 
in this great land of Bharat itself, instead of dreaming to go 
to other countries like America and earn lakhs and lakhs of 
rupees. You earn name and fame 1n your motherland itself. 
Earning money 1s not something great. Even a beggar can 
earn a lot of money. “Money comes and goes; but morality 
comes and grows”. Cultivate that morality. Whoever has 
morality, will never undergo any difficulty. 


Sankranti Discourse, Prasanthi Nilayam, 14-1-2009. 


sk Lord is a Kalpavriksha (Wish-fulfilling 
Tree); you have to approach Him and develop 
attachment to Him. You must win His Grace and 
be ever near Him keeping back all the forces that 
draw you away from Him. Even if you commit 


some technical faults in singing about Him or in 
worshipping Him, it does not matter. Bhakti makes 
every error excusable. 


Sri Sathya Sai Baba 


32 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


t requires all the strength one can collect 
to carry a load up-hill. The gear and the 
accelerator have both to operate to haul a car 


up asteep. The Guru who taught you cannot 3 

do anything to haul it; he can only guide. 

The control of the senses, changing the mode Lead Your Life With 

of life, the habits of thought, have to be done . . 

by you. The senses say, “Why struggle? Eat, Self-Confidence, Faith And Devotion 

drink and be merry, while you can”, but, the 

Guru says, “Death lands on you without 

notice; overcome its fear now, before he Forbearance ts the real beauty in this sacred land 

calls.” “Now’ is the true friend; ‘yesterday’ of Bharat. Of all the rituals, adherence to truth 

has deceived you and gone; ‘tomorrow’ is a is the greatest penance. The nectarine feeling in 

doubtful visitor. “Today’ is the fastest friend; this country is the feeling of love towards one’s 

hold fast to it.” mother. Character is valued far higher than the 

very life itself. People have forgotten the basic 

Sri Sathya Sai Baba principles of this great culture and are imitating 


Western culture. Alas! Bharatiyas are not aware 
of the greatness of their cultural heritage just as a 
mighty elephant ts not aware of its own strength. 





(Telugu poem) 


34 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


Creation emerges from truth and 
merges into truth, 
Is there a place in the cosmos where truth 
does not exist? 
Visualise this pure and unsullied truth. 


(Telugu poem) 


WHEREVER you see, Sathya is present there. It 
is present 1n every stone, every pebble, every tree, every 
boulder and every rock. Everything is the manifestation of 
truth. Truth blossoms in various ways and various forms. 
Though truth 1s everywhere, it cannot be seen because it 
has no form. Everything in this world is the manifestation 
of God’s glory! You should try to recognise this truth. 


Higher Education At Muddenahalli For Instilling Self- 
Confidence In Students 


Embodiments of Love! 


I have come to Muddenahalli after a long time. When 
I first came here, excellent arrangements were made for the 
convenience of the people who had gathered here in large 
numbers. The organisers very patiently and peacefully 
made them sit comfortably to enable them to listen to My 
Discourse. 


Lead Your Life With Self-Confidence, Faith And Devotion 35 


The purpose of My present visit 1s to provide facilities 
of higher education to the students who are studying here. 
At present, this institution provides facilities to the students 
for studying up to 12th standard. They have to go to distant 
towns if they want to pursue higher studies. The places are 
far-off and the expenditure is too high, which they cannot 
afford. Moreover, living in a town 1s also full of difficulties. 
Therefore, I have resolved to provide education up to 
postgraduate level so that the students can pursue courses 
like B.A., B.Sc., M.A., etc., here itself (loud applause). 


Man is endowed with all types of powers but he is 
suffering because he has too many desires. All his powers 
have become meaningless because of his excessive greed. 
Greed is the real cause of man’s sorrows and difficulties. 
He is losing his peace of mind because of his excessive 
desires. Therefore, man should reduce his desires and 
attain Atma Jnana (knowledge of the Self). Man can get 
rid of all his worries when he engages himself in the quest 
of Atma Jnana. It is My wish to provide ideal education 
to the students in this institution so that after passing their 
B.A., B.Sc., B.Com., etc., they can lead their lives in the 
vast world with self-confidence. 


Value Based Education To Be Imparted To Students 


There are many facilities in villages today but 
spirituality has gone into oblivion. People have given up 


36 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


the practice of reciting the various names of God like Rama, 
Krishna, Govinda, etc. Therefore, I have decided to arrange 
for imparting the teachings of the sacred texts like the 
Ramayana, the Mahabharata and the Bhagavad Gita to the 
students so that they can imbibe these teachings themselves 
and share them with others. It 1s for this purpose that I am 
starting a new campus of this university. You may have 
seen the university building at Puttaparthi on the top of a 
hill. It is My wish that a grand building like that should 
be constructed here and value-based education should be 
imparted to the students of this region also. People know 
the teachings of the Bhagavad Gita but they do not put them 
into practice. What is the use of that knowledge which is 
not put into practice? One should put these teachings into 
practice, share them with others and inspire them to make 
these as part of their life. The very purpose of My coming 
here 1s to encourage and inspire you in this regard. 


Today, I have laid the foundation of the building. 
My resolve is that when I come here again next year, the 
building should be ready. Nobody else can declare with 
such authority that the work of this magnitude would be 
completed in such a short time. It is not only with regard to 
this campus of the university, I did the same for our Super 
Speciality Hospital at Puttaparthi also. I declared on 22"¢ 
November 1990 that the hospital would start functioning 
on 22" November next year, and it did start functioning on 
that day. Do you know how the implements required for 


Lead Your Life With Self-Confidence, Faith And Devotion 37 


the hospital came? On 21‘ November night at 11 O’clock, 
a big van arrived, full of all the required equipment. As 
declared by Me one year before, four heart operations were 
performed on the day of inauguration. The operations were 
successful and the patients were discharged within five 
days. I am laying the foundation of this building on 14" 
February 2009 and this campus will start functioning next 
year. Everything will be ready next year by this time and 
all the facilities will be provided to the students. 


You Can Achieve Everything With Self-Confidence 


Students should develop self-confidence. Many of 
you might have read the story of Abraham Lincoln who 
lived in penury during his student days. While other boys 
went to school in costly clothes, Lincoln could not afford 
even a proper dress when he went to school. One day, his 
friends made fun of him and humiliated him. He came 
home crying and told his mother how he was being insulted 
and humiliated. His mother consoled him, saying, “My 
dear son, do not get affected by praise or blame. Develop 
self-confidence. Have firm faith in God. Then everything 
will become good for you.” These words made a lasting 
impression on the tender heart of Lincoln. He acquired 
self-confidence with the encouragement of his mother. 
Ultimately, he rose to the position of the President of 
America. He expressed his deep gratitude to his mother 


38 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


when he became the President of America because it was 
due to her teachings that he rose to such a high position. 


There is nothing impossible 1n this world for a person 
who has self-confidence and courage. He can accomplish 
anything and everything. Therefore, it 1s necessary to 
strengthen self-confidence. Do not bother about what others 
say. Do not be afraid even 1f they make fun of you. Why 
Should you have any fear when God is with you? He 1s the 
resident of your heart. He is none other than your Atma. Call 
it God, call it Atma, call it Consciousness, all are different 
names of the same reality. If you take gold to the goldsmith 
and ask him to make a ring, he will make a ring out of it. 
The same gold can be melted and made into a bangle or a 
chain. The ring, the bangle and the chain are made of the 
same gold. Likewise, the same Atma 1s present 1n everyone 
though it takes various forms. It is not possible to divide 
the Atma. Ekatma Sarva Bhutantaratma (one Atma dwells 
in all beings). Ekam Sat Viprah Bahudha Vadanti (truth 
is one, but the wise refer to it by various names). Nobody 
can attribute any differences to the principle of the Atma. 
If we perform our task with this type of self-confidence, 
we can achieve anything. We will then be victorious 1n all 
our endeavours. 


You should all become great leaders. Today the 
country 1s passing through a critical situation. People 
are very much concerned as to who should become their 


Lead Your Life With Self-Confidence, Faith And Devotion 39 


leaders. Therefore, you should become good leaders, go to 
the masses, provide necessary encouragement to them and 
set right the society. You are all aware that many evils have 
crept into our society. Many educationists have been saying 
that they will work for the welfare of society, but none of 
them has done anything. Society can be set right only by 
those who have firm faith in God. Sacred teachings should 
be imparted to the students and they should be encouraged 
to take part in the service of society. Only then can there 
be peace in the world. It 1s not enough if you merely pray, 
Samasta Lokah Sukhino Bhavantu (May all the beings of all 
the worlds be happy!). You should serve the world. Serve 
all, Bangaru (nuggets of gold)! Considering yourself as 
the servant of all, you should develop the spirit of selfless 
Service. 


The present-day leaders come and go. Once they 
become leaders, they forget their duties. These leaders 
may become MLAs today, MLCs tomorrow and ministers 
thereafter. But they all come and go. None of them 1s stable 
in his position. You should not become like that. Only 
those who have self-confidence can become real leaders. 
Therefore, you should develop self-confidence and serve 
society. You should develop compassion towards poor 
people and try to protect them. Offer food and clothes to 
them and show them the right path. You need not do what 
is beyond your capacity. Whatever little you can afford 
to do, do tt in such a way that it gives maximum results. 


40 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


I am starting this institution with these expectations and 
bless you all to achieve the same. Next year, I will come 
and open this new campus of the university. 


Students Should Earn A Good Name 


You should not be worried about the funds. So far, I 
have never asked anybody for money. Where is the need 
to ask anybody for money when the goddess of wealth 
Lakshmi resides in My heart? Therefore, you should not 
ask anybody for money. I will provide everything. I do not 
beg from anybody. I am not a beggar. Whatever may be the 
expenditure, I will bear all of 1t Myself. You will see the 
results yourself. Even the people from Bangalore will be 
wonderstruck when they see the work done by Me. 


Students! Lead your life with self-confidence, steadfast 
faith and devotion, and study well. Think that God is always 
with you. In fact, He is residing in your heart. Don’t consider 
that He is separate from you. Your parents may be away 
from you but God can never be away from you. Therefore, 
develop devotion for God. You may forget anything, but 
never forget spirituality. The power of spirituality is greater 
than any other power. There is no other power greater than 
that. Our Narasimha Murthy 1s also sitting here. He should 
stay here for some time and set everything right. (Saying 
this, Swami created a gold ring for Sr1 Narasimha Murthy 
and put it on his finger.) He should help in selecting good 
teachers who can fulfil the objectives of this institution. 


Lead Your Life With Self-Confidence, Faith And Devotion 4] 


Narayana Rao! You and all your teachers should work 
together in unison for the growth and progress of this 
campus. If you need anything, you should ask Me. Do 
not ask anything from anybody else. I will meet all your 
requirements. 


Is My long Discourse causing inconvenience to you? 
(Sri Narasimha Murthy and others said that it was their great 
good fortune to listen to Swami 5 Discourse.) Of course, you 
are all very fortunate. Dear students! You are indeed very 
fortunate that you have been blessed with the opportunity 
to experience the bliss of Swami s Darshan, Sparshan and 
Sambhashan (vision, touch and conversation) from your 
early age. Darshanam Papa Nashanam, Sparshanam 
Karma Vimochanam, Sambhashanam Sankata Nashanam 
(Vision of the Lord destroys all sins, His touch destroys 
the bondage of Karma, conversation with Him destroys all 
troubles). Not only that, all the worldly sufferings are cast 
away by these three. You should share your experience with 
your parents also. Try to correct them if they have any bad 
habits so that they can get rid of them. Earn a good name 
so that your parents may proudly say, “Our boy is studying 
in a Sai institution which has brought great transformation 
in him.” Do not earn a bad name, as a result of which they 
may have to express regret, “Our boy is studying in such 
and such school where he has taken to bad ways.” Earn a 
good reputation. When you earn good reputation, you can 
attain any high position in life. 


42 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


(Here, one of the listeners exclaimed, “Swami! Today, 
it seems that we have been transported into heaven.” Swami 
then said) Very happy, very happy. Be always happy. 
(Bhagawan sang the Bhajan “Prema Mudita Manase Kaho 
Rama, Rama, Ram...” and continued the Discourse.) 


Never Hurt Your Parents 


When you meet any of your friends, do not say, “Oh 
friend! Hello, hello ... How are you?” Instead, address him 
lovingly, saying, “Brother! How are you?” and offer your 
salutations to him. 


Sarva jiva namaskaram Kesavam pratigachchati, 
Sarva jiva tiraskaram Kesavam pratigachchati 


(Whomsoever you salute, it reaches God, whomsoever you 

criticise, it also reaches God). Therefore, respect everyone. 
Love your parents deeply. It is your parents who have given 
you life and nourished you. In fact, all that you have has 
been given to you by your parents while they took all your 
sufferings upon themselves. Therefore, never cause any 
hardship to your parents at any time. When you conduct 
yourself in this noble manner, God will bless you with 
wealth and prosperity. When your parents become weak 
and debilitated, you should support and help them. Children 
should see to it that they do not put their parents to any 
suffering. Never make them shed tears. If you make your 
parents happy, your children will also make you happy. 
Never harm anyone. Always offer help to all. Help Ever, 
Hurt Never. 





Lead Your Life With Self-Confidence, Faith And Devotion 43 


Many overseas devotees are also getting transformed 
by following the teachings of Swami. I declare before all 
of you that the whole world will become like one family 
within next 18 years. Soon Bharat will have a great name 
as spiritual leader of the world, and Bharatiya culture and 
spirituality will spread to all corners of the world. 


Discourse at Sathya Sai Grama, 
Muddenahalli, 14-2-2009. 


a Name is enough to give you all the 
results of every type of sadhana (spiritual 
effort). This is accepted by all the Sastras 
and all the sadhakas (spiritual aspirants) 
who have left accounts of their struggle and 
success. Moreover, the Name is capable of 
being recited and meditated upon by all, 
equally. Of course, the Name is a limitation of 
the Universal; it identifies the un-identifiable, 
through one of its aspects. Take the Upaadhi 
(disguise) as a means of saving yourself; take 
it as a boat that will take you across the sea 
of birth and death. 


Sri Sathya Sai Baba 


44 


SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


Tre Rakshasas (demonic persons) 
had already attained liberation for they 
had the vision of God when they drew their 
last breaths. 


“The vanaras came downto be My instruments 
and so they have no death, neither are they 
born, except at My Command,” said Rama. 


Man too must become His instrument in 
order to escape death and birth. He has come, 
imprisoned in the ego, and he has to liberate 
himself. This can be done only by making him 
aware of the Universal (Adhara) basis. Like a 
man sunk in poverty, dwelling in a hut that is 
raised over a vast underground treasure, man 
is suffering, with a spring of joy inside him, 
of which he is unaware. I have come to give 
you the key of that treasure, to tell you how 
to tap that spring, for you have forgotten the 
way to blessedness. If you waste this chance 
of saving yourselves, it is just your fate. 


Sri Sathya Sai Baba 





4 


Develop Self-Confidence To Gain 


Success In Life 


Forbearance ts the real beauty in this sacred land 
of Bharat. Of all the rituals,adherence to truth 
is the greatest penance. The nectarine feeling in 
this country is the feeling of love towards one’s 
mother. Character is valued far higher than the 
very life itself. People have forgotten the basic 
principles of this great culture and are imitating 
Western culture. Alas! The Bharatiyas are not 
aware of the greatness of their cultural heritage 
just as a mighty elephant is not aware of its own 
strength. 


(Telugu poem) 


46 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


HE elephant, unable to realise its innate strength, 

meekly submits itself to the commands of the 
mahout who works for a paltry sum of a few rupees. It 
gets up and sits down as per the commands of the mahout 
on account of the training it received from him. Similarly 
the Bharatiyas today are blindly following the western 
culture, forgetting their own rich and sacred culture. The 
culture of Bharat is very sacred, strong and ancient. It is 
eternal and a beacon light that guides all the countries of the 
world. How then can the Bharatiyas forget their own great 
culture? The culture of Bharat enjoins that all people should 
revere and respect their mother and father as God. It exhorts 
‘Matrudevo bhava’ and ‘Pitrudevo bhava’ (mother 1s God; 
father is God). Not only this; it also exhorts ‘Acharyadevo 
bhava’ and ‘Atithidevo bhava’ (teacher is God and guest 1s 
God). If you tend to ignore the words of your own mother, 
whom else will you revere and respect? 


Embodiments of Love! 


As we go on talking for hours together, we tend to 
forget what we really intend to communicate. So many 
deviations and distortions creep into our speech. Today, the 
entire world is filled with negative feelings. Whoever you 
come across, whatever you see, negativity 1s widespread. 
All are reflections of your inner thoughts and feelings. But 
beyond all these, there is one entity called Atma which is 
the Embodiment of the Divine Self. There 1s only one Atma 


Develop Self-Confidence To Gain Success In Life 47 


that dwells in every individual, nay every living being. 
The Bhagavad Gita declared “Mamaivamso jeevaloke 
Jeevabhutah Sanatanah” (the eternal Atma in all beings 
is a part of My Being). There 1s no scope at all for any 
doubt or duality in this aspect. Itis “Ekameva adwiteeyam 
Brahma” (The Atma or Brahma is one without a second). 
That is why it is said “a man with dual mind is half blind”. 
Divinity is described in the Vedas as “Sahasra seersha 
purushah sahasraakshah sahasra paad” (The Cosmic 
Being has thousands of heads, eyes and feet). The import 
of this statement is that the one Divinity expresses itself 
through millions of individuals and that all are Divine. We 
tend to forget this great truth and consider each individual 
as separate from the other. 


Develop Faith In Atma Tattwa 


The strife and conflicts between human beings started 
the moment humanity forgot its fundamental unity. It is 
time that this trend 1s reversed and the fundamental unity 
among humans 1s re-established. Along with the unity, there 
should be purity. Where unity and purity go together, there 
is Divinity. The combination of unity, purity and Divinity 
will result in realisation of Atma Tattwa. The Upanishads, 
especially the Taittireeyopanishad dealt at length with this 
Atma Tattwa. If only one develops faith in this Atma Tattwa, 
one will succeed 1n all his endeavours. 


48 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


The Atma Tattwa or Divine consciousness is 
permeating the entire Universe. Not a blade of grass can 
move without this Divine consciousness. Everything 1n this 
Universe is the reflection of that Atma Tattwa or Divine 
consciousness. The same Atma Tattwa dwells in all human 
beings irrespective of religion, caste, creed and nationality. 
This is true even in the case of Avatars. 


The Avatars of Rama, Krishna, etc. may be different in 
names and forms; but the Atma Tattwa in them 1s only one. 
They all lived in their human vestures till the completion of 
their Avataric mission and once their task was completed, 
they disappeared. Hence, the physical bodies are not 
permanent. In fact, nothing in this ephemeral world 1s 
permanent, not even the great Avatars. Atma 1s the only 
entity that is eternal. It is beyond birth and death. It 1s 
changeless. There is a beginning and end for everything 
else in this universe, except the Atma. Hence, one has to 
develop firm faith in this Atma Tattwa. Unfortunately, today 
we tend to forget this true and eternal Atma Tattwa and 
develop faith in the ephemeral world. We weave a web of 
imagination around the pleasures that this transient world 
would offer. Ultimately, we land ourselves 1n sorrow and 
difficulties. The Atma Tattwa 1s the only entity that is true, 
eternal and changeless. Everything else undergoes change 
from time to time. Even in the case of the human body, it 
passes through different stages like childhood, adolescence, 
youth and old age. But, the individual remains the same 


Develop Self-Confidence To Gain Success In Life 49 


through all these changes. 


Today, man adapts himself to continuous changes in 
time, situations and environment. One who changes himself 
thus is not a human being in the real sense. Who 1s a real 
human being? One who does not undergo a change; one 
whose faith in the Atma Tattwa (self) 1s firm and steady. That 
is self-confidence. One who develops that self confidence 
can find a place for himself permanently in the history of 
the world. 


Respect The Commands Of Mother And Follow Them 
Sincerely 


You all know about Abraham Lincoln, the past 
President of the United States of America. He was a perfect 
example of such self-confidence. He came from a very 
poor family and could not afford to have a decent dress 
and books. He was so poor that he had to study under 
streetlights. His mother used to support him with the meagre 
amount of money she earned by mending old and worn-out 
clothes. One day his classmates who were rich and wearing 
fine suits, boots and hats made fun of him and heckled him 
saying that he did not deserve to walk along with them on 
that poor attire and that he may walk on the footpath. He 
came home crying and poured out his agony to his mother 
explaining how he was insulted and humiliated. His mother 
consoled him saying, “My dear son! Do not get affected 


50 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


by praise or blame. Understand the situation at home. Your 
father cannot afford spending money on your education. 
Develop self-confidence. That 1s your property.” These 
words made a lasting impression on the tender heart of 
Lincoln. He acquired self-confidence and self-respect, with 
the constant support and encouragement of his mother. He 
even did some odd jobs and earned some money to support 
himself. The good name he earned for himself in the society 
commanded the respect and love of his fellowmen for him. 


In due course, his friends and well-wishers advised him 
to contest the elections. They assured him of their support 
and votes. On their advice, he contested the elections and 
won. He became the President of America. Thus, Abraham 
Lincoln the son of a poor artisan with little spare money 
even to pursue primary education became the President of 
America by sheer hard work and self-confidence infused 
by his mother. People cannot reach great heights without 
self-confidence. Not even the nine forms of devotion 
Sravananm (listening), Kirtanam (singing), Vishnusmaranam 
(contemplating on Vishnu), Padasevanam (serving His 
Lotus Feet), Vandanam (salutation), Archanam (worship), 
Dasyam (servitude), Sneham (friendship), Atmanivedanam 
(self-surrender) can help. Any amount of sadhana without 
self-confidence will be of little use. Hence, I wish that all of 
you should develop self-confidence. Face your examinations 
with self-confidence. Without self-confidence, not even 
your friends can help. Do not forget to follow your mother’s 
advice, for, she 1s ‘Matrudevo bhava’ (Mother is God). She 


Develop Self-Confidence To Gain Success In Life 51 


will always protect you, wherever you are. He who respects 
the commands of his mother and follows them sincerely 
will come up in life, as in the case of Abraham Lincoln. 


Unfortunately, people today do not give due respect 
and recognition to their mothers. They do not hesitate even 
to denigrate her before others, when they are holding high 
positions. Whenever some guests or officer colleagues visit 
their houses and enquire about the mother, they reply that 
she is a servant. This type of behaviour 1s totally against the 
Vedic injunctions which exhort people to treat the mother 
as God, verily. She in fact, is the living divinity. She is the 
first Guru to a human being. She is the only person who 
selflessly works and wishes for the welfare of her children. 
Those who disregard the advice of their mother will never 
be successful in their life. Even in foreign countries, people 
like Abraham Lincoln attained high positions by obeying 
the commands of their mothers and by developing self- 
confidence. 


We consider the foreigners as great. But, not all the 
foreigners can be considered great. Only those who respect 
their mothers and follow their advice are great. If you ignore 
the advice of your mother, you are sure to face difficulties in 
life. Follow her advice wholeheartedly. Develop the quality 
of implicit obedience to the wishes of your mother, without 
a second thought. Then only will your life be peaceful. 


Sustain The Rich Spiritual Legacy Of Bharat 


52 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


The women of Bharat earned great name and fame for 
their sterling quality of chastity. They are not to be treated 
lightly. A few examples of such noble women are always 
worth remembering and emulated. Savitri could bring her 
deceased husband back to life, by the power of her chastity. 
Sita was a great woman who entered the fire to prove her 
chastity and came out unscathed. There were several such 
examples in this country of Bharat, which shone as a beacon 
light to the entire world. Bharat is a holy and sacred land. 


How fortunate you are to be born in this great land 
of Bharat! You must, therefore, sanctify your lives by 
following the rich and sacred culture of this country. 
Bharat is a holy land where the qualities of magnanimity 
and sacrifice flourished. The spiritual outlook of Bharat 1s 
unparalleled. In fact, 1t is this spiritual outlook that sustained 
this country since times immemorial and took it to great 
heights. The people of this country are enjoying peace and 
bliss even today, while the whole world is passing through 
difficult times. It 1s for this reason that people from all other 
countries visit this country and find solace here. We have 
to sustain this rich legacy of spirituality. 


Develop Self-Confidence To Become Successful In Life 


Whenever someone enquiries a student what he is 
doing, he replies that he is concentrating on his studies. 
But, the real meaning of concentration is fixing one’s mind 
on a particular object. Contemplation is the next step. The 
final step is meditation. Thus, concentration, contemplation 


Develop Self-Confidence To Gain Success In Life 53 


and meditation are the three steps in sadhana. Meditation 
is not simply silent sitting, closing one’s eyes. Maintaining 
an unwavering and steady mind is meditation. People think 
concentration 1s a great exercise. But, it is the first step in 
sadhana, the others being contemplation and meditation. 
Concentration is like the primary school education. 
Contemplation 1s the high school education and meditation 
is the college level education. It is only after one reaches 
the college level, one 1s eligible to acquire a degree. All our 
ancient rishis reached up to this stage and meditated upon 
Divinity. When one reaches the stage of meditation, there 
is no scope for any wavering and one’s faith in Divinity 
becomes steady. You have to attain that stage. You may 
study a number of books and pass your examination in 
the school or college. But, it is only one who reached the 
meditation stage that passes the test prescribed by God. 


Dear students! 


Do not be proud of your achievement in getting a first 
class or a rank. It is not the marks that count. You should 
see that you do not get remarks, which is the result of your 
losing self-confidence. Hence, one should develop self- 
confidence to become a real success 1n life. 


(Bhagawan sang the Bhajan, “Bhajan Bina...’ and 
continued His discourse) 


Embodiments of Love! 


54 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


Constantly meditate upon a name and form of God that 
is to your liking. It does not matter which name and form 
you select for your Namasmarana. All names and forms 
belong to the one God. He 1s Atmaswarupa (Embodiment 
of Divine Atma). He takes upon different forms and is 
worshipped by various names. It is only God who can fulfil 
the desires of devotees. It is He who grants you powers and 
positions. Without Him, you cannot achieve any position. 
All are zeros only! With God’s grace, one can become a 
hero! 


Discourse, Prasanthi Nilayam, 21-02-2009, 


ou are in this body, in this 
oY receptacle in order to realise the God you 
really are. This body is the cocoon you have 
spun round yourselves, by means of your 
impulses and desires. Use it while it lasts, to 
erow wings so that you can escape from it! 


Youcame into this world crying, announcing 
your grief at being thrust into it, grief for 
having lost hold on God. Having come with 
erief, decide not to go with it, from here. Get 
rid of it in this life itself. 


Sri Sathya Sai Baba 





Ss 
Love God And Meditate On Him 


Bharat is the motherland of many noble souls who 
earned great name and fame in all the continents 
of the world. 


This is the land of valorous people who vanquished 
the foreign rulers in the battlefield and attained 
independence. This is the land which excelled in 
music, literature and other fine arts. 


Having been born in this great land of Bharat, oh, 
boys and girls, it is your sacred duty to protect 
its rich cultural heritage. 


(Telugu poem) 


Embodiments of Love! 


56 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


E are spending nights daily ever since we are 

born. But, not all those nights can be termed 
as Sivaratri. People meditate upon, sing and listen to the 
glory of the divine name and experience the Divinity of 
Lord Siva. Since the whole night is spent in meditation 
and singing the glory of the divine name of Lord Siva, this 
night is called Sivaratri. Not only this night, whenever you 
spend the entire night meditating upon the divine name, that 
night is also Sivaratri. Lord Siva is not a separate Avatar. 


Vishnu And Siva Are Beyond Description 


In fact, Hari and Hara (Lord Vishnu and Lord Siva) are 
beyond one’s contemplation. They are beyond the physical 
body. Many people contemplate upon them as Avatars with 
a physical body and worship them in a particular form. 
They develop a deep urge to visualise them in a particular 
form. But, who is it that ascribed those forms to Divinity? 
Surely, they did not incarnate 1n those forms. Some painters 
like Ravi Varma who, based upon certain descriptions in 
the Sastras and Puranas painted them in a particular form 
as per their imagination. That is all! In fact, Vishnu and 
Siva are not limited to a physical frame. They are beyond 
description. They are formless and attributeless. Nirgunam, 
Niranjanam, Sanatana Niketanam, Nitya, Suddha, Buddha, 
Mukta, Nirmala Swarupinam (God 1s attributeless, 
unsullied, final abode, eternal, pure, enlightened, free and 
embodiment of sacredness). 


Love God And Meditate On Him 57 
God Is Formless And Attributeless 


The devotees are also accustomed to contemplate 
upon and worship those forms since millennia. They wish 
to visualise God in those forms. God is beyond description 
and 1s not limited to a particular form. No painter, however 
great he may be, can ever paint the picture of God. How can 
a painter paint the form of God, who is formless? However, 
God assumes different forms as per the wishes of devotees. 
Whoever wishes to visualise God in whatever form of his 
liking, God manifests in that form. It is for that particular 
moment only. It is not permanent. All forms attributed to 
God are only temporary. Divinity is beyond name and form. 


Once Goddess Lakshmi came to Parvati and wondered: 


Oh, Gowri! You are very young and 
Sambasiva is old; 

He has matted locks and wears a tiger skin; 
He rides a bull and is constantly on the move; 
He 1s adorned with snakes; 

How did you court Him? 

Don't you know all this? 

He has no house of His own and sleeps in 
the burial ground. 


(Telugu song) 


Parvati was deeply disturbed by these remarks and 
approached Lord Siva and enquired, “You do not have 
a house of your own. You do not belong to a particular 


58 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


caste or lineage. Further, you are ‘Ardhanaareeswara’ 
(androgynous). How then can you call yourself God?” 
Lord Siva replied that God is beyond names, caste and 
lineage. He then turned to Lakshmi and enquired, “Oh! 
Mother Lakshmi! Are you aware of your own husband’s 
antecedents? He is constantly on the move to protect His 
devotees and has no time for food and sleep. If at all He 
settles down to take food, at that moment some devotee 
like Droupadi prays, “Oh! Lord Krishna! I am in great 
trouble. Please save me.” Immediately, He rushes to rescue 
her, leaving His food. Thus, He is constantly on the move 
to protect His devotees like Narada or Prahlada. How then 
did you court such a Lord who has no time even for food 
and rest?” 


The Formless God Manifests As Per The Wishes Of The 
Devotees 


Siva then clarified that God has no name and form; 
He 1s changeless; He has neither birth nor death; neither 
beginning nor end; He 1s eternal and Atmaswarupa. He also 
emphasised that it 1s man’s illusion to ascribe a name and 
form to God. The formless God manifests with a particular 
form and name as per the wishes of the devotees, to fulfil 
their aspirations. God is formless and attributeless. It is the 
devotees who attribute some names, forms and attributes to 
God and feel satisfied. All the names and forms are anitya 
and asathya (evanescent and false). The only eternal and 
true form of God is Atma. 


Love God And Meditate On Him 59 


Everything 1n the world may change; but the Atma will 
never undergo a change. The entire universe is contained 
in the Atma. This is also called as Divine consciousness 
or Aham or Brahman. People misunderstand this eternal 
truth, ascribing several names and forms to it. When the 
formless God assumes a form, it 1s natural for human beings 
to meditate and worship that form. People derive great 
satisfaction and experience bliss by doing so. It is alright 
as long as that form remains. Once that divine form ceases 
to exist, what will you do? The happiness and bliss derived 
from the worship of a particular form of God are born out 
of your illusion only. 


Never Consider Physical Body As Permanent 


The physical vestures last for a particular period and 
then cease to exist. Divinity takes different forms later. For 
example, you are now attached to this physical body. You 
worship this body and derive great satisfaction and bliss 
thereby. But, after sometime, this body may disappear like 
the earlier Avatars. Then you should not feel sad. When 
the Divine Atma embodied 1n this physical body reaches 
its eternal Abode, it is a matter of joy, not sorrow. In Treta 
Yuga the Rama Avatar came. He went into exile in the forest 
and destroyed several demons including the great Rakshasa 
King, Ravana. Finally, having fulfilled His Avataric 
mission, He went into the Sarayu river and disappeared. 
Same is the case with Lord Krishna 1n the Dwapara Yuga, 


60 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


who left His mortal coil after having been hit by the arrow 
of a hunter in the forest. Thus, the physical vestures are 
always temporary and untrue. 


Meditate Upon Divinity Which Is True And Eternal 


The body is made up of five elements and 1s bound 
to perish sooner or later but the indweller has 
neither birth nor death. The indweller has no 
attachment whatsoever and is the eternal witness. 
Truly speaking, the indweller who is in the form 
of Atma, is verily God Himself. 


(Telugu poem) 


Hence, you should never consider the physical body 
as permanent. The bodies appear according to the time and 
circumstances. Once the prescribed time 1s over, they just 
disappear. Even the experiences gained by the physical 
body vanish. Considering the physical bodies as true, if 
you wish to have the darshan of Lord Krishna of Dwapara 
Yuga now, how is it possible? As long as He walked in that 
body, He appeared in Mathura, Brindavan, Gokul, Dwaraka, 
etc., and made people happy with His darshan, sparshan 
and sambhashan. You take the example of an electric bulb. 
Each bulb has separate wattage, which remains for a limited 
period of time. The Avatars are also like these electric bulbs. 
Over a period, God has incarnated as several Avatars. You 


Love God And Meditate On Him 61 


should not be attached to the physical form of a particular 
Avatar, rather you should be attached to Divinity as the 
formless, attributeless Parabrahma which manifested as 
different Avatars in different ages. 


You were born as a child and grew up as a boy, youth 
and an elderly person. All these different stages in life are 
for a limited period only. But, you the individual are there 
in all the different stages. The Avatars come, fulfil their 
mission and disappear. You must, therefore, meditate upon 
Divinity which 1s true and eternal. 


There are three aspects in sadhana _ concentration, 
contemplation and meditation. You are at the moment fixing 
your gaze on this form, that is concentration. When this form 
moves away after sometime, you still look at this form with 
your mental eye; that 1s contemplation. As a result of this 
exercise, this form gets imprinted 1n your heart permanently. 
That is meditation. As you go on meditating thus, the form 
remains in your heart permanently. At present, you are 
confining your sadhana to concentration and contemplation 
only. These two stages are only transitory. It is true 
that the first step in your sadhana is concentration. The 
concentration has to be transformed into contemplation 
and later into meditation. In this final stage of meditation, 
you will continue to visualise the form of God even if you 
close your eyes. The ancient rishis adopted this form of 


62 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


meditation. That is the reason why God manifested before 
them whenever they wished, talked to them and fulfilled 
their desires. 


The Nirakara, Nirguna Parabrahma (formless, 
attributeless Supreme Self) 1s changeless and eternal. It 
represents the ultimate reality. It is known by different 
names like Rama, Krishna, Sai, etc. You do not make any 
distinction between the names, for it 1s beyond names and 
forms. You install that ultimate reality on the altar of your 
sacred heart and constantly meditate upon it. Some people 
tend to misinterpret the Sastras and Puranas to suit their 
convenience and selfish ends. 


A small story. Once an impostor posing as a renunciant 
stood before a house and begged for food saying, ‘Bhavati 
bhikshaam dehi!’ (1 am hungry, kindly give me food!). 
The housewife heard his plea and came out. She told him, 
“Sir! Please go to the river and have a bath and come back. 
Meanwhile, I will keep the food ready for you.” Then the 
Sanyasi quoted a line from the Puranas, ‘Govindeti Sada 
Snanam’ (constant chanting of the name of Govinda is as 
good as taking a bath). The housewife immediately realised 
that the person standing 1n front of their door begging for 
food was not a true renunciant and replied, ‘Dear Son! 
Govindeti Sada Bhojanam’ (constant chanting of the name 
of Govinda is as good as a meal). You may go’. It 1s said that 
the face is the index of mind. It reflects our inner thoughts 
and feelings. If the so called renunciant in this story really 


Love God And Meditate On Him 63 


believed in the glory of the divine name, he should have 
taken a bath before asking for food. He was a lazy person. 
He wanted food to satisfy his hunger, but was reluctant to 
have a bath before the meal. You should never believe in 
such impostors. 


Some people sit silently, closing their eyes. They say 
they are doing meditation. That is not meditation. They 
may be sitting silently, but their mind may be wandering 
thinking about all and sundry. The stage wherein the mind 
is unwavering and firmly fixed on the higher reality alone 
can be called meditation. Meditation 1s the stage next to 
contemplation. A small example: you may have scored first 
class marks in the half yearly examination, but you will 
not be eligible to get a degree. It is only after passing the 
final examination that you will become eligible to receive 
a degree. Contemplation and meditation are comparable 
to the half yearly and final examinations. Thus, spirituality 
represents a higher stage in life. Today, people are engrossed 
in the pursuit of physical and worldly objects, forgetting 
moral and spiritual goals. How then can they attain spiritual 
progress? If one wishes to have a spiritual experience, 
one has to acquire the necessary strength to face the final 
examination. 


To say that this is my body, my house, my property, 
etc., represents the physical aspect. When you say, ‘this is 
my body’ it means ‘my’ 1s separate. That 1s, you are separate 
from your body. Similarly, when you say ‘my mind’, ‘my 
buddhi’ (intellect), “my chitta’ (subconscious mind), etc., 


64 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


it means they are all separate from you. Hence, your true 
nature is ‘I’, which is separate from all that you call as “my 
body, my mind, my buddhi’, etc. You have to sacrifice all 
your karmas (i1.e., the fruits of your actions). That means, 
you have to perform your Karmas with an attitude of 
‘Sarva Karma Bhagavad Preetyartham’ (all actions to be 
performed in a spirit of surrender to God). Then only you 
will become immortal. If you wish to attain the true and 
eternal state, you must realise the Atma Tattwa. It is only the 
Upanishads that delineate on the Atma Tattwa extensively 
and not the epics like Bhagavata and Ramayana. The same 
Atma Tattwa, that 1s, the supreme reality incarnates from 
age to age to restore Dharma whenever it is on the decline 
as stated in the Bhagavad Gita: 


Yada Yada Hi Dharmasya Glanir Bhavati 
Bharata, 
Abhyutthanamadharmasya Tadatmanam 
Srujamyaham. 
(Sanskrit verse) 


(Oh Arjuna! Whenever there is a decline in Dharma 
and rise in Adharma, | incarnate from age to age for the 
establishment of Dharma.) 


Peace Brings Love 


Install God on the altar of your sacred heart and 
meditate on Him constantly. In spite of sorrow, difficulties, 
calamities that you may encounter, hold on to Him firmly. 
They trouble your body, not you; for, you are separate 


Love God And Meditate On Him 65 


from your body. The body 1s like a box 1n which the mind, 
intellect, chitta, indriyas and Antahkarana are packed. 


We are cultivating qualities like anger, jealousy, envy, 
pride, etc., due to our contact with the outside world. It 1s 
only when we get rid of these qualities that we enjoy peace. 
Therefore, we have to start our sadhana with Sathya (truth) 
and Dharma (righteousness). When truth and righteousness 
go together, Santi (peace) will reign. Peace brings love. 
Where there is peace, there cannot be hatred. When we 
develop hatred against someone, it means the spring of love 
is dried up in our heart. When there is love in our heart, we 
do not get angry, even if someone accuses us. Normally, we 
do not care for anyone when we are angry. Many people 
speak ill of Me, accuse Me and even heckle Me. But, I am 
not disturbed. I am always happy and blissful. That is real 
love. Where there is anger, hatred and jealousy, 1t means 
that there is no love. Hence, we should always follow the 
motto of “Love All, Serve All!” 


The basis for following this principle 1s Sathya and 
Dharma (truth and righteousness). Always speak truth and 
follow righteousness. As against this principle, people are 
now lecturing so much about Dharma without themselves 
treading the path of Dharma. Dharma cannot survive 
in such circumstances. It is said, “Sathyannasti Paro 
Dharmah”’ (there cannot be a greater Dharma than speaking 
truth). Sathya and Dharma are like the two hands, two legs 
and two lips in a human body. It is only when the two lips 
work together that a human being can speak. Similarly, it 


66 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


is only when Sathya and Dharma go together that peace 
reigns. Where there 1s no Dharma, there love cannot be. 
Thus, Sathya and Dharma are the basis for all other values 
like Santi (peace), Prema (love) and Ahimsa (non-violence). 


(Bhagawan sang the Bhajan, “Prema Mudita Manase 
Kaho...” and continued His discourse.) 


Do Not Indulge In Excessive Talk 
Embodiments of Love! 


Always meditate on the divine name; not just 
contemplation, but meditation. That meditation should be 
with love for God. Without love, your meditation will not 
achieve the desired result. Your love for God should be 
continuous through day and night. It is possible that when 
you pray to God to fulfil some desire and things go contrary, 
you may get angry and develop hatred against Him. But, it 
has nothing to do with spirituality. Your innate nature and 
love for God should never undergo a change. You should 
continue to attach yourself to the Divine name. That is real 
meditation. When you are in deep meditation, nothing in 
the external world should be visible to you even if you open 
your eyes. 


Another aspect about which you need to be careful 1s 
your speech. Too much talk is very bad. Do not indulge in 
excessive talk. Try to mend your nature. Observe silence as 
far as possible and be quiet. Talk as much as is needed. Just 
answer to the point. If you talk more, you will be branded 





Love God And Meditate On Him 67 


as a chatter-box. Joo much talk is not good, even from the 
health point of view. This is very important, especially in 
the case of children. You have to keep your mind steady 
right from the young age. What 1s important is not studying 
textbooks, but steadying your mind. Textbooks, you can 
always study; in the classroom, in the hostel, etc. 


Are you all happy? (All the students in one voice 
replied that they are happy) 


Be always happy, happy, happy! 
Sivaratri Discourse, Prasanthi Nilayam, 23-2-2009. 


T o earn the Grace of God, you have to 
pray to the Personified Power with Name 
and Form; it is your yearning that decides 
in what form the Lord appears. You call and 
He answers. If you are not earnest, if you feel 
indifferent, and say, “Let Him come when He 


wills, in the Form He likes and with the Name 
He prefers,” He will not come at all. Call on 
Him with anguish; He will respond. 

Sri Sathya Sai Baba 


68 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


5 Ysa of mind will not descend on 

you because your room is air-conditioned 

or your sofa, soft cushioned. It does not 

depend on your bank-balance; or on the 

diplomas you have collected. It can come 6 

only when, you deny the dhanava (demon) 

in you all the chances of moving you, when No Society Can Exist Without 
you encourage the Divine in you to manifest : 

Himself. The dhanava is the prompter of the Morality 
Asuric traits mentioned in the Gita. 


Everything in the universe is Divine; it 


exists; it shines; it is lovable. It is asti, bhati ANTUNAM Narajanma Durlabham (of all living 


and priya; it is Sat-Chit- and Ananda. For beings, human birth is the rarest). Why 1s it said 
ees aaa a een fae é al. so? Everybody wants progress, prosperity and welfare of 


Absolute, which is also Sat-Chit-Ananda society. There are three main principles through which 
this can be achieved. They are: Daiva Preeti, Papa Bheeti 


and Sangha Neeti (love for God, fear of sin and morality 
Sri Sathya Sai Baba in society). 


(Being, awareness, bliss). 


Safeguard Morality 





For morality to prevail in society, the individual should 
have fear of sin. He will have fear of sin only when he 
develops love for God. Therefore, it 1s necessary that man 


70 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


should develop love for God. When man develops love for 
God, he will have fear of sin and will adopt the right path 
in life. That will bring about morality in society. A man 
without morality cannot be called a human being in the real 
sense of the term. But modern man is immersed over head 
and ears in sin. Then, how can he have love for God? One 
can have love for God only when one fears sin. Man should, 
in fact, consider Daiva Preeti, Papa Bheeti and Sangha 
Neeti as his three main limbs like feet, stomach and head. 


Due to the absence of 
fear of sin and love for God, 
humanness has declined in human beings. 
This is detrimental to universal peace. 


(Telugu Poem) 


Daiva Preeti, Papa Bheeti and Sangha Neeti are 
interdependent. Man will have fear of sin when he develops 
love for God. He will develop morality when he has fear 
of sin. Conversely, a man devoid of morality will have no 
fear of sin and a man who has no fear of sin can have no 
love for God. Man desires to have many things 1n life; he 
performs many types of yoga, meditation and penance. But 
all these are useless if he lacks fear of sin. Therefore, for 
morality in society, the individual should have fear of sin. 
He can earn respect and attain a place of honour in society 
only when he has morality. No society can exist without 


No Society Can Exist Without Morality 71 


morality. Therefore, we should spread morality in society. 
The society which 1s based on morality will promote love 
for God. On the other hand, if society is without any moral 
base, there will be neither fear of sin in its members nor 
love for God. Therefore, it is the foremost duty of man to 
safeguard his morality. 


Selflessness Is The Noblest Virtue 


A true human being is one who is endowed with 
humanness. First of all, he should have love for God. If 
you engage yourself in Seva (service activities) without 
love for God, it amounts to only selfishness. So long as 
there is selfishness in man, he cannot realise the Self. In 
fact, a fish is better than a selfish person in the sense that the 
fish cleans the water in which it moves. Selflessness 1s the 
noblest virtue. You consider yourselves as human beings. 
But, do you have humanness and human qualities? If you 
lack these, then where is the difference between a man 
and an animal or a beast? The animals at least help man 
to grow crops but man today has become so selfish that he 
does not help anybody. Therefore, we should ask ourselves 
this question, “Are we human beings, animals or beasts?” 
Of course, we are not animals or beasts; we are human 
beings. When we know this, we should develop befitting 
human qualities. Everybody should think and ask himself, 
“Do I have human qualities or not?” The human values of 


oo) SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


Sathya, Dharma, Santi, Prema and Ahimsa are like the five 
life-breaths of man. You can call yourself a human being 
only when you possess these five human values. If you lack 
these five values, then whatever other qualities you may 
have, they cannot make you a real human being. 


An animal has hunger, lust and anger. It leads its life 
without any restraint. It lacks kindness and compassion 
which are the main qualities of a human being. Lust, anger, 
delusion, greed, pride and jealousy are common to a man 
and an animal. One who has no control over these animal 
qualities is verily an animal. Man should keep them under 
check and develop Sathya, Dharma, Santi, Prema and 
Ahimsa (truth, righteousness, peace, love and non-violence) 
instead. He should have kindness and compassion for all. 


First of all, he should have love. We can have peace 
only when we have love. We can have fulfilment in life 
only when we combine peace and love. When we have 
both peace and love, then we will have no hatred and we 
will not hurt anybody. If we hurt others, it shows that there 
is anger in us. Sorrow is the reaction of anger. Therefore, 
man should develop love. If at any time, the feelings of 
anger and hatred arise in us, we should check them. That 1s 
the quality of a human being. That is why we should have 
fear of sin, love for God and morality in society. When we 
develop love for God, all our sins will be totally burnt to 


No Society Can Exist Without Morality 73 


ashes. Therefore, if we want all our sins to be destroyed, 
we Should develop love for God. 


Anger And Jealousy Are Worst Enemies Of Man 


Manushyanam Daiva Swarupam (Manis divine). That 
is why Avatars take human form. When you have human 
form, you should not give room to animal qualities. Even 
if they arise in you, you should drive them away. When 
you have animal qualities, you will have no fear of sin. 
Therefore, you should always have love, love and love 
alone! 


Anger and jealousy are the worst enemies of man. 
One who has these two cannot be called a human being. 
Such a person can never attain divinity. One who flies into a 
rage from moment to moment shows lack of humanness. It 
shows only his animal quality. Therefore, first of all control 
anger and jealousy. This is what all our sacred texts like 
the Gita and the Upanishads teach. These two are more 
powerful and fierce than even a lion and are always waiting 
to overpower you. The anger of a lion 1s short-lived; the 
lion can kill anyone in a few minutes. But, man harbours 
anger and jealousy for months and years and he does not 
give them up easily. Therefore, anger and jealousy are the 
most fearful enemies of man. They destroy the feelings of 
unity and forbearance. 


74 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


Forbearance ts the real beauty in this sacred land 
of Bharat. Of all the rituals, adherence to truth 
is the greatest penance. The nectarine feeling in 
this country is the feeling of love towards one’s 
mother. 


(Telugu Poem) 


Real sweetness lies in the love for the mother. We 
should consider love and forbearance as our mother and 
father. But, unfortunately, these two are nowhere to be seen 
in man today. When you acquire these two virtues, you are 
nothing but God. Therefore, it 1s essential for man to have 
Daiva Preeti, Papa Bheeti and Sangha Neeti. What does 
Papa Bheeti mean? It is the fear of hurting and insulting 
others. Sin does not necessarily mean killing somebody. 
Hurting the feelings of others also amounts to killing. 
Therefore, see to it that you do not cause any mental hurt 
to anybody. To refrain from all this is Papa Bheeti. Rama 
went to the forest and killed those who indulged in sinful 
deeds in order to wipe out sin. Vibhishana also came to 
Rama and helped Him to annihilate sin. 


Always Speak Sweet Words 


Vibhishana was the younger brother of Ravana. 
They were three brothers — Ravana, Kumbhakarna and 
Vibhishana. Vibhishana was always calm and composed and 
was free from hatred, jealousy and anger unlike his elder 


No Society Can Exist Without Morality 75 


brother Ravana. The third brother Kumbhakarna was eating 
and sleeping all the time. The very name Ravana signified 
anger, jealousy and hatred whereas the name Vibhishana 
indicated peace and quietude. A man’s name influences 
his nature. 


There are certain names which create pleasing feelings 
when you hear them. But, there are some names which 
create the feeling of fear and repulsion. For example, when 
we hear the name cuckoo, it creates sublime and sweet 
feelings in us. We hear with great pleasure when the cuckoo 
sings. There is a pleasing feeling in its very name. But, 
on the other hand, people throw stones at the crow when 
it opens its mouth. We should give names to our children 
with proper consideration. That is why people name their 
children after taking into account the star of their birth. We 
should have names which are good. We should never have 
a name which 1s not proper. The name should be such that 
it gives rise to feelings of peace and sweetness. 


Sathyanarayana 1s the name of this body. How sweet it 
is! This name was given by Kondama Raju, the grandfather 
of this body. He also changed the name of the mother of 
this body from Namagiriamma to Easwaramma, which 
means the mother of Easwara (God). That 1s how the name 
Easwaramma has become famous 1n the world. 


Words like snake and scorpion create in us a feeling of 


76 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


fear because of their poison. A snake has poison in its fangs 
and a scorpion has it in its tail. Their poison 1s localised 
in certain parts of their body. But man today 1s filled with 
poison from top to toe. Not only his speech, but all his 
actions are also poisonous. Some people have so much 
poison in their speech that whatever words come out of 
their mouth, they are full of poison. They hurt the feelings 
of others by such words. We should keep our speech free 
from such poisonous words and should always talk sweetly. 


Always Have A Smiling Face 


There are some people who have poison even 1n their 
smile. But there is no poison in love. We should have smile 
which is full of love. Swami always smiles lovingly. His 
smile radiates bliss. You should always have a smiling face. 
Never put on a ‘castor oil face’; it reflects anger, hatred 
and jealousy. Always have a smiling face. You should 
keep smiling even if somebody abuses you. Then the other 
person will also stop abusing and start smiling. When you 
ask someone, “How are you, brother?”; he will also say, 
“How are you, brother?” even if he is your enemy. As is 
your action, so will be the reaction. As is the sound, so is 
the resound. When you lovingly ask someone, “How are 
you?’’, he will also ask, “How are you?” Everything has a 
reaction, reflection and resound. Therefore, our speech, our 
actions and our conduct should be good. This is the main 
quality of a true human being. 


We should be humble and courteous in our speech. 


No Society Can Exist Without Morality 7 


Do not cause fear in others. In this lies true humanness; 
otherwise, people will brand you as a person without 
human quality. Our speech and actions should be pleasing 
to others. When someone gives a speech, he cites his 
experiences as an example. We should narrate only good 
experiences. When you call yourself a student of Sri Sathya 
Sai University, your conduct should be in accordance with 
the reputation of the institution in which you have studied. 
You should respect and honour your elders. See no evil. 
When you conduct yourself in this manner, everybody will 
call you, “Good boy, good boy.” You should earn such a 
good reputation. Only then will the saying Vantunam Nara 
Janma Durlabham’ become meaningful. 


(Bhagawan sang the Bhajan, “Hari Bhajan Bina Sukh Santi 
Nahin...”’ and continued His Discourse). 


When I went to Chennai some time ago, some people 
asked Me, “Swami! People aspire for peace and happiness. 
Where do peace and happiness lie?” Then, I answered 
them through this song, “Hari Bhajan Bina Sukh Santi 
Nahin” (There can be no happiness and peace without 
chanting the name of God). Bhajan means to contemplate 
on God. That alone gives us peace and happiness. Peace 
and happiness are not separate from each other. They can 
be attained only through Hari bhajan. Someone may ask 
you, “Sail Baba speaks of peace and happiness. Where do 


78 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


they exist? What have you understood?” When you give 
them the reply, “Hari Bhajan Bina Sukh Santi Nahin”, 
there will be no further questions. Humanness will blossom 
only when there 1s Daiva Preeti, Papa Bheeti and Sangha 
Neeti. You will be victorious in the entire world when you 
have these three. These three are enough; you do not need 
anything else. Sing the glory of God. Then, you will set a 
great example for all. 


Chala Santosham (Very happy). 


Discourse in Sai Kulwant Hall, 
Prasanthi Nilayam, 25-2-2009. 


o all of you I say, “Let mountains fall; 

let the sea overwhelm the land; but, do 
not give up your sadhana. And, remember, 
sadhana is a waste, unless you grow at the. 
same time in virtue and uprightness.” If you 
give up all and surrender to the Lord, He 
will guard you and guide you. When you 


complain, “Oh! He has not guarded me,” I 
reply, “You have not surrendered.” TheLord 
has come just for this very task. He is declaring 
that He will do so, that is the very task that 
has brought Him! 


Sri Sathya Sai Baba 





7 


Develop Love And Consider All As 
Brothers And Sisters 


Sweeter than sugar, tastier than curd, sweeter 
indeed than honey is the Name of Rama. Constant 
repetition of this sweet name gives one the taste 
of divine nectar itself. Therefore, one should 
contemplate on the name of Rama incessantly. 


(Telugu poem) 


Bharat is the motherland of many noble souls who 
earned great name and fame in all the continents 
of the world. This is the land of valorous people 
who vanquished foreign rulers and attained 
independence. This is the land which excelled 


80 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


in music, literature and other fine arts. Having 
been born in this great land of Bharat, oh boys 
and girls, itis your sacred duty to protect tts rich 
cultural heritage. 


(Telugu poem) 


THE Bharatiyas, today, do not know their greatness 
just as the elephant does not know its own strength. It obeys 
the command of the mahout and sits when the he asks it to 
sit and stands when it is asked to do so. In the same manner, 
the Bharatiyas are imitating the western culture under the 
influence of western education. 


The Bharatiyas are endowed with great potentialities 
and their hearts are full of devotion. There 1s none among 
them who does not chant the divine name from his very 
birth. They name their children after the various names 
of God, thereby remembering God all the time. There 1s 
no village in Bharat where there is no temple of Rama. 
Villagers of all small hamlets even, set up a shrine for Rama, 
Lakshmana and Sita 1n a little hutment or some rustic abode 
for regular worship. 


Right from the beginning, the Bharatiyas gave more 
importance to spirituality than to worldly and material 
pursuits. The main factor that is responsible for the peace 
and progress of Bharat is the devotion of the Bharatiyas 
for God. At present many countries of the world are in the 


Develop Love And Consider All As Brothers And Sisters 81 


erip of great problems and difficulties. But Bharat is by far 
free from such difficulties. The people of Bharat may have 
some financial problems, but they are happily leading their 
lives totally surrendering to the will of God. 


The Bharatiyas place their trust in the Self as the basis 
of their life rather than material possessions, property and 
wealth. In fact, their entire life is based on this trust and 
they have achieved progress in spite of many difficulties 
and deprivations. Having based their life on the trust in 
the Self, how can the Bharatiyas give any importance to 
worldly and materialistic pursuits? Even in their day-to-day 
conversation, they refer to their Self, saying, “Only my 
Atmarama knows this.” 


We should not limit Rama or Krishna to a particular 
name or form. These names were given to them after their 
birth. They were not born with these names. The Bharatiyas 
have realised the truth that God is the resident of man’s 
heart. That is why they are able to withstand all difficulties 
and sufferings and lead their lives happily. Sukhadukhe 
samekrutwa labhalabhau jayajayau (one should remain 
equal-minded in happiness and sorrow, gain and loss, 
victory and defeat), says the Gita. Pleasure and pain are part 
of human life. Whenever they have to encounter sorrows 
and difficulties, they consider them as the harbingers of 
happiness. They have attained exalted positions due to such 
noble feelings. Their faith in God is unshakeable even in 


82 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


the face of mishaps such as bomb blasts, floods and plane 
crashes. Those who base their life with faith in God will 
never encounter sorrows, suffering and difficulties. Their 
difficulties will come and go like passing clouds. One who 
is born in this world is sure to die one day or the other. 
Nothing is permanent in this world. Only one thing 1s 
permanent and that is the Atma or the Self. People aspire 
for liberation, heaven and Vaikunta, but even they are not 
permanent. The only thing that is permanent is the Atma 
and that is the only truth. You may see so many forms in 
this world but none of them is permanent except the Atma. 


The Story Of Ramayana 


Let us now dwell upon the Ramayana. Dasaratha had 
three wives Kausalya, Sumitra and Kaikeyi. Kausalya 
first gave birth to a female child who was named Santha. 
Dasaratha gave her to one of his friends, who adopted her 
as his daughter. She was married to Sage Rishyasringa 
who conducted the Putrakameshti Yajna of Dasaratha. 
When oblations were offered in the sacrificial fire with the 
chanting of related mantras for the Yajna, an effulgent being 
came out of the fire and handed over a vessel containing 
payasam (sweet pudding) to Dasaratha with the instruction 
to distribute it equally among his queens. 


Accordingly, Dasaratha distributed the payasam to 
Kausalya, Sumitra and Kaikeyi. Kausalya and Kaikeyi took 
their share of the pudding to their respective puja rooms. 


Develop Love And Consider All As Brothers And Sisters 83 


Each of them was happy thinking that her son would be the 
future king of Ayodhya. But Sumitra had no such claims. 
She was a paragon of virtues. Her name ‘Sumitra’ itself 
signifies that she was a good friend to one and all. She 
carried her bowl of pudding to the terrace and placed it on 
the parapet wall while drying her hair in the sun. Suddenly, 
an eagle swooped down and carried away the bowl. Sumitra 
rushed down and informed Kausalya and Kaikeysi about 
what had happened. Kausalya and Kaikeyi came to her 
rescue and shared their pudding with her. Kausalya gave 
half of her share to Sumitra. Kaikeyi also did the same. 


The Intimate Relationship Of The Brothers 


In due course, Kausalya gave birth to Rama, Kaikey1 
to Bharata, and Sumitra to Lakshmana and Satrughna. 
Kausalya and Kaikeyi had one son each, whereas Sumitra 
had two sons. The sons of Kausalya and Kaikey1 were 
happily playing in their cradles while Sumitra’s sons were 
crying all the time, and were not taking milk. Sumitra was 
at a loss to know the reason for their crying. Ultimately, she 
went to Sage Vasishta and told him about her predicament. 
Sage Vasishta closed his eyes in meditation. His yogic 
vision enabled him to know the truth. He said to Sumitra, 
‘As you partook of the sacred pudding given by Kausalya, 
you gave birth to Lakshmana who is an amsa (part) of 
Rama. Similarly, Satrughna is born out of the share of 


84. SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


pudding given to you by Kaikeyi. So, he is a part of Bharata. 
Keep Lakshmana by the side of Rama and Satrughna by the 
side of Bharata. Then they will rest peacefully.” Sumitra did 
as instructed by Vasishta. Both Lakshmana and Satrughna 
stopped crying and started playing blissfully in their cradles. 
This was the basis of the intimate relationship between 
Rama and Lakshmana, Bharata and Satrughna. Both the 
sons of Sumitra, namely, Lakshmana and Satrughna, were 
always 1n the company of Rama and Bharata. In this manner, 
all the four sons of Dasaratha grew up in an environment 
of love and happiness. Sumitra was very happy because 
she thought her son Lakshmana would serve Rama and 
Satrughna would serve Bharata when they grew up. 


Where was Rama born? Many people have many 
doubts about the place of His birth. He was born in Ayodhya. 
Was the city of Ayodhya built by some ordinary mortal? No, 
no. It was built by Viswakarma (divine architect) himself. 
He built it in such a way that no enemy could enter it. 


The Divine Marriage 


When Rama won the hand of Sita by stringing the bow 
of Siva in the court of Janaka, His marriage with Sita was 
performed in Mithila amidst great rejoicings. The people 
of Mithila were beside themselves with joy and sang merry 
songs. 


Develop Love And Consider All As Brothers And Sisters 85 


Welcome to all for Rama’s wedding; 
together we shall witness the joyous scene. 
Many have gathered already, decked up in 

all their finery; with necklaces the ladies are 
adorned of jewels pure and gleaming. 
Rama shall tie the knot today to beauteous Sita; 
oh, what a fine match they make. 
Father Dasaratha has made ready 
bounteous feasts. 
All learned sages are assembled with 
Vasishta presiding. 

Oh, what a multitude has assembled to rejoice, 
hearts with joy overflowing. 
Wedding of the holy pair 
Rama and Sita, such a sight 1s indeed rare. 
The sight shall confer great merit. 
Rama looks the cool full moon, 
and Sita is a matching double. 

The compassionate Rama who loves all 
will confer his grace on us all. 

Come quickly to see the holy wedding of Rama 
and Sita. 


(Telugu poem) 


It seemed as if the entire population of Ayodhya 
had come to Mithila to witness the marriage of Sita and 
Rama. Dasaratha, all his ministers, and all family members 


86 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


prominently participated in the marriage. After the marriage 
function, all left for Ayodhya. 


The Encounter Of Rama With Parasurama 


On the way, they heard a deafening sound. When they 
looked around to find where the sound had come from, they 
were confronted by Parasurama who looked very fierce. All 
of them were perturbed and they began to think, “What is 
this great impediment after the glorious celebration of the 
marriage?” Good and bad always follow each other. After 
experiencing great joy in Mithila, they were confronted with 
a difficult situation on their way to Ayodhya. Dasaratha and 
others became fear-stricken. Parasurama came forward and 
asked, “Who has broken the Siva bow?” “It is I who has 
done it,” said Rama. “If that is so, let us see 1f you can bend 
my bow.” Saying so, he gave his bow in the hands of Rama. 
Rama strung and armed that bow with an arrow with His 
left hand. Seeing that, Parasurama offered his salutations 
to Rama and went his way. Experiencing the joy of victory, 
all of them reached Ayodhya and participated with great joy 
and enthusiasm 1n the festivities held there. The people of 
Ayodhya held joyous celebrations. 


Like his mother Sumitra, Lakshmana’s wife Urmila 
was also a woman of great virtues. When Lakshmana 
went to inform her that he was accompanying Rama to the 
forest for fourteen years, she said, “It 1s your greatest good 
fortune. You should consider Sita and Rama as your mother 


Develop Love And Consider All As Brothers And Sisters 87 


and father and serve them. In Ayodhya you have Kausalya, 
Sumitra and Kaikeyi but in the forest you have only one 
mother and that is Sita. You should even forget me and 
serve Sita and Rama with total dedication.” Lakshmana was 
happy to hear these words of Urmila and said to himself, 
“What a virtuous wife I have!” 


Rama Follows The Command Of His Father 


After the departure of Rama, Lakshmana and Sita to 
the forest and the death of Dasaratha, Bharata came back 
to Ayodhya. When he was offered the crown of Ayodhya, 
he refused to accept it, saying that, 1t was the right of only 
the eldest son and hence he would go to the forest and pray 
to Rama to come back and rule Ayodhya. When he went 
to the forest to appeal to Rama, Rama told him, “We have 
to follow the command of our father. Without that, our life 
itself is a zero.” Rama promised Bharata that he would 
surely return to Ayodhya after the period of 14 years of 
his exile. Then Bharat requested Rama to give His sandals 
which he would place on the throne and worship them. On 
his return to Ayodhya, Bharata did not enter the palace. He 
lived in a small hut and led the life of a renunciant just as 
Rama was living in the forest. 


During the sojourn of Rama, Lakshmana and Sita at 
Panchavati, Ravana came in the guise of a mendicant and 
abducted Sita. Rama was put to great difficulties. But He 
faced all difficulties smilingly. Hanuman went in search 


88 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


of Sita to Lanka. He could cross the ocean with the power 
of the divine name of Rama. In fact, any stupendous task 
can be achieved by contemplating on the name of Rama. 
It was with the power of Rama’s name that the monkeys 
had made the bridge over the ocean so that Rama and His 
army could reach Lanka. 


Rama Rescues Sita From Ravana’s Prison 


Rama had to fight with Ravana, the king of demons. 
In the course of his battle, Lakshmana was hit by a missile 
and became unconscious. Rama was very much distressed 
and he lamented, “I may get a wife like Sita but I cannot 
get a brother like Lakshmana.” Then Hanuman brought 
Sushena, the medical expert of Lanka, who said, “There 
is a herb called Sanjivini on a mountain in the Himalayan 
region. If you bring that herb, Lakshmana can be revived.” 
Hanuman was sent to bring the Sanjivini herb to revive 
Lakshmana. Hanuman did not know how to recognise that 
particular herb. Therefore, he lifted the whole mountain 
on which the herb existed and placed it before Rama. With 
the help of the herb, Lakshmana was revived. Then Rama 
hugged him and said, ““Lakshmana, My life is meaningless 
without you. You have always been with Me and protected 
Me in many ways. There is nothing more dear to Me than 
you in this world. In fact, you are verily My life.” Rama 
ultimately killed Ravana and rescued Sita from his prison. 


Bharata Welcomes Rama For Coronation As King 


Develop Love And Consider All As Brothers And Sisters 89 


Meanwhile the period of 14 years of exile of Rama was 
over. As the end of fourteen years drew near and Bharata 
could not see any signs of Rama’s return to Ayodhya, he got 
ready to give up his life by immolating himself on a pyre. 
As Rama had anticipated the situation, he sent Hanuman 
in advance to inform Bharata that He was on His way back 
to Ayodhya. Bharata was overjoyed on hearing this good 
news. All the people of Ayodhya as also Bharata and the 
entire family were eagerly awaiting the arrival of Rama in 
Ayodhya. When Rama, Lakshmana and Sita alighted from 
the Pushpaka Vimana, Bharata and all the people of Ayodhya 
offered them a hearty welcome. Soon after the arrival of 
Rama in Ayodhya, arrangements for His coronation were 
made. People of Ayodhya were full of enthusiasm at the 
prospect of Rama becoming their king. 


The students just now sang this song, 


Kausalyatmaja Rama Charan, 
Vaidehi Priya Rama Charan, 
Hanumatsevita Rama Charan, 
Bharatarchita Sri Rama Charan, 
Ahalyoddharaka Rama Charan, 
Lakshmana Sevita Rama Charan, 
Prasanthi Niketana Rama Charan. 


(Always worship the Lotus Feet of Rama, son of 
Kausalya, which are dear to Sita, worshipped by Bharata 
and is in the abode of peace, served by Lakshmana, and 
Hanuman, and which redeemed Ahalya). 


90 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


Lakshmana was overjoyed on hearing the kind words 
of Rama. Rama had great love for Lakshmana, more than 
anybody else. Similarly, Lakshmana loved Rama most 
dearly. He never disobeyed the command of Rama. In fact, 
all the brothers Rama, Lakshmana, Bharata and Satrughna 
had great love for each other. They ruled over Ayodhya with 
great unity. It was not Rama alone who administered the 
entire kingdom; all his brothers helped Him in conducting 
the affairs of the kingdom. 


The Ramayana teaches us many lessons in morality 
and ethics. In fact, all the characters of this great epic set 
great ideals for mankind to follow. Sweeter than sugar, 
tastier than curd, sweeter indeed than honey is the Name 
of Rama. Is there anything greater than Ramanama? We 
should understand this truth and contemplate on His name 
day in and day out. Great epics like the Ramayana and 
the Mahabharata teach us many moral and ethical values. 
Truth is the highest among these values. Sathyannasti Paro 
Dharmah (There 1s no Dharma greater than adherence to 
truth). Dharma is born out of Sathya, and from Dharma 
emerges peace and from peace emerges love. Where there is 
love, there can be no hatred. One who has love will adhere 
to non-violence. Sathya, Dharma, Santi, Prema and Ahimsa 
are the five cardinal human values. One who practises 
these human values is a human being in the true sense of 
the term. Even if he lacks one of these, he cannot be called 
a perfect human being. Therefore, we should develop all 
these five values. 


Develop Love And Consider All As Brothers And Sisters 9] 


Unfortunately, when we look at the present scenario, 
we do not see truth anywhere and we don’t even hear the 
word ‘Dharma’. Therefore, man today is beset with unrest. 
People want peace but what they get is pieces only! Due 
to the lack of peace, love has become non-existent in man. 
Therefore, we should develop peace. Then only will love 
develop in us. When love takes root in us, we will have 
no enemies. Then all will become our friends. Hence, man 
should develop love and consider all as his brothers and 
sisters. This is the main essence of the Ramayana. 


It is only to demonstrate this principle of love that I 
have done this housing project in Orissa. We should love 
and help each other. The calamity that has befallen them 
can happen to anyone. When you make them happy, you 
will also be happy. Therefore, we should all be united. 


Let us all move together, 
Let us all grow together, 
Let us all stay united and 
Grow in intelligence together, 
Let us live together with 
Friendship and harmony. 


(Telugu poem) 


It is only when we grow in intelligence together can 
there be unity. We should move and work with unity. No 
one should hate anybody. If any thought of hatred comes 
to you for amoment, you should brush it aside and develop 


92 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


the feeling of unity from the very next moment. It is only 
love that unites all. 


(Bhagawan concluded His Discourse with the Bhajan, 
“Prema Mudita Manase Kaho Rama Rama Ram...’’) 


Sri Ramanavami Discourse, 
Prasanthi Nilayam 3-4-2009. 


8 
Students Should Set Ideals 


©), course, you only talk of Saranam For Others 
(surrender), of placing all at the Feet; but 
you withhold a great deal. Your minds are 
wayward like monkeys that skip and jump INCE ancient times, women have been performing 
from bough to branch. Give them to Me; I their duties, serving their husbands, praying to 
can make them steady and harmless. When I God and observing high moral principles in their life. In 
say, sit’, they will sit; when I say, ‘stand’ they this country Bharat, honour is considered more valuable 
stand. That is what Sankaracharya offered than life itself. But, today, in the name of freedom, people 
to do; he told Siva that he will hand over the are imitating western culture. In Bharatiya culture, decent 
monkey that was his mind to Him so that dress, vermilion mark on the forehead and proper hairstyle 
it might be tamed and used for His delight. are very important for women. But, women today have 
But, it must be a complete handing over; no given up their dress code and have started wearing pant 
reservations. and shirt like men after getting their hair cut. This 1s totally 
Sri Sathya Sai Baba against Bharatiya culture. Since ancient times, Bharatiya 





culture has been held in high esteem and it has been a source 


94 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


of joy for all. But such a sacred culture is being forgotten 
today. Not only men and women, but, students are also 
affected by this modern trend. Students are supposed to 
conduct themselves with dignity and honour, secure high 
marks and make their parents happy. Not only to their 
parents, they should give happiness to society also. 


God Has No Form 


What are the reasons for the ills of modern society? 
The reasons are man’s lack of love for God, fear of sin and 
morality in society. You may forget God, but, God will never 
forget you, because, God is in you. It is very difficult to 
know God. No one can say what is God and where He 1s. 
You think that God has a form, but, 1n reality, He has none. 
If you question God, “Who are You? What is Your name?”’ 
He will reply, “dham Brahmasmi (1 am Brahman).” It 1s 
because of your delusion that you ask Me who I am. I am 
Brahma (God) and you are in Bhrama (delusion). As you 
identify yourself with the external form, you are unable to 
realise the truth contained in the axiom, Daivam Manusha 
Rupena (God 1s in the form of a human being).” You attach 
great importance to the body, but, in fact, this body is only 
like a bag, which contains many subtle organs like mind, 
intellect, subconscious mind and ego. All these organs are 
present in you. You think that these are all associated with 
the body, but, in fact it 1s not so. Though they are within the 
body, they do not belong to the body. However, when all 
these leave the body, it cannot remain even for a moment; 


Students Should Set Ideals For Others 95 


it becomes useless and 1s burnt on a pyre. Therefore, do not 
put your faith in the body. 


All of you worship Krishna, Vishnu, Siva and many 
other deities. Where have these forms come from? They 
are only the creation of artists like Ravi Varma. Whatever 
pictures such artists make, you consider them as pictures 
of God. When you see the picture of Krishna, you consider 
it as the form of Krishna. No, no, it is only a symbolic 
representation of Krishna. Who is Krishna? Krishna is 
divinity in human form. Whichever form you attribute to 
divinity, contemplate on that form. When you worship that 
form, your mind may waver quite a bit in the beginning. 
One-pointed focusing of the mind on a particular form 1s 
called concentration. When you practise concentration, 
the wavering of the mind may somewhat reduce. That is 
the state of contemplation. In contemplation also, there 1s 
some wavering of the mind. When the mind becomes totally 
steady, then only can you call it meditation. Gradually, you 
forget yourself. That is the state of Samadhi (superconscious 
state) in which you transcend all forms. Then, you will 
experience the attributeless Atma. If you merely sit with 
closed eyes, it is not meditation. 


See Your Reflection In All Beings 


God is one and He is the only reality. There 1s no 
second. When you think of Him as Krishna, He will 
manifest before you in the form of Krishna. When you 


96 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


think of Him as Vishnu, He will manifest as Vishnu. But, 
all these forms are your own imagination. They do not 
correspond to the reality. It is all your mind’s work. You 
think God will manifest before you when you undertake 
spiritual practices like worship, rituals, Yajnas and Yagas 
(sacrificial practices). It 1s only your imagination. Your 
mind is the cause of this imagination. You should continue 
your Sadhana till you transcend the mind. Mind 1s always 
indulging in imagination. You should go beyond the mind. 
You should focus only on the Atma. It has no form. You 
should understand that the formless and attributeless Atma 
is the only truth. It pervades the whole universe. 


The creation emerges from truth and 
merges into truth, 
Is there a place in the cosmos where truth 
does not exist? 
Visualise this pure and unsullied truth. 


(Telugu Poem) 


Wherever you see, truth is present there. Divinity 
is the life force that is immanent in all beings including 
insects, birds and animals. Therefore, whomsoever you 
come across, you should offer your salutations to him. What 
does it mean? It is not the person to whom you offer your 
salutations but to the Atmic principle present in him. Hence, 
even if you come across a mad person, you should ofter 
your salutations to the Atma present in him. Except God, 
there is no other entity in the world. Ekameva Adviteeyam 


Students Should Set Ideals For Others 97 


Brahma (God is one without a second). Ekatma Sarva 
Bhutantaratma (one Atma dwells in all beings). When you 
fill a thousand pots with water, the reflection of the sun 1s 
seen in all of them. Does it mean that there are different 
suns in all the pots? No. The sun is only one. All bodies 
are like pots. It is the same Atma that is reflected in all of 
them. Everything is reaction, reflection and resound. You 
hear the echo of your voice. You see your own reflection 
in a mirror. You should, therefore, see your own reflection 
in all beings. If you love someone, 1t means you are loving 
yourself. If you hate someone, it means you hate yourself. 
You think everything that happens 1s done by God. In fact, 
you yourself are the cause of everything. If you hate or love 
someone, God has nothing to do with that. God 1s always 
steady, pure, selfless, changeless and attributeless. It 1s your 
ignorance if you imagine that God has attributes. Therefore, 
do not attribute any particular form to God to worship Him. 
Focus your mind on the principle of the Atma present in 
you and consider it as your God. 


Morality Is The Very Life-Breath Of Man 


When you put a step forward, there is God in 1t. When 
you look at something, there is God in it. It is the same 
current that makes the bulb shine, fan rotate and mike 
function. God is the divine force that makes everything 
function. When you put off the main switch, all the electrical 
gadgets stop functioning. God is like the main switch. 
When you forget God, it amounts to forgetting everything. 


98 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


Therefore, always love God. Kill the demons of your evil 
qualities. Strive for the progress of society. Who can develop 
society? Only those who have good qualities can develop 
society. Those who have love for God are endowed with 
morality. Morality is the very life-breath of man. Without 
morality, he is lifeless. The whole Jati (human race) will 
be doomed without Neeti (morality). What is Jati? People 
think, Jati is community. But it is not so. Jati denotes human 
race. This 1s its real meaning. Jati does not refer to any 
particular caste. It refers to humanity as a whole. You say, 
“Tam a Brahmin, you are a Vaishya, he is a Kshatriya, you 
are a Sudra’’. This division of people into various castes 1s 
your own creation. It is not given by God. What God has 
given 1s only one thing and that 1s love. When you develop 
love in you, then you will love everyone. When you don’t 
have love in you, you will hate others and become distant 
from them. But this is not good. Love All, Serve All. You 
will achieve great progress when you preserve this truth 
in your heart. Those who perform good deeds, help others 
and do not cause any harm to the poor, only such people are 
truly endowed with morality. It 1s not good 1f you respect 
a few and ignore others. 


Cut The Ego And Raise To The Level Of Divinity 


The entire universe 1s the creation of God and every 
being is the embodiment of divinity, including small 
insects. Do not observe any difference between Cheema 


Students Should Set Ideals For Others 99 


(ant) and Brahma. Thyagaraja propounded the same truth, 
“Cheemalo Brahmalo Siva Kesavaadulalo Prema Meera 
Velasi Unde Birudu Vahinchina Rama Nannu Brovara” 
(Oh Rama! In Your pure and unsullied form of love, You 
dwell in all beings from an ant to Brahma as also in Siva 
and Kesava. Please be my protector too). Therefore, God 1s 
present in every being. Do not hate or deride anybody. Do 
not quarrel with anybody. When you lead your life in such 
a manner, you will be able to realise your Self. 


You say, “I, I, I’. What does ‘I’ mean? It means ego. 
So long as you have ego, you will not be able to understand 
your reality. When you cut the ‘I’ from the middle, it 
becomes cross (f). Cross symbolises cutting of ego. When 
you cut your ego, you rise to the level of divinity. If you have 
the feeling of ‘I, mine and thine’, it will develop duality in 
you. Duality is not correct. The Upanishads do not approve 
of it. All the Upanishads teach oneness of the principle of 
Atma. The principle of Atma is without any differences. 


In the Realm Of Atma All Are Females 


Body has been given to you to lead your life in this 
world and to discharge your duty. Duty is God. Perform 
your duty. After marriage, you have a wife. Wife has to 
be treated as wife. But in the realm of the Atma, all are 
females. You say, “He is my son, he is my son-in-law.” This 
relationship is of your own making. Truly speaking, nobody 
is your son and nobody is your son-in-law. It 1s you who 


100 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


create differences, but, in reality there are no differences. 
Therefore, consider all as one. The Ramayana also states 
this principle of oneness. 


Welcome to all for Rama’s wedding; 
together we shall witness the joyous scene. 
Many have gathered already, 
decked up in all their finery. 

With necklaces the ladies are adorned 
of jewels pure and gleaming. 

Rama shall tie the knot today to beauteous Sita. 
Oh, what a fine match they make! 
Father Janaka has made ready bounteous feasts. 
All learned sages are assembled with 
Vasishta presiding. 

Oh, what an assembly of multitude 
to rejoice, hearts with joy overflowing! 


(Telugu Poem) 


Who is Rama? One who pleases everyone is Rama. 
When you get happiness from the Atma within you, you 
become Rama. Sita symbolises the Atma and Rama, the 
Paramatma (God). Therefore, the marriage of Sita and 
Rama symbolises the union of Jiva (individual soul) and 
Deva (God). When the marriage of Sita and Rama took 
place, all the people of Ayodhya came to see this marriage. 
After the performance of the marriage of Sita with Rama, 
Viswamitra went to his dwelling place. Not only did his 


Students Should Set Ideals For Others 101 


name Viswamitra denote ‘friend of universe’, he actually 
was so. He imparted knowledge to everyone. 


The Principle Of Love 


So many of you have gathered in this hall. What is the 
purpose for which you have come here? You have come to 
see this form. Any number of people may come here but 
their vision is focused only on this form. Whatever you do, 
do it for the sake of attaining God’s love. In this regard, 
I wrote a song: 


Sathya Dharmamu Santi Premalato 
Nee Nitya Jivana Yatra Saginchu 


(Perform the journey of your life adhering to the principles 
of Sathya, Dharma, Santi, Prema). Truth is permanent. 
Truth is one, not two. Similarly, Dharma 1s one; it 1s the 
image of Sathya. When Sathya and Dharma come together, 
peace manifests there. Peace is not something available 
outside in the bazaar. Outside you get only pieces. When 
you have peace, you do not hate or hurt anybody. Then only 
you develop love. 


The principle of love is present in all. When people 
develop love, there will be no conflicts in the world. 
Therefore, you should develop love. Never resort to 
untruth under any circumstances. If you follow — untruth, 
you will never be able to develop love. Therefore, always 


102 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


adhere to truth. Develop love at all times. You can develop 
love only by following truth and righteousness. These two 
qualities are most essential for man. This is the essence 
of all Upanishads. All the Upanishads teach the same 
truth in different ways. The sum and substance of all the 
teachings of the Upanishads 1s that the principle of divinity 
is one. Ekameva Adviteeyam Brahma (God 1s one without 
a second). God is one, not two. It is due to your delusion 
that you see duality. You should never give scope to such 
delusion. You will have true devotion when you do not have 
even a trace of delusion. 


Man Is Important, Not Money 


Many beggars come to a rich man. Some ask for food, 
some for clothes, some for money and some for house. 
They are all beggars. In the same way, if you beg this and 
that from God, you become beggars. You should not beg 
anything from God. God 1s in fact in you only. He will 
give you whatever you require. You need not beg anything. 
Today, everybody in this world has become a beggar. 
Politicians beg for votes. They give notes for votes. They 
win elections by buying votes. This world 1s all a drama 
of beggars. Society is ruined and polluted because of such 
beggars. 


Today, there is pollution, pollution, pollution 
everywhere. There 1s pollution in water, pollution in food 
and pollution even in air. If you want to buy milk, that 


Students Should Set Ideals For Others 103 


also is polluted. So, everything has become polluted today. 
Nowhere there is anything pure. Even pure water is not 
there. It has also become polluted. You are aware that the 
river Ganga comes down from Rishikesh. In our country 
Bharat, the Ganga 1s revered as mother. But people are 
polluting such a sacred river also. If a Brahmin stands in 
the Ganga to perform worship, he may find even human 
limbs flowing with water. Similarly, everything is being 
polluted. Students should develop pure mind to get rid of 
this pollution. Then only will they become the emancipators 
of the country. Pure mind ts without any doubts, unsullied, 
steady and selfless. 


What is the use of merely acquiring so many degrees? 
There are so many who are sitting unemployed in their 
houses after getting degrees. In what way are they benefited 
by their degrees? The subjects they have studied in their 
degree (classes) are totally unrelated to their day-to-day 
life. They strive hard to earn money with the help of these 
degrees. They do not make any efforts for anything higher 
in life. Wherever you go, money is being considered all 
important. If you want to travel by bus, you need money. 
If you want to have coffee, for that also you need money. 
Even for water, you need money. If you want to go to a 
temple, even then you need money. All this world has 
become a playfield of money. But what is important 1s man 
and not money. You will attain everything if you protect 
humanness. All problems arise if you lack humanness. You 
are yourselves responsible for all these problems. 


104 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


Humility And Obedience Are The Hallmarks of A 
Student 


It will be good if our students put into practice what 
they have learnt in this university and set a high ideal for 
others. All of you should lead your lives with humility and 
obedience. Destroy all your evil qualities such as pride, 
ego and wickedness. When you drive away all these evil 
qualities, you will become a pure human being. Wherefrom 
does humanness come? It comes from your heart. Here, the 
heart referred to 1s not the physical heart but the spiritual 
heart which 1s free from all blemishes. Like fragrant air, 
your purity should spread everywhere. You should share 
with others the pure thoughts and the pure feelings that 
emanate from you. Whatever you do, it should be helpful 
to others. Help Ever, Hurt Never. If you imbibe these two 
qualities, everything will become good for you. Then only 
will you become a student in the real sense of the term. 


Students today indulge in hurting others. It is not 
good if you do not help others. You are not a student at all 
if you do not develop humility and obedience. These are 
very essential for students. But, today, educated people 
have become highly egoistic. They are proud of their Ph.D. 
degrees. What does Ph.D. mean? The letter “P’ stands for 
person, “h’ for help and ‘D’ for divinity. Hence, one with 
Ph.D. degree is the person who helps others and attains 
divinity. On the contrary, if he does not help others, then 
the letter “p’ will denote that he is a Papi (sinner). Whatever 
high an education you may acquire, you should always 





Students Should Set Ideals For Others 105 


remain humble and modest and should respect your parents. 
Even if your parents are too poor to provide two square 
meals to you in the house, you should still love them. Your 
mother brings you up putting up with so many difficulties. 
If you forget such a mother, it 1s a great sin. Your father 
also looks after you and helps you in every way. Therefore, 
never forget and forsake your parents. Love them tll your 
last breath. That is the true quality of a student. Serve your 
parents and satisfy them. You will find fulfilment in life 
only when your parents are satisfied. 


Sri Sathya Sai University Auditorium, 
Prasanthi Nilayam, 4-6-2009 


| sce children must be taught with the help 
of big letters scrawled on boards and 
slates. Temples, images and Saligrams (crystal 
stones) are the slates and boards, for children 
in spiritual progress, But, even if you play with 
a toy elephant you cannot get the experience 
of contacting a live elephant, can you? The 


Formless God-head can be understood by 
you only when you have rendered yourself 
Formless! When you are in the world of gunas 
(qualities), you have to attach yourself only to 
a Saguna Lord (God with attributes). 


Sri Sathya Sai Baba 


106 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


an comes into the world 
burdened with maya and its instrument, 
the mind. The mind expresses itself through 
attraction and repulsion, raga and dwesha 
(affection and hatred), towards the external 9 
world. Raga is rajasic (passionate) in its 
effect; it can be used for one’s uplift, as Three Assets That You Must 
Narada used it to fix attention on the 
Lord. Dwesha is Tamasic (negativistic), as Safeguard 
Dhurvasa expressed it in his dealings with 


Ambarisha and others. 
Gurur Brahma Gurur Vishnu 


Gurur Devo Maheswara; 
Guru Sakshat Param Brahma 
Tasmai Sri Gurave Namaha. 


Without raga and dwesha, the mind cannot 
function at all. If these two are removed, 
there can be no mind and no maya, and you 
eet fixed in jnana. Let raga and dwesha go 
and let Rama enter; then there will be no (Guru is Brahma, Guru is Vishnu, Guru is Maheswara. 
manas or maya (mind or illusion). Guru is verily the supreme Brahman. So, salutations to 
the Guru.) 


Sri Sathya Sai Bab 
rl oathya oal baba (Sanskrit Sloka) 





RAHMA, Vishnu and Siva are the three different 
names and forms of the same divinity “All are 
one, be alike to everyone.” Though the names and forms 


of the physical body are different, divinity in all beings 1s 


108 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


one only. Brahma is the Creator, Vishnu is the Protector and 
Siva is the Destroyer. Yet, all the three aspects represent the 
one divinity. The one God when engaged in creative aspect 
is referred to as Brahma, while protecting and sustaining 
the living beings as Vishnu and, finally, in the act of Laya 
(dissolution) as Siva. In order to avoid the confusion created 
by ascribing different names and forms to Divinity, God is 
referred to as Atma or the Absolute Brahman (the nameless, 
formless, attributeless divinity). The one Atma permeates 
all living beings. 


Religions are different, path is the same; 
Clothes are different, cotton 1s one; 
Beings are different, Atma is one; 

Nationality and lifestyle are different, 
Human birth ts the same. 


Every human being has to develop three qualities — 
love for God, fear of sin and morality in society. It is only 
lack of fear of sin that is responsible for the present state 
of lack of morality in society. Love is the cementing factor 
that unites people. Where there is love, there society will 
be united. Devoid of morality, one does not deserve to be 
called a human being. Hence, morality is important for 
everything. Though God showers His love on one and all, 
it is the human being who has lost the precious quality 
of fear of sin. Man today is committing several sins with 
the belief that God 1s kind and will ultimately forgive his 


Three Assets That You Must Safeguard 109 


sins. With the result, he is indulging in more and more of 
sinful acts. He has developed a sort of complacency in this 
regard and thinks that he can escape punishment. But, the 
fact is otherwise. Though God is compassionate and may 
forgive all his sinful acts, a human being has to necessarily 
pay for his sins. Hence, every human has to develop these 
three qualities of love for God, fear of sin and morality 
in society. Where there is no fear of sin, there will be no 
morality in society. 


When The Mind Is Sound, Love For God Can Be 
Developed 


People are behaving most irresponsibly and are 
undertaking several undesirable activities with unbridled 
ego. They have no fear of sin. They don’t even think 
for a moment of the consequences of their acts. One has 
therefore to restrain oneself from seeing evil, speaking evil 
and doing evil. If not, the consequences of these evil deeds 
will boomerang on that person later, 1f not today. It 1s also 
possible that the results of all these sinful acts will come 
back to that person all at a time with a bang. If one 1s really 
interested in the welfare of the society one must work for the 
development of morality in society. If one lacks in morality, 
he 1s not a human being at all; he is an animal, verily. 
Speaking untruth, doing injustice to others and indulging 
in unrighteous acts and bad practices is very bad. One has 


110 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


to lead his life by following the three principles of love for 
God, fear of sin and morality in society. It is said that one 
who has no morality in himself is worse than a monkey. 
In fact, a monkey is better than such an individual. No one 
will respect an individual who indulges in immoral acts in 
this world. It is only a person who follows moral principles 
will command respect from one and all. Even those who 
try to harm such a person will be restrained by others with 
a warning. “He is a good person. Do not try to meddle with 
him.” Those who lack in morality are looked down upon 
in society as worse than dogs. Hence, one has to develop 
morality and lead a life of moral principles at all times. 


There are three sadhanas (spiritual practices) by 
which love for God, fear of sin and morality in society can 
be developed. They are Bhakti (devotion to God), Jnana 
(the path of wisdom) and Vairagya (detachment). Karma 
(activity) is a natural and essential attribute of the physical 
body. It is only when the body undertakes good karmas that 
the mind will function well. When the mind is sound, love 
for God can be developed. Thus Bhakti, Jnana and Vairagya 
are interlinked with love for God, fear of sin and morality 
in society. They are like the three blades of a fan. It is only 
when the three blades rotate that we can have refreshing 
air; otherwise we feel uncomfortable. 


Purity Of Conscience Is Of Utmost Importance 


Three Assets That You Must Safeguard 111 


People today question why we have to develop love 
for God? Love for God enables one to develop fear of sin, 
which in turn will develop morality in society. Everyone 
has to discriminate between good and bad, sin and virtue. 
Having analysed, one must try to do good only. Be good, 
do good, see good, this is the way to God. Devoid of these 
three, any number of rituals, worship, japa (chanting the 
divine name) and tapa (penance) will be of no use. 


The nine forms of devotion are: Sravanam (listening), 
Kirtanam (singing), Vishnusmaranam (contemplating on 
Vishnu), Padasevanam (serving His Lotus Feet), Vandanam 
(salutation), Archanam (worship), Dasyam (servitude), 
Sneham (friendship) and Atmanivedanam (self-surrender). 
The first step is Sravanam (listening). Then one has to 
analyse whether what has been listened to is good or bad. 
If you think that it 1s a bad suggestion and therefore not 
to your liking, how can you implement it? It is possible 
today that one can get his work done by speaking untruth 
and score victory over others by false and unjust means. 
Hence, one has to enquire into the sanctity or otherwise of 
every act that he undertakes. One should not be complacent 
about the consequences that would follow; sooner or later, 
the result of a sinful act would accrue. It may happen now 
or a little later, at any moment. Hence, you should be ready 
to undertake only good and noble acts with a pure mind. 
More than anything else, purity of conscience is of utmost 


112 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


importance. That is Atma Tattwa. 


Nobody can understand what Atma 1s. Since the bodies 
and forms are many, some names have to be given 1n order 
to distinguish between them. However, Atma or Brahma has 
neither birth nor death unlike the physical bodies. Hence, 
no one can identify it as such and such. Atma, though 
beyond one’s comprehension, has been described as Nitya, 
Suddha, Buddha, Mukta, Nirmala Swarupinam (eternal, 
pure, enlightened, free and embodiment of sacredness). It 
is, Niranjanam, Sanatana Niketanam (unsullied, eternal 
abode). There is only one Atma that 1s immanent in all 
beings. That is the essential nature of the Atma. 


A small example; when you place one hundred pots 
filled with water under the sky on a moonlit night, you will 
find one moon reflecting in each of those pots. The body 
is like a pot. It is bound to perish at any time. Then, where 
does the moon (Atma) go? It does not go anywhere. It is 
there. However, since there is no water, it 1s not reflecting 
in the water. In the same manner, the Atma is present in 
every human being. 


If one does not have good character, there will be no 
morality in that person. If there is no morality, one does not 
deserve to be called a human being. We have to earn honour 
and respect for ourselves in the society. However, these 
days, we don’t find anyone concerned about good name 
in the society. But, people are very particular about who 1s 


Three Assets That You Must Safeguard 113 


rich and who is poor. Money comes and goes, but morality 
comes and grows, 1s the adage. It 1s, therefore, not correct 
to aspire for wealth, power and such other worldly things. 
All these possessions are transitory. You may try to hold on 
tightly to them, but they just slip away even without your 
noticing them. The Atma, however 1s eternal. There 1s no 
coming and going for Atma. It always remains an eternal 
witness to everything that goes on in the world. We have 
to develop faith in such eternal Atma. Those who develop 
faith in the Atma Tattwa will not be disturbed by injustice, 
wrong and bad practices. 


If You Want To Transform Society, There Must Be 
Purity In Your Heart 


People say If you want is transform the society there 
must be purity in your heart. “My body, my senses, my 
mind, my intellect”, etc., but, “you” are none of these. 
For example, you say, “This is my book”. This book 1s in 
your hands at this moment. The next moment somebody 
wishes to have a look at it. It goes into his hands. Similarly, 
you hold some currency in your hands. After some time it 
will go into someone else’s hands. It just comes and goes. 
But, morality comes and grows. Morality has no form. If 
someone wishes to improve society and the world, morality 
has to be developed in the individual first. Several political 
parties come forward these days saying that they will 
improve the society. They propose to transform the society. 


114 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


But, they invariably fail because what they try to do 1s to 
garner the votes of people for their selfish ends. They do 
not at all bother about the society. If you want to transform 
the society, there must be purity in your heart. First, the 
individual and then the society. In order that the individual 
is transformed, there must be love for God and fear of sin. 
Then comes morality in society. It is the individuals that 
make a society. Hence, if unity among people is developed 
there will be purity and Divinity. Unity, purity and divinity 
cannot be attained by mere education. 


Real Meditation Is Forgetting Oneself Totally 


Supposing you sit for meditation, closing your 
eyes. However, the mind goes on wandering everywhere. 
You try to bring it back to the starting point. It 1s all a 
practice. It is only when the wavering mind 1s stilled that 
meditation 1s possible. This process of making the mind 
steady is called concentration. Meditation 1s possible only 
after concentration. The proper order is concentration, 
contemplation and meditation. If someone claims that he 
is meditating the moment he sits, 1t should not be believed. 
That is an artificial exercise, not meditation. Real meditation 
is forgetting oneself totally. It 1s forgetting dehatma bhava 
(the feeling of identification with the body) completely. 
One has to totally give up attachment to the senses. Then 
only the mind will be steady. 


Once, there used to be a father who had four sons. Each 


Three Assets That You Must Safeguard 115 


one wanted to follow a different vocation to earn money. 
One son wanted to take up business. Another wanted to 
open a small grocery shop. The third son wanted to take 
up employment and the fourth another vocation. Though 
earning money was the common objective, each one wanted 
to go in a different path. Finally, it 1s the means that are 
adopted for earning money that result in accumulation 
of virtue or sin. People commit a sin even without their 
knowing that they are doing so. The sins committed by 
people will continue to haunt them. 


Sometime ago, there were heavy floods in the State 
of Orissa. They ravaged several villages in four districts. 
The houses, trees, standing crops and even animals, and 
some people were swept away by the surging flood water. 
Hundreds of villages were inundated and people were 
marooned. They were fear-stricken at the fury of nature. 
Then I sent a telegram: “Don’t worry. Be happy. I will build 
your houses.” The people of Orissa came to see Me, by 
arranging a special train. The government was there, MPs 
and MLAs were there, who were expected to come to their 
rescue 1n that hour of need and provide succour to them. 
But, none came forward. I sent ten crores immediately and 
arranged for distribution of relief material and building of 
pucca houses for the affected people. I am not interested in 
accumulation of money. I want only your love. Be happy. 
Develop your morality and love for God. If you develop 
love, that love itself will drive away the demonic qualities 


116 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 
in you. 
Good Or Bad, One Gets The Fruits Of His Actions 


Before the Rama-Ravana war commenced, Hanuman 
entered Lanka, as part of his mission to search the 
whereabouts of Sita. After he found Sita, he was on his 
way back to pass on the information to Sri Rama. He was 
caught by the demons and brought to the court of Ravana. 
Ravana was infuriated on seeing Hanuman, who destroyed 
the beautiful Asokavana while he was returning. Ravana 
questioned Hanuman, “Who are you? How dare you enter 
this impregnable city of Lanka?” He underestimated the 
power of Hanuman and derided him addressing him as an 
ordinary monkey. In the same tone Hanuman replied as an 
equal to Ravana, ““The Lord who cut off the ears and nose 
of your sister has sent me.” Ravana was very angry since 
no one dared to talk to him in such an undignified manner. 
In fact, Hanuman used the same language as Ravana 
did. Ravana felt insulted. Hanuman was not bothered in 
the least, for he was always chanting Ramanama which 
gave him the courage and strength to face any situation. 
Ravana could not tolerate the impertinence and arrogance 
of Hanuman and, therefore, ordered that Hanuman’s tail 
be set on fire after wrpapping it with clothes dipped in oil. 
Immediately, clothes soaked in oil were wrapped round 
the tail of Hanuman and it was set on fire. Hanuman did 


Three Assets That You Must Safeguard 117 


not keep quiet. With that burning tail, he jumped from one 
building to the other and thus set the entire city on fire. 


Beautiful and palatial buildings studded with precious 
stones went up 1n flames within no time. Even Mandodar1’s 
palace was engulfed by flames. She came out. People ran 
helter-skelter here and there. Not a single building was 
spared from the raging flames. Hanuman then advised 
Mandodari, “Mother, it is the sin committed by your 
husband that is responsible for this devastating fire and 
consequent loss of so many lives and property. Please tell 
your husband not to commit such heinous sins hereafter. 
If you can thus save your husband, it amounts to saving 
yourself and the rakshasa clan.” 


People have to suffer the consequences of their actions. 
God is only a witness. Good or bad, one gets the fruit of 
his actions. Hence, first and foremost, one has to develop 
morality which is based on developing human qualities 
first. If human qualities are to be developed in a person, 
one should have love for God. Thus, love for God, fear of 
sin and morality in society are interdependent. When there 
is morality in society, all people will be safe. 


One important point has to be remembered in this 
context. You may hide your actions from the society, but 
the omnipresent God knows everything. You will have to 
suffer the consequences of your actions. It is an immutable 


118 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


law. Hence, if you can help others, it is alright. Otherwise 
just keep silent. Do not harm others. Do not commit a 
mistake by thought, word and deed. Sometimes, you may 
not get the result of your actions immediately. It will take 
some time. But, surely the result will follow. People study 
spiritual texts like the Bhagavad Gita, but fail to realise their 
own innate nature. The Upanishads exhort one, “Dear son, 
you try to realise your own nature first. Know thyself! If 
you can do that, it amounts to knowing everything.” The 
knowledge of the Self (Atma Bodha) entails realisation, “I 
am not the body, I am not the mind, I am not the intellect’, 
etc. 


The mind 1s like a cloth consisting of threads woven 
together. How long will this cloth last? As long as the threads 
are intact. Once you remove the threads, the cloth loses its 
shape. Or, if you put the cloth in fire, it will be reduced to 
ashes. People say, “So and so is my wife, so and so is my 
child, so and so is my son-in-law, so and so 1s my son,” 
etc. These relationships are only illusion. Who are all these 
people? All are God’s property. Everything in this world is 
God’s property; nobody has any right, whatsoever. People 
fight between themselves claiming rights, thus wasting their 
time. Time waste 1s life waste. In fact, it is not the time we 
are wasting; we are wasting our precious life. 


In conclusion, I would like to stress once again that 
you should cultivate love for God, fear of sin and morality 
in society. These are valuable assets which you must 
always safeguard. If you safeguard these values, they 


Three Assets That You Must Safeguard 119 


will in turn protect you. You think you have to realise 
Brahma Tattwa today. In fact, Brahman has no name and 
form. It is Nirgunam, Niranjanam, Sanatana Niketanam, 
Nitya, Suddha, Buddha, Mukta, Nirmala Swarupinam 
(God is attributeless, unsullied, final abode, eternal, pure, 
enlightened, free and embodiment of sacredness) 


The Bal Vikas children from Tamil Nadu are waiting 
to present a cultural programme. Witness that programme. 
I will continue My Discourse tomorrow. 


Discourse in Sai Kulwant Hall, 
Prasanthi Nilayam, 6-7-2009 


‘i earn the Grace of God, you have to pray 
to the Personified Power with Name and 
Form; it is your yearning that decides in what 
form the Lord appears. You call and He answers. 
If you are not earnest, if you feel indifferent, and 


say, Let Him come when He wills, in the Form 
He likes and with the Name He prefers,” He 
will not come at all. Call on Him with anguish; 
He will respond. 


Sri Sathya Sai Baba 





120 


SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


ho takes the role of educator from 
Wine beginning of your life? The Mother, 
is it not? Prakriti (Nature) is the Mother, 
the Feminine principle, the Maya (illusory 
energy). She is the great teacher. If you do not 
learn the lessons well, Nature punishes you, 
boxes you in the ear, hits you on the head. 
She is a stern merciless instructress; but, if 
you learn well, she will lead you proudly to 


the Presence of Purushottama (the Supreme 
Person). Obey Prakriti and be well trained 
by her: then, you can inherit the Glory of 
Purushottama. If you disregard Her teaching, 
the Mother gets disgusted with you and the 
Father too will disregard your entreaties. The 
commands of Prakriti given for your good 
are called, dharma. Have that dharma as 
the witness of all your thoughts, words and 
deeds. Be guided every instant by the dictates 
of that Dharma, and success will be yours. 


Sri Sathya Sai Baba 





10 


Be Exemplars Of Selfless Service 


Embodiments of Divine Atma! 


IN the morning there was no time to talk about these 
people. Ever since our hospital started functioning, 

Appa Rao has been working there as an auditor. For fourteen 
years, he worked hard, day and night. I am pleased with his 
work. He came here with the sole intention of rendering 
selfless service, and not with any other motive. Those were 
the initial stages of the Super Speciality Hospital and, so, 
there was plenty of work, day and night. He alone had 
to attend to everything... receiving parcels of medicines, 
checking them and noting them down. In spite of being a 
non medical person, he worked untiringly taking care of 
patients also. He is meticulous in checking all details. He 


122 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


has worked with full satisfaction. All these fourteen years, 
he never aspired for anything. He did not accept even a naya 
paisa. Everybody in the hospital earns these days twenty to 
thirty thousand rupees. But he has not taken any money. He 
had to climb up and down the stairs many times everyday, 
while looking after the stores, patients, nurses and doctors 
as well. He looked after so many things, all alone. He never 
complained to Me also. He has been adjusting himself. He 
has never been deficient in his work. I Myself used to see 
him now and then to enquire about the work. We should 
express our gratitude to such a dedicated worker. With much 
compassion towards him, I told him, “Appa Rao, Now the 
number of patients coming to our hospital has increased 
by thousands. Mentally of course you are quite alert, but 
physically you are weak. Therefore, you take rest at home. 
You have come to serve Swami. There was no shortcoming 
whatsoever in your service.” 


His wife also supported him and has been taking good 
care of him at home, looking after his food and other needs 
meticulously. He has no habit of taking food outside. So, 1f 
and when necessary, she used to send his food to the hospital. 
Appa Rao has also been taking care of poor people in many 
respects. He rendered help in many heart operations to the 
poor people. He used to send free medicines to the homes 
of those heart patients even after they were discharged. He 
worked very hard. My heart melted at his service. How can 
we leave such a person who worked so hard? Everybody, 


Be Exemplars Of Selfless Service 123 


including students, sought his help. I tell our students often, 
Help ever, Hurt never. 


We do not take even a paisa from anyone for rendering 
medical services. Our hospital always gives and never 
takes. He rendered Seva with the feeling, “This is my 
hospital, my Swami’s hospital.” He considered the hospital 
as his own, and served it selflessly. Even when I was away 
physically, I helped him in all that he did. As this is our 
first Super Speciality Hospital, he had to work very hard 
for its development. Subsequently, another Super Speciality 
Hospital has been established in Bangalore. There is an 
Orthopaedic division also in our hospital here. Appa Rao has 
been looking after all this. I liked his work. Before this, he 
worked for the Government. There also, he rendered good 
service. As he utilised all his experience for the benefit of 
our hospital, today we have gathered here to honour him. 


His younger brother Murthy is an electrical engineer. 
He 1s also working with us. Whenever there 1s any electrical 
problem he is called by telephone and he attends to it 
immediately. Even at night, he is ever ready to do service. 
The youngest brother Lakshminarasimham worked 1n our 
university as Registrar. He is also growing older, and needs a 
little rest. He has not married and so there is no bondage. He 
has been totally dedicated to our university. He first joined 
in Seva Dal. He did Ph.D. with the intention of joining our 
college. These three brothers have been rendering good 
service. They have been very helpful to us, in spite of many 


124 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


troubles they had to face. 


Nanjundaiah has been the controller of examinations. 
He has been very kind to all students. He has been working 
day and night in order to declare the results well in time. 
He never used to take rest even for a while. He would 
engage himself in correcting papers even while suffering 
from fever. Everybody was depending upon him. He had 
to take much trouble in sending results to Anantapur and 
Bangalore colleges. We were very much concerned at the 
troubles he had to face. His wife also has been taking good 
care of him at home, providing timely food and looking 
after other needs meticulously. 


Hard Work Earns Swami’s Guidance And Protection 


The University has now grown very large. We are 
receiving larger number of applications as compared to 
other institutes. All big officers to small clerks in all India 
have great regard for our institutions. Be it the hospital 
or the university, there 1s no habit of taking money for the 
services rendered 1n our institutions. We know only to give. 
In Sai Organisations, there is only giving and no taking. 


Recently, we appointed a committee to oversee the 
working of the Hospital and provide necessary help and 
guidance. We have procured some new machinery also. We 
have even imported necessary equipments from abroad. We 
have 1n our stock a variety of books. 


Be Exemplars Of Selfless Service 125 


The University has produced many Ph.Ds. This year 
also, fourteen researchers got Ph.D. degrees. The students 
have great faith in these two people (Lakshminarasimham 
and Nanjundaiah). 


These two (Appa Rao and Nanjundaiah) have been 
very helpful to us in hospital services and educational 
activities. All the responsibility was shouldered by them. 
They used to send me letters while I was not present here. 
I used to discuss every detail with them. I used to ask 
Nanyundaiah about the examination results. The results 
were always good. We have now decided not to burden 
them with these responsibilities any longer. Today, I am 
thanking and blessing them. These two are foremost among 
those who have strived hard for our Institutes. Therefore, 
wherever they are, Swami is always with them, guiding 
and guarding them. They came here only for the sake of 
Swami. Therefore, I wish to provide them with houses 
and keep them here only. Just as they had looked after the 
patients and the students, I wish that hereafter also they both 
extend necessary guidance and help to the new comers in 
the respective areas. There is much to learn from these two 
people. What is this Organisation doing for the society? 
How 1s it doing? What 1s their responsibility in this regard? 
Such details should be accorded to the new comers and 
necessary zeal and motivation should be inculcated. 


The university was started first with undergraduate 
courses only. Now studies up to Ph.D. level are available. 


126 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


Our university and hospitals are now being regarded as the 
best in India. I am very happy that you have contributed 
much for this name and fame. You always belong to Me. 
You have never thought that you are working for the hospital 
or the college. You have been working with the feeling, 
‘This is ours, this is our Swami’s.” That is the reason why 
we got all first prizes for the colleges and high reputation 
for hospitals. Even this information is known only through 
newspapers; we never proclaimed it in any manner. Our 
hospitals and university have become very famous indeed. 


The students have learnt many things from such 
people, and have grown up to great heights. Many of 
them, who are Ph.D.s, have been appointed here so as to 
lead these institutions. Now many novel subjects have 
been introduced along with the conventional faculties like 
B.Com., B.Sc., M.Com., M.Sc., Ph.D., etc. There are many 
deserving students, who are unable to get admission in 
other schools and colleges and with great hope are looking 
at us for help. I told our authorities to take such students 
also into our fold. We do not have any selfish motive. It is 
only a consideration of their parent’s anguish. They have 
given us the responsibility of looking after the welfare and 
progress of their children. 


New Responsibilities For The Two 


Appa Rao and Nanjundaiah must both be given the job 
of keeping watch with vigilant eyes on the affairs of these 


Be Exemplars Of Selfless Service [27 


institutions. In other institutions, new entrants have to pay 
money and take receipts. But our hospitals and university 
have never given any scope for such things. Here everything 
is free, free, free. People wonder as to how we are managing 
these institutions with so many entrants, like this, without 
taking even a paisa? They just come in their clothing, when 
we admit them here. We are admitting all, including those 
who obtained average marks, and we are developing them 
into ‘First class’ students. 


In other hospitals, patients have to spend thousands of 
rupees towards heart operations. But we do not charge them 
even a paisa. For us, love and devotion are important and 
not other things. “Love to love, Heart to heart.” We seek 
only this. They are all deriving great joy. Many patients 
are coming from Nepal and Bhutan for free treatment. In 
this endeavour, the students also must extend necessary 
help to the doctors and other officials. Our hospital and 
Institutes have been fostered in this manner for the past 
twenty years. This trend has to continue in the future also. 
Without begging anybody, we have made fixed deposits to 
the tune of twenty or thirty crores for each institute; and 
they are running on the interest accrued from these deposits. 
I have made necessary arrangements in this regard. We are 
paying salaries at par with the Government. Students of our 
institutes or patients in our hospitals need not worry about 
anything. We take care of everything. 


128 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 
Parents Should Not Be Sent To Old Age Homes 


You must strive to keep everybody happy. Make 
parents happy. Help your parents. The parents are being 
admitted into old age homes, when they are short of money. 
This is not correct. You must provide necessary support to 
the aged parents. It is your own responsibility to look after 
your parents. Even though Swami 1s taking care of your 
education and other necessities, the aspect of parent’s care 
is your own responsibility. Parents should not be sent to old 
age homes. You must keep them with you and serve them. 
You must work hard and take good care of them. You need 
not prepare special items for their sake. It is enough if you 
can give them whatever you are eating. 


As soon as the students pass the exam and acquire a 
degree, they go in search of jobs. 


When all women go out on jobs, 
who will look after chores of their homes? 
When they go out for teaching other children, 
who will teach their own children? 
When husband and wife go to offices, 
who will take care of their children? 


(Telugu Poem) 
Give Priority To The Fostering Of Children 


Some people are deprived of homely food, because 
there 1s no one at home to cook food. So they eat whatever 


Be Exemplars Of Selfless Service 129 


they get. Thus, they are spoiling their own health. There 1s 
no happiness for a woman who is employed in an office. 
They spend their valuable time in some clubs. They do not 
have any consideration for their children in the house, and 
about their timely food. One should give priority to the 
fostering of the children. 


An officer gives a phone call to his house and tells 
the cook, “We have arranged a tea party at home today. 
Make all arrangements for the party.” But there is no tea 
powder, no sugar, no material for making chapatis or 
pakodas in the house. This is the kind of situation they have 
at home. Also, the children’s health gets spoiled because 
of inconsistent food habits and lack of parental care. They 
drink contaminated water and spoil their health, because 
there is no one at home to guide them. Why should the wife 
go out and work? When she goes to school for teaching 
other children, who will teach her own children? So, it 1s 
your own duty to take care of your children. It 1s equivalent 
to earning a good salary if you can teach your own children 
and bring them up well. One feels sorry at the state of a 
woman who fails to take care of her husband and children. 
It is enough if you are able to provide proper timely food 
to your children and take care of their health. If you take up 
jobs leaving your children at home, your entire earnings will 
go towards cooks, baby sitters and cleaners. The house gets 
mismanaged. What you spend towards the cook, caretaker 
and others will work out to be more than what you earn. 


130 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


You can save so much money if only you attend to your 
own work. This is the way of life all women must adopt. 


The children should also learn to render necessary 
help at home. As soon as you come home, find out what 
is available and what 1s not available? What is needed 
immediately? When there is shortage of water, the boy 
should not keep quiet. He should immediately rush out with 
a container and fetch water from the available source. He 
should not feel, “I am educated. Why should I carry water?” 
Family life involves such domestic chores. Students must 
learn how to make parents happy. Parent’s duty is to take 
care of their children. This is the education that 1s essential 
for one and all. After having obtained a Ph.D., one need not 
go far away for the sake of an extra thousand rupees. If you 
take care of your children and do service to parents, that 
itself is great wealth. Today, parents are being treated like 
servants. [tis enough if you take care of your parents, your 
children and the family. That is real education, Getting 
a first class and struggling for a job 1s not a wise thing. 
Whatever job you take up, you must help your parents. This 
is what you must learn. 


The students must emulate people like Appa Rao. 
“Help ever, hurt never.” These are the good qualities that 
you should learn in the Sri Sathya Sai College. Whenever 
any poor person comes to you, you must feed him first, even 
foregoing your meal if necessary. Instead of going to a club 
and spending money there, it is better to use that money for 
the sake of the poor. It is necessary that you learn good 


Be Exemplars Of Selfless Service 131 


qualities and habits so that you may improve the society. 
First Set Your House In Order 


First of all you must develop love for God, fear of sin 
and morality in society. Bad qualities have to be curbed 
and ethics must be fostered in the society. When morality 
is lost, what is the use of any amount of social service 
you do? These are the lessons that you must learn. When 
you follow the path of elders such as these, you can reap 
immense joy and goodness in life. It applies to girls also. 
You must learn from parents the aspects of service, and put 
them into practice. If you make your parents happy, your 
children will make you happy. 


What is meant by morality? It is not just earning money 
and depositing in the bank. You must refrain from troubling 
your parents. When you have love for God, you will have 
fear of sin. After acquiring morality you may proceed to 
serve the society at large. When you are unable to attain 
God’s love, how do you expect to win people’s love? You 
must earn name in the society in a way that people talk of 
you as a good and helpful person. You must learn from 
parents how to help. 


How can morality be acquired while one 1s engaged in 
acts of sin? When you come across elders, always respect 
and serve them. Today I am honouring such good people, 
so that you will try to emulate them. This is what gives Me 
happiness. First take care of your children at home, and 


132 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


extend happiness to your parents. How can you be happy 
while your parents are not happy? If today you love your 
parents, tomorrow you will receive love from your children. 
You can be called educated only when you learn these two 
things. You may acquire big degrees, but who will love you 
if you do not love your parents? Society will love you when 
you take good care of your parents. First set your house in 
order and then think about the progress of society. It 1s with 
this purpose that I am honouring today these experienced 
elders. You should take a lesson from this and follow in the 
footsteps of the elders. 


Gurupurnima Discourse, Prasanthi Nilayam, 7-7-2009 


= ple is just a matter of origin 
and essence; water in lakes, pits, wells 
and rivers is rain water, though the taste, 
colour, name and the forms are different, 
based on where the rain has fallen and how 


pure is the container. Divine grace is like 
rain, pure, pellucid, falling on all. How it is 
received and used depends on the heart of 
man. 


Sri Sathya Sai Baba 





11 


Realise Atma Tattwa 
By Constant Practice 


Embodiments of Love! 


EVERYONE enquires, “Swami, where 1s Atma?” 
They do not understand what Atma is. The Upanishads have 
dealt at length with the principle of Atma. Unfortunately, 
today people have not been able to interpret the teachings 
of the Upanishads properly. The teachings of the Bhagavad 
Gita, Ramayana and the Bhagavata have their origin in 
the Upanishads. Our sages in the ancient times did intense 
tapas (penance) to understand the nature of Atma and finally 
declared that Atma was the fundamental basis of everything 
in the universe. When it assumes a physical body, even while 
the body undergoes constant change from birth to death, 


134 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


Atma remains as the eternal and changeless principle. The 
Atma 1s the source and sustenance for everything. It has no 
birth and death. 


Brahman Permeates The Entire Universe 


People celebrate different festivals with great 
enthusiasm. For example, they celebrate the festival of 
Mahasivaratri. Does 1t mean Lord Siva was born on that 
day? No; the name ‘Siva’ signifies auspiciousness. The Siva 
principle is omnipresent. 


Sarvatah Panipadam Tat Sarvatokshi Siromukham, 
Sarvatah Srutimalloke Sarvamavrutya Tishttati 


(Sanskrit verse) 


(with hands, feet, eyes, head, mouth and ears pervading 
everything.) 


Whatever is seen by the eyes and heard by the ears, 
even the words that are spoken — everything is Brahman. 
There is nothing in the universe which is not Brahman. 
That is why it is described as - 


Sabda Brahmamayi, Characharamayi, 
Jyotirmayi, Vangmayi, Nityanandamayi, 
Paratparamay1, Mayamayt, Sreemayi 


(Sanskrit verse) 


Realise Atma Tattwa By Constant Practice 135 


(Embodiment of sound, mobility and immobility, light, 
speech, eternal bliss, perfection, delusion and wealth). 


Mind Originated From Atma 


No one can say “this is Brahman and this is not’. For 
example this handkerchief 1s also Brahman. From where 
did this handkerchief originate. It is made out of threads. 
The threads 1n turn originated from cotton. Since the threads 
are woven together, it has assumed the form of a cloth. The 
cloth thus woven out of cotton threads can be made into a 
dhoti or a sari or a shirt. 


Some people say that the mind is the origin for the 
entire universe. This is not true. Even the mind has a source 
on which it depends. No doubt the mind is very strong and 
powerful, but, even such a mind has originated from Atma 
only. The mind directs all activities in the physical world. 
It is very unsteady and 1s changing continuously. That 1s 
why it is called “monkey mind’. 


Atma 1s the source and sustenance for the body, mind, 
intellect, Chitta (consciousness). Viveka (discrimination), 
Vijnana (higher wisdom) and Sujnana (the science of 
consciousness). All have originated from Atma only. All 
these assume a particular form at a particular time, like an 
infant, a child, a boy, a young man and an old person in the 
life of a human being. These different forms at different 


136 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


stages have no independent existence. It 1s a transition from 
one stage to the other. However, the Atma is the source 
and sustenance for all these entities. It 1s the fundamental 
principle. 


Divinity Has No Name Or Form 


In order to understand this fundamental principle, 
people ascribed different names to it. Some called it Aum, 
the primordial sound. Others called it Zattwamasi (That 
Thou Art). Yet others called 1t Brahman. Some others gave 
it some names like Rama, Krishna, Allah, Easwara, Jesus, 
etc. These different names and forms are given for the 
purpose of identification only. 


Divinity, however, has no name and form. The names 
and forms ascribed to God are based upon one’s liking for a 
particular name or form. Some people desire to worship God 
as Venkateswara and realise Him in that form. Who created 
that form? It is the human mind that picturised God in that 
form; for example, painters like the famous Ravi Varma. He 
painted God in different forms — Rama, Krishna, etc. These 
are all man-made, but not original. You may worship God 
as Rama, Krishna or Siva and realise Him in that form. But, 
fundamentally, God is one and only one. He is formless, 
nameless and attributeless Brahman. This fundamental truth 
has been explained in the aphorism, Ekameva Adviteeyam 
Brahma (God is one without a second). Yet, different people 


Realise Atma Tattwa By Constant Practice 137 


at different times are deluded by names and forms. One can 
say itis all their imagination. In fact, that imagination itself 
is the root cause for all the troubles in the world. Though 
names and forms are different, God is only one. 


The Process of Meditation 


You think so and so 1s bad and he looks bad. On the 
other hand, if you think that he 1s a good person, he will 
really appear good. It is your feeling towards him that 
makes all the difference between good and bad. These are 
all born out of your thoughts, for which the mind is the 
source. Hence, you have to take things as they are. You 
think you are meditating on a particular form or object. 
Really speaking, it is not meditation. The form or object 
on which you are supposed to be meditating may change 
after sometime. Hence, it is not meditation 1n the real sense. 
It is not concentration either. It is just contemplation, for 
a particular time frame. When the object stabilises after 
regular practice, you can meditate. It 1s not possible for 
anyone to meditate the moment one sits for meditation. No 
one ever succeeded in such an attempt. People say they are 
meditating; but it is artificial. Artificial meditation 1s really 
bad. There are three steps in the process — concentration, 
contemplation and meditation. It 1s a gradual process 
achieved by systematic and regular abhyasa (practice). This 
abhyasa yoga and the consequent peace attained by a person 
has been beautifully explained 1n the Bhagavad Gita thus: 


138 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


Sreyohi Jnanamabhyasat, 
Jnanaddhyanam Visishyate, 
Dhyanat Karmaphala Tyaga, 

Tyagat Santiranantaram. 


(Sanskrit verse) 


(Better indeed is knowledge than practice. Better than 
knowledge is meditation on God. But, better than meditation 
is renunciation of the desire for the fruits of actions. For, 
there follows peace immediately. ) 


Reason For Depression 


Anewborn child does not become an adult immediately. 
He gradually grows into an adult. It is a mistake to think 
that whatever you wish becomes fruitful. If it 1s so, there 
will be no human effort at all! There will be no meaning for 
the human existence. Hence, first and foremost, concentrate 
upon the ‘I’ principle. Constantly contemplate on the 
aphorism, “I am Atma.” You and Atma are one only, not 
two different entities. 


Today, every action of a human being 1s leading to 
confusion which in turn leads to depression. What is the 
reason for this sequence of events? Your own unsteady 
nature. In fact, the entire environment in the world is 
undergoing change. There is change in water, air, clouds 
and even food. When everything around you is changing, 
naturally it will have its effect on you. Your mind 1s also 
undergoing change in tune with the changes around. 


How To Develop Faith In The Feeling Of Oneness 


Realise Atma Tattwa By Constant Practice 139 


There is only one changeless principle, that 1s constant 
integrated awareness (Prajnanam). The Upanishads declare 
Prajnanam Brahma (Brahman 1s Supreme Consciousness). 
If you wish to attain that state, you must develop 
Ekatmabhava (feeling of oneness). Though the bodies are 
different, only one Atma dwells in all living beings. The 
human bodies are like the pots and the mind therein 1s water. 
The one moon is reflected in all the pots. It is only reaction, 
reflection and resound, everywhere. 


Dear children! 


You will not be able to understand the Atma Tattwa. 
Atma 1s not merely a word comprising two letters. It 
connotes developing Ekatmabhava. All are one, be alike 
to everyone. How can you develop faith in this maxim? 
A small example. You are doing a particular work. Your 
neighbour has undertaken a different job. Though you both 
undertook different jobs, the environment in which you are 
performing the jobs is the same. Atma is the consciousness 
that pervades everywhere. That all-pervading principle is 
Truth. 


The creation emerges from Truth 
and merges into Truth, 
Is there a place in the cosmos 
where Truth does not exist? 
Visualise this pure and unsullied Truth. 


(Sanskrit verse) 


140 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


The entire universe is permeated by Truth. It is above, 
below and on all sides. That Sathya (Truth) is Atma. It is 
eternal and changeless. The epic Bhagavata enjoins on us to 
speak truth and to speak sweetly and softly. Sathyam bruyat, 
Priyam bruyat, Na bruyat sathyamapriyam (speak truth, 
speak pleasantly and do not speak unpleasant truth). Truth 
is the source and sustenance for everything 1n the universe. 
Where there is Sathya, there will be Dharma. Where Sathya 
and Dharma go together, peace is the result. Where there 
is peace, there cannot be krodha (anger), tapa (agitation), 
eershya (envy), asuya (jealousy) and damba (conceit). 
Such peace devoid of these bad qualities transforms itself 
into pure love. 


Once, Hanuman entered the city of Lanka in search of 
Sita, who was abducted by Ravana and kept in confinement 
there. He searched for Sita in every street and every 
building, but could not find her. However, he could find 
the rakshasa (demonic) ladies in awkward postures. He 
decided for himself that Sita was a noble lady and would not 
stoop down to such a level. Unable to find Sita anywhere, 
Hanuman lamented, “I have searched for her in every house 
and even in flower gardens. I am yearning to see her.” 
Then he went into the Asoka Vana and found Sita sitting 
under a tree. He felt extremely happy to find her and 1n that 
joyous mood started pulling down fruit-bearing trees and 
deforming the beautiful garden. This act of impertinence 


Realise Atma Tattwa By Constant Practice 14] 


of Hanuman infuriated the demons and he was taken to 
Ravana’s court duly bound by ropes. 


The Law Of Karma Is Immutable And Inescapable 


In the durbar (royal court) of the demon king Ravana, 
he picked up an argument with him over the propriety of 
his heinous act of abducting Sita. He addressed Ravana in 
a most humiliating manner. Ravana could not tolerate the 
impertinent and arrogant behaviour of Hanuman. He became 
very angry and warned Hanuman, “You monkey! No one, 
not even kings dared to address me in such humiliating 
language. I will see that your mouth is shut right now.” 
Hanuman retorted, “You are a demon, whereas I am servant 
of an Emperor who rules the fourteen /Jokas (worlds). You 
cannot do anything to me.” Ravana could not contain his 
anger any more and ordered that Hanuman’s tail be wrapped 
with clothes soaked in oil and set fire to. Immediately, the 
demons brought some old clothes, wrapped them round his 
tail, poured oil on them and set fire to the tail. Hanuman 
then jumped from one building to the other with the burning 
tail and set fire to all the buildings in Lanka. Very soon, 
the flames spread everywhere and it looked as though the 
entire city was going up 1n flames. All the residents in the 
city came out into the streets in great panic. They were 
wondering and discussing among themselves: “Who 1s this 
monkey? Wherefrom has it come? Who sent it? Our entire 
city is burning. Where can we go now?” 


142 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


Even Mandodari’s palace was not spared. The entire 
city including the buildings and personal belongings of the 
residents were reduced to ashes. Only one house in Lanka, 
that of Vibhishana, was safe. Thus, the residents of Lanka 
had to pay for their sins. The Law of Karma is immutable 
and inescapable. People have to suffer the consequences of 
their evil deeds. Whatever one does, whether good or bad, 
will come back to him. 


How To Keep Away from Indulging In Bad Deeds? 


When man emerges from the womb of his mother, 
he does not find any garland around his neck. 
There are no jewels made of pearls nor are there 
glittering gold ornaments. There are no necklaces 
studded with precious stones like emeralds and 
diamonds. But, there is one garland around his 
neck. Brahma strings together the consequences 
of his past deeds into a heavy garland and puts 
it around his neck at the time of his birth. 


(Sanskrit verse) 


Thus, the results of our past karmas (actions) haunt us. 
Suppose you have eaten pakoda in your house; after some 
time, you will get the belch of pakoda only. Similarly, you 
get the results of your past karmas only. Hence, your actions 
must always be good. In order that one always undertakes 
good karmas (actions), one must cultivate Daiva Preeti, 


Realise Atma Tattwa By Constant Practice 143 


Papa Bheeti and Sangha Neeti (love for God, fear of sin 
and morality in society). If one can cultivate these three, 
he will be able to keep himself away from indulging in bad 
deeds. Love for God, fear of sin and morality 1n society are 
all interdependent. One follows the other. Namasmarana 
would help cultivate these noble qualities. That is the 
reason why I repeatedly exhort you to do Namasmarana 
incessantly. Namasmarana 1s the means by which one can 
cross the ocean of samsara. 


How To Realise Atma Tattwa 


If one has to realise Atma Tattwa, one must seek 
refuge in Atma only. Once you realise the Atma Tattwa, 
you will yourself become Atma. You have to constantly 
contemplate upon the Upanishadic declaration, Aham 
Brahmasmi (1 am Brahman). You have to remind yourself, 
“Tam not a man, I am not a rakshasa (demon), lam Atma.”’ 
I wish that students should gradually give up loose talk and 
unnecessary activities. Your speech should be good; your 
vision should be good; your thoughts should also be good. 
It is only when your thoughts, words and deeds are good 
and in perfect harmony you will become a good person. 
The sacred texts like Ramayana, Mahabharata and the 
Bhagavad Gita teach the same. First and foremost, develop 
love for God. If only you have love for God, it amounts to 
having everything. 


144 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 
Constant Practice Enables You To Reach The Goal 


If you wish to attain Atma Tattwa, you have to 
constantly contemplate upon Atma. Once you experience 
Atma Tattwa, you will yourself become Brahman. In order 
to get that experience, there should be regular practice. 
One does a lot of practice even for attaining simple things 
in daily life. Without practice, nothing can be achieved in 
life; you will commit mistakes. 


First and foremost, learn to live like real human beings, 
constantly reminding yourself, “I am a human being, I am 
not an animal, I am not a cruel beast.” From humanness, 
you have to rise to the level of Divinity. You should not 
degenerate to the level of an animal or beast. In fact, all 
Avatars come only to raise the level of consciousness of 
human beings to that of Divinity, only to transform humans 
into Divine beings. When you follow God’s instructions 
meticulously and undertake activities that would please 
Him, you will surely become God, verily. It 1s not a difficult 
task. Constant practice would enable you to reach your 
goal. On the other hand, 1f you follow bad people, you will 
also become bad. “Tell me your company, I shall tell you 
what you are’, is the saying. As 1s your company, so you 
shall become. 


Discourse in Sai Kulwant Hall, 
Prasanthi Nilayam, 20-7-2009 


12 


Vinayaka Principle Is All-pervasive 


Bharat is the motherland of many noble souls who 
earned great name and fame in all the continents 
of the world. This is the land of valorous people 
who vanquished foreign rulers and attained 
independence. This is the land which excelled 
in music, literature and other fine arts. Having 
been born in this great land of Bharat, oh boys 
and girls, itis your sacred duty to protect its rich 
cultural heritage. 


(Telugu poem) 


HE festival of Ganesh Chaturthi was celebrated 
the other day. Our students also had a celebration 


which was full of beauty, splendour and bliss. 


146 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


All Can Experience Vinayaka Principle 


Embodiments of Love — Students! 


First of all, you should know who Vinayaka is. 
Vinayaka is the leader of the universe; there is no leader 
above him. He 1s the leader of all and master of all. It will 
be your misfortune if you forget such a leader and master. 
He eats only simple food, which is cooked without oil. 
The food he eats 1s called Kudumulu which is prepared by 
grinding various types of food grains, making the mixture 
soft by mixing 1t with water and cooking it in steam. He 
eats only such simple food. This preparation 1s also called 
Undrallu. Those who eat such food will not suffer from 
even a minor illness at any point of time. Vinayaka has two 
consorts, Buddhi and Siddhi. Being in the constant company 
of Vinayaka, they have acquired all types of knowledge 
from him. They also eat simple food like Vinayaka. 


Vinayaka 1s omnipresent. He teaches through silence 
and conducts himself in an exemplary manner. Some people 
think that Vinayaka 1s worshipped only in Bharat. But the 
Vinayaka principle is all-pervasive and is worshipped by all. 
People may follow different paths, but all can experience 
the Vinayaka principle. This Vinayaka principle 1s present in 
everyone in the form of breath. It will be sheer foolishness 
if you limit your worship of Vinayaka to idols made of clay 
and metals. In fact, Vinayaka is your master, who 1s in you, 


Vinayaka Principle Is All-Pervasive 147 


with you and around you. By constant contemplation on 
Vinayaka, all your sins will be destroyed. 


Inner Meaning Of Immersion Of Vinayaka Idol 


Yesterday, our students brought the idols of Vinayaka 
in decorated chariots and took them out for immersion in a 
procession. What is the significance of immersion of idols 
in water? When the idol of Vinayaka 1s immersed in water, 
it loses its form. Then Vinayaka principle becomes all- 
pervasive. If you put sugar in water, it will mix with water, 
permeating its every molecule. Likewise, the merger of the 
idol of Vinayaka with water signifies his all-pervasiveness. 
Vinayaka is the divine parent of all and loves all his children. 
He considers them as his only property. Emulating his 
example, all parents should consider their children as their 
property. Similarly, the children should also have utmost 
regard for their parents. Never forget your mother, never 
forget your father. 


Vinayaka is the bestower of Buddhi and Siddhi 
(intellect and spiritual attainments). If your Buddhi 1s good, 
everything will become good for you. Therefore, when 
you commence your studies or start any new work, you 
first offer worship to Vinayaka. Even before eating your 
food, you should pray to Vinayaka. All Bharatiyas pray to 
Vinayaka before undertaking any new venture. When they 


148 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


construct temples, they usually install the idol of Vinayaka 
in the front. It 1s a tradition of the Bharatiyas that whenever 
they have to start some work, they do it only after offering 
worship to Vinayaka. When a singer wants to present a 
concert, he first offers prayer to Vinayaka. Our students 
also dedicate their first Bhajan to Vinayaka when they start 
their Bhajan programme. Vinayaka is the master of your 
life. There is no leader other than him. 


Vinayaka is the Master of the Universe 


Worship of Vinayaka should not be limited to Vinayaka 
Chaturthi day only. You should worship him at all places and 
at all times, whether it 1s Chaturthi, Ashtami, Navami (fourth, 
eighth, ninth day of new moon) or any other day. Sarvada 
Sarva Kaleshu Sarvatra Hari Chintanam (everywhere, at 
all times, under all circumstances contemplate on God). 
However, there is a special significance of worshipping 
Vinayaka on Vinayaka Chaturthi day. As it will be difficult 
for people to perform this elaborate ritualistic worship 
regularly on all days, certain number of days have been 
fixed for the special worship of Vinayaka like three days, 
five days or ten days. Moreover, it is difficult for people 
to prepare the Naivedyam (food offerings) to Vinayaka on 
all days, although the food of Vinayaka is very simple and 
easy to prepare. His food 1s cooked only in steam without 
putting directly on fire. Such food keeps us healthy and 
free from diseases. 


Vinayaka Principle Is All-Pervasive 149 


Though Vinayaka has a big belly, it does not mean 
that he eats much. He takes only limited food. When people 
sing songs 1n praise of Vinayaka, they describe him as Bojja 
Ganapati (one with big belly). But he does not eat all that 
is offered to him. He sanctifies those offerings and confers 
his blessings. He is ever on the move to bless his devotees. 
God is like that only. Vinayaka is the leader of all beings. 
He is the controller and sustainer of the entire creation. If 
Vinayaka does not sustain and control the creation, there 
will be total destruction. It is only Vinayaka who protects 
the creation from Vinashana (destruction). He is present 
everywhere. Whether you are aware of it or not, he 1s always 
with you, in you, around you, above you and below you. 


Vinayaka And Pranayama 


Man cannot live without air. It is his life principle. 
Vinayaka permeates the life principle of man. People 
celebrate Vinayaka Chaturthi with great joy and prepare a 
number of delicious dishes. But, Ganesha 1s not interested 
in eating all the delicious items offered to him. He is happy 
to live on air. Here, air symbolises Prana (life principle). 
There can be no life without the life principle. You can 
yourself see that you breathe in and breathe out. You 
cannot live without breathing. When you take the breath 
in, you experience the sound ‘So’ and when you breathe 
out, you experience the sound ‘Hum’. In this way, one’s 
breathing signifies “Sohum” (That I am). In the science 


150 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


of Pranayama, the inhalation of breath 1s called Puraka, 
exhalation is called Rechaka and retention of breath 1s 
called Kumbhaka. You can attain the state of dhyana only 
whent he duration of inhalation, exhalation and retention 
are equal. Rechaka, Puraka and Kumbhaka are the three 
main aspects in the practice of Pranayama which can be 
learnt only by the grace of Vinayaka. All these processes 
of inhalation, exhalation and retention are directed by the 
Will of God. But people do not understand the secret behind 
this and celebrate Vinayaka Chaturthi in a ritualistic way. 


Vinayaka Bestows Intellect and Spiritual Attainment 


Vinayaka is called Siddhi Vinayaka because he 
bestows Buddhi and Siddhi. Both of these are very essential 
for man. Vinayaka has the head of an elephant which has 
a great significance. Since elephant is considered very 
auspicious, all big temples keep their own elephants for 
ceremonial processions. The elephant 1s the biggest of all 
the animals. The footprints of all animals like lion or tiger 
will be erased when an elephant walks over their path. When 
an elephant passes through a thick forest, 1t creates a path 
even for cars, buses and chariots to pass through. Likewise, 
Vinayaka makes the path for all to follow. When people 
were going from Ayodhya to Mithila for Rama’s wedding, 
the procession was headed by elephants. 


Vinayaka Principle Is All-Pervasive 151 


The grand procession was led by elephants, 
horses and chariots, 
The entire Army of Dasaratha followed 
The elderly Sage Viswamitra 
King Dasaratha was accompanied by his 
ministers and vassal kings, 
It appeared as though the entire Ayodhya 
moved en masse towards Mithila, 
It was a wonderful and blissful sight to behold. 


(Telugu poem) 


The elephant is so powerful that when it trumpets, all 
the barking dogs will be silenced. Without understanding the 
real significance of the elephant head of Vinayaka, we make 
an idol with a trunk and take it out in a procession. Not only 
Vinayaka, but all gods transcend physical forms. There can 
be no birth and death for the one who transcends physical 
form. God has no form. If you ask God, “Who are You?”’, 
He will reply, “Aham Brahmasmi” (1 am Brahman). Who 
is Brahman’? He signifies inhalation and exhalation which 
have no form. Nobody can question who begot Brahman? 
Where is He? Likewise, the primordial sound ‘Om’ has 
no form. It has no beginning, no end. How can there be an 
end of something which has no beginning? Inhalation and 
exhalation are two related processes. Similar are happiness 
and sorrow, merit and sin. God is beyond all these. One 


152 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


who is born will also die. But God has neither birth nor 
death. You should never forget this divine principle which 
signifies the unity of the entire creation. If you ask who 1s 
God, the answer to this question 1s that God Is the principle 
of oneness in the entire diversity of the creation. 


Therefore, students! It is your delusion to limit God 
to the idols of Rama, Krishna and Vinayaka and worship 
them. Did you see Krishna anywhere? Where is He? You 
have seen the picture of Krishna made by artists like Ravi 
Varma and created His idol accordingly. Did Ravi Varma 
see Krishna before painting His picture? No. He imagined 
the form of Krishna by reading the description given in 
the sacred texts and made the picture. There is no one who 
has seen God. However, the physical form in which God 
incarnates has a great significance. God does not assume 
physical form without any reason. Therefore, you should 
never forget His physical form. God assumes the physical 
form to strengthen the moral fabric of the world. 


I was very happy to see the enthusiasm of our students 
yesterday when they brought decorated idols of Vinayaka 
here. It was heartening to see that our students understood 
the real significance of Vinayaka Chaturthi and celebrated 
it in its true spirit. It is not possible to experience the divine 
principle without understanding the spirit behind these 
celebrations. Therefore, try to know the inner significance 


Vinayaka Principle Is All-Pervasive 153 


of celebrating festivals. When you understand that Vinayaka 
is the omnipresent divine principle, you will be celebrating 
this festival in its true spirit. In fact, all festivals should be 
celebrated with proper understanding of their significance. 


(Bhagawan concluded His Discourse with the 
Bhajan, “Vinayaka Vinayaka.....’’) 


Discourse in Sai Kulwant Hall, 
Prasanthi Nilayam, 26-8-2009. 


harma is the code of conduct which will 

promote the ideals of each stage of man 
-learner, householder, earner, master, servant, 
sadhaka, sanyasi, etc. When the code is 
distorted and man undermines his earthly 
career, forgetting the high purpose for which 
he has come, the Lord incarnates and leads 


him along the correct path. That is to say, He 
comes as Man, to restore the principles and 
re-establish the practice of Dharma. This is 
what is referred to as Dharmasamstapana in 
the Gita. Among these Forms assumed by the 
Lord, there is no higher or lower. 


Sri Sathya Sai Baba 





154 


SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


f you have faith and if you keep 

the name of Rama as constant companion, 
you are in Vaikuntha, Kailash, or Heaven, 
all the time. These are not distant regions 
that have to be reached by tortuous travel; 
they are springs of tranquility that are in 
your own heart. 
You cannot have this chance of the proximity 


of the greatest of all sources of joy in any 
other place. Here it is so near, so easy to 
attain, so full of grace. If you fall back, you 
will seldom get the chance again. Ask and 
get what will save you, not what will bind 
you. 


Sri Sathya Sai Baba 





13 
Uphold Ethics And Morality 


The body is made up of five elements and 1s bound 
to perish sooner or later; but, the indweller has 
neither birth nor death. The indweller has no 
attachment whatsoever and 1s the eternal witness. 
Truly speaking, the indweller who is in the form 
of the Atma, is verily God Himself. 


(Telugu poem) 
The Dehi (Indweller) has no bondages. Dehi 1s also 
referred to as Atma or Brahman. 


Embodiments of Love! 


EOPLE worship God 1s several ways and develop 
faith in Him. However, God has no name or form. 
He is one and only one. Yet, people call Him by different 
names like Rama, Krishna, Allah, Jesus, etc. These are all 


156 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


their individual fancies, but God has no particular name. 
God is one. Ekam Sat viprah bahudha vadanti (truth 1s 
one, but the wise refer to it by various names). The one 
God is referred to and worshipped by various names and 
forms. These forms ascribed to God are the result of one’s 
imagination and as portrayed in some paintings. In fact, 
there 1s no one who has ever visualised God. In whichever 
form one contemplates on God, He will manifest in that 
form. God is one, not two! 


Game Of Dice Leads To Loss Of Empire And Wife 


Every individual refers to himself or herself as ‘I’, 
‘Tl’, ‘TP. This ‘I refers to the individual ego, born out of 
attachment to the body. When this deha bhava 1s removed 
(crossed), one becomes the Dehi (the Indweller). You 
become God, verily. Divinity transcends name and form. 
People, since time immemorial, have contemplated, 
worshipped, served and longed for such a transcendental 
Divinity. 


People have many desires in this material world. 
Emperor Dharmaraja had only one desire, that 1s, playing 
the game of dice. He was very fond of this game. The 
Kauravas noticed this weakness of Dharmaraja. They 
contrived to trap him by making use of this weakness. Their 
maternal uncle Sakuni instigated and advised them, “You go 
and invite Dharmaraja for a game of dice.” Sakuni was an 


Uphold Ethics And Morality 157 


adept in this game and he could easily defeat his opponents 
by foul means. Duryodhana and his brothers were on one 
side and Dharmaraja was on the other. The dice used 1n this 
game were manipulated to enable them to score a victory 
each time the game was played. As a result, Dharmaraja 
lost the game every time. He lost his empire, his brothers, 
himself and even Droupadi. 


The Kauravas annexed his empire and took control 
over Dharmaraja’s brothers and wife Droupadi. They 
dragged her to the royal court. Droupadi then posed a 
question to the honourable members and elders in the 
assembly whether Dharmaraja pawned himself first and 
then lost her or vice-versa. If Dharmaraja pawned himself 
first and lost the game, he had no right to pawn Droupadi. 
Moreover, Droupadi was the wife of not only Dharmaraja, 
but all the five brothers. Did they give their consent to pawn 
Panchali (the wife of five brothers) by Dharmaraja in this 
game of dice? No one in that august assembly dared to 
answer the subtle points raised by Droupadi. They did not 
open their mouth. 


Dronacharya, in his youth one day went to King 
Drupada to ask for the gift of a cow. As the king refused 
to make the gift, Dronacharya in his anger left Panchala 
with his belongings and wife and child. As he was walking 
towards Hastinapura, he encountered the Pandava and 
Kaurava children playing in a field near a well. Coming 


158 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


near the children who had surrounded the well, Dronacharya 
enquired, “My dear children, what is the matter? Why are 
you all standing around the well in this manner? What has 
happened?” The children replied in one voice, “Swami, our 
ball has fallen into this well.” Dronacharya then pacified 
them saying, “Do not worry, I will take the ball out.” So 
saying, He pulled an arrow and shot at the ball. The arrow 
stuck to the ball. Then he shot another arrow which stuck 
to the first arrow. In this manner, he released a number 
of arrows one after the other and finally with the help of 
the arrows made into a pole, he pulled out the ball and 
handed it over to the children. Seeing this wonderful feat 
of Dronacharya, they fell at his feet. They realised that they 
had at last found someone who was an expert in archery. 
They conveyed this news to Bhishma who appointed 
Dronacharya as the teacher of both Kauravas and Pandavas. 


Nobility Of Droupadi 


Among the children Arjuna particularly learnt the 
skills of archery fast and became an expert in a short time, 
winning the affection and admiration of Guru Dronacharya. 
In fact, he made his Guru proud and famous by his skills. 
This had made Aswatthama, the son of Dronacharya, jealous. 
From then onwards, he bore a grudge against Pandavas, 
particularly Arjuna. During the Mahabharata war, he 
joined the Kauravas and fought against the Pandavas. One 
night, during the war, he stealthily entered the camp of the 


Uphold Ethics And Morality 159 


Pandavas and massacred the Upapandavas (young children 
of Pandavas) mercilessly under the cover of darkness. As 
he was about to escape, he was tracked down by Arjuna, 
who dragged him into the presence of Droupad1. Instead of 
becoming angry and cursing the evil doer and pronouncing 
punishment on him, she fell at the feet of Aswatthama, the 
son of her husband’s most revered Guru and said: 


It is at the feet of your father Dronacharya that 
my husbands learnt all that they know. Being 
the son of Dronacharya, is it proper to kill my 
innocent children? How could you have the heart 
to kill them, who were unarmed, young, quietly 
asleep, were not having any enmity against you 
and were not contemplating any harm to you? 
(Telugu poem) 
When Droupadi was thus pleading with Aswatthama, 
Bhima could not bear to see this. Exploding with anger, he 
roared: 
This Droupadi ts a stupid woman, for, she pleads 
for the freedom of this wretch. She feels no anger 
against this murderer of her sons. This assassin 
1s not a Brahmin, do not release him, kill him. 
If you do not do that, I will myself kill him with 
my powerful fist. 
(Telugu poem) 


Aswatthama was trembling with fear and felt 


160 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


helpless. Consumed with rage, Arjuna was about to attack 
Aswatthama. Droupadi then raised both her hands and 
pleaded with Arjuna thus: 


Oh, Phalguna! It is not righteous to kill a person 
who is afraid or has lost courage, who ts asleep or 
intoxicated, who seeks refuge or is a female. You 
should not kill Aswatthama, for, he is the son of 
your preceptor. 


(Telugu poem) 


Droupadi then fell at his feet and reasoned with him: 
“Arjuna, will my sons be revived by killing Aswatthama? 
His mother too would experience the same kind of sorrow 
that I am now undergoing. Having studied the Vedas and 
Sastras, how 1s it that you are not able to maintain your 
tranquillity?” 


Thus, Droupadi pleaded with Arjuna to forgive 
Aswatthama for his heinous act. Arjuna retorted, ““You are 
preventing me from keeping up my vow.” Droupadi replied, 
“Tonsuring his head and removing the crown jewel from 
his head is equivalent to killing him.” Arjuna then agreed 
to her pleadings and as a token of punishment shaved off 
Aswatthama’s head, took his crown jewel and set him free. 
“There 1s no use brooding over the past. Past is past; forget 
the past,” is the advice given by Droupadi to Arjuna. On 
the advice of Droupadi, Arjuna suppressed his emotion. 


Saving Life Is Superior To Accumulation of Wealth 


Uphold Ethics And Morality 161 


Just now, an economist who participated in the 
conference mentioned about the theme “Ethics and Finance.” 
Arjuna followed the ethics and saved the life of Aswatthama 
forgetting the loss of the Upapandavas. To save the life 
of a fellow human being is far superior to accumulating 
wealth. Several such incidents of nobility are to be found 
in the Mahabharata and the Bhagavata. There are many 
such noble women like Droupadi. She was broad-minded 
and of noble character. It is only because of such women 
that the country of Bharat has achieved great progress from 
age to age and attained the pre-eminent position of today. 
Unfortunately, the Bharatiyas have forgotten their glorious 
past.... In the supremely holy land of Bharat, tolerance 1s 
the towering quality of our character. 


Follow The Greatness Of Your Culture And Your 
Conscience 


What is the real beauty in a human being? It is not the 
beauty of the physical body. It is the quality of tolerance that 
confers real beauty on an individual. Our culture of Bharat 
has given utmost importance to the quality of tolerance. 
This has been our tradition since ages. One has to therefore 
uphold one’s rich tradition of purity and tolerance. A true 
Bharatiya 1s one who protects these two qualities. He is not 
a human who lacks morality. Money comes and goes; but, 
morality comes and grows. Hence, one has to protect one’s 
morality. That is the real quality of a Bharatiya. Only the 
one who is endowed with a noble character is eligible to be 


162 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


called a Bharatiya. Just as an elephant is not aware of its 
innate strength and meekly submits itself to the commands 
of the mahout, the Bharatiyas of today forget their innate 
strength and purity and are imitating the western culture. 
Though they are endowed with great strength and have 
mastered the Vedas, the Upanishads and the scriptures, they 
are aping the western culture forgetting their own greatness. 
It does not behove of the people of such a great nation. You 
have to realise the greatness of your culture and follow your 
conscience. Unfortunately, people today do not follow their 
conscience. It 1s not out of ignorance but innocence! If you 
continue to imitate the western culture, your own strength 
will gradually diminish. Therefore, do not imitate others. 


Observe restraint. For example, the lion attacks an 
animal only when it is hungry. It does not go about killing 
every animal that it comes across. Thus, even a wild beast 
like the lion has the capacity to restrain itself. Hence, it is 
necessary for every human being to observe restraint and 
certain limits. Limitless ego, anger and desire will only 
lead you astray. You have to divert your mind from such a 
situation and follow the noble path so that you do not cause 
harm to others nor do you suffer in the process. You should 
not utilise your strength and power indiscriminately. You 
see the modern children enjoying unrestrained freedom. 
Freedom no doubt ts good and permissible but should be 
within a limit. Then only it acquires value. Trying to amass 
wealth and being over smart will only lead you to danger. 


Uphold Ethics And Morality 163 


You must have seen in newspapers as to how America 
indulged in colossal wastage of its money and resources 
in waging wars against Iran, Iraq and other nations. 
What is it that America could gain out of this? Today the 
American economy has slowed down and there is recession 
in the country. It is all due to their improper usage of 
resources. Take for example, Lord Easwara. He 1s mighty 
and all-powerful. Yet, He uses His all-pervading power 
only to the extent necessary. He does not use His power 
indiscriminately. One must emulate His example and make 
proper use of one’s strength and resources only to the extent 
necessary. 


Watch Your Thoughts And See That They Do Not Go 
Astray 


Do not waste your thoughts; for, 1t makes your mind 
unsteady and wavering. (Showing His handkerchief) What 
is this? This is acloth. No, this 1s not a cloth but a bundle of 
threads. Not even threads, it is just cotton. Without cotton, 
there can be no threads, and without threads there can be 
no cloth. Likewise, the mind is nothing but a bundle of 
thoughts. Therefore, put a check on your thoughts. Even 
the wealth you acquire and the food you eat must be within 
a certain limit. Food is God, do not waste it. 


You should help others, never hurt them. “Help 
Ever, Hurt Never.” These are some of the guidelines for a 
purposeful living which you must follow. He is a blessed 


164 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


one who conducts himself in such a way that he does not 
hurt others nor does get hurt in the process. You have to 
learn these skills which are not available in the textbooks. 
Watch your thoughts and see that they do not go astray. 
Each time a thought arises in your mind, analyse it. “Is it 
good or bad?” If you feel it 1s bad, do not allow it to persist. 
Just let it pass. [fit is a good thought, put it into practice so 
that you and others also will be benefited. 


The Three Principles To Be Cultivated In Order To 
Earn A Good Name 


In the conference held yesterday and today, certain 
guidelines for the efficient functioning of the banks in the 
country have been deliberated upon. Whatever actions you 
perform must be in a spirit of self-improvement. Do not be 
under the impression that you are serving the organisation; 
rather you are serving yourself by your sincere efforts. Do 
not at all give room for ego and pride. 


By depositing your savings 1n the bank, it 1s not the 
bank but you who will be benefited by it; for, 1t will come 
back to you only. In the same way, you will be benefited 
by the good you do to others. You are doing it for your 
own good life. If you want to earn a good name in society, 
you should cultivate three principles: Daiva Preeti, Paapa 
Bheeti and Sangha Neeti (love for God, fear of sin and 
morality in society). If you foster morality in society, people 


Uphold Ethics And Morality 165 


will gather around you treating you as a good person. 


First and foremost, develop love for God. The next 
is fear of sin. It is only when you cultivate this quality that 
you will become a person of character. When you have a 
noble character, the entire society will love you. None will 
hate you. Maintain good character and love all. Love is 
everywhere and God is everywhere. Hence, love all. The 
more you love others, the more your reputation will go up 
in the society. If you commit a mistake or indulge in an 
evil deed, others will try to imitate you. Hence, be good, 
do good and see good. This is the way to God. It is only 
when you conduct yourself in such a manner that you will 
earn a good name in society. You cannot learn these things 
from a textbook. It is not textual information. It relates to 
the purity of heart. You should develop such sacredness. 
Unfortunately, there are only secrets but no sacredness 
anywhere. This is not good. If you smoke a cigarette, your 
friend too will come to you and say, “Hello, you are a good 
boy. Give me also one cigarette.” As is your company, so 
will be your behaviour. “Tell me your company, I shall tell 
you what you are.” If your company is bad, you become a 
bad person. If you are good, others will follow your example 
and become good. 


Today, you find that several companies have closed 
their operations. What could be the reason for this? If one 


166 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


company is following foul methods, other companies also 
follow suit. It 1s a common thing that bad habits spread 
quickly and easily. You have, therefore, to be cautious and 
strive for good things to happen. You should not be hasty 
to imitate bad things. “Haste makes waste, waste makes 
worry, therefore, do not be in a hurry.” 


Mother Is Very Important 
Dear children! 


You are all very young. Start doing good work 
right from this age. Set an example to others. Do service 
to society. It is society that protects you. Even before you 
start doing social service, there are four persons whom 
you should revere and respect. They are mother, father, 
preceptor and God in that order. First and foremost, the 
mother is very important. You should make her happy. Jf 
your mother is happy, your entire life will be happy. \f you 
make her unhappy, you will suffer. Hence, keep her happy 
and contented at all times. The happiness of the mother 
is your happiness. She will protect you always. It is the 
mother who gave birth to you and brought you up. She may 
reprimand you and even beat you when she is angry with 
you. But her anger 1s only momentary. You should not feel 
for it. The temporary anger will not last long. Realise the 
fact that anger, ego, jealousy, etc., are all temporary phases. 
Even lust is momentary. These are all temporary and hence 
they come and go. They are not permanent. But, there is 


Uphold Ethics And Morality 167 


one principle, that is, Atma Tattwa, which 1s everlasting. 
Develop love for one and all. Love, Love, Love! “Love 
All and Serve All.” Love ts your only property that lasts 
for ever. There 1s nothing greater than love, and you don’t 
need anything greater too. 


Plunge into service with a feeling, “Service is God; 
Service is my Life.” Service should not be undertaken with 
an expectation of remuneration. “Money comes and goes, 
but morality comes and grows.” Do not be elated when you 
get money, nor you should be depressed on losing money. 
The difference between money and morality is, money 
comes and goes whereas morality comes and grows. 


Dear children! 


Today is a very happy day. Pray that occasions like 
this should reoccur wherever you may be. 


God is your sole refuge 
wherever you may be, In a forest, in the sky, 
in a city or a village, on the top of a mountain 
or in the middle of a deep sea. 


(Telugu poem) 


God 1s always with you, above you, behind you. He 
will always protect you. Develop this firm faith in your 
heart. God’s grace is not transitory. It will always be with 
you. You are all good children, I know. You should conduct 


168 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


yourself as good children always. 


(Bhagawan concluded His discourse with two Bhajans, “Hari 
Bhajan Bina Sukh Santi Nahin...” and “Subrahmanyam, 
Subrahmanyam...’’) 


Conference on Ethics And World Of Finance, 
Prasanthi Nilayam, 29-8-2009 


erry life is a new chance, a fresh 
opportunity for realising the Truth. 
Yesterday is gone; today is the fresh chance, 
the new opportunity is now; tomorrow, you 
cannot be sure of . 


In fact every minute is to be welcomed as 


unique and as valuable, precious. Do not pine 
over the chunks of time you have wasted; 
seize the moment that has come within your 


erasp. 
Sri Sathya Sai Baba 





14 


Live Up To 
The Expectations Of Emperor Bali 


Man is born out of, grows in and finally departs 
from this world due to karma. Karma its verily the 
embodiment of Divinity for man. It is only due to 
karma, happiness and sorrow occur in this world. 


(Telugu poem) 
Embodiments of Love! 


EAR devotees of Kerala! Emperor Bali used to 
rule the state of Kerala in ancient times. He used 
to treat his subjects as his own family members and provide 
several conveniences for their happy and comfortable living. 
He used to develop sacred feelings among the people and 


170 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


create a proper environment to foster them. In order that the 
people tread the right path and to set an example to them, 
he started a Yajna by name ‘Viswayit’ once. Several people 
gathered to witness that event. Emperor Bali performed 
the Yajna on a grand scale by donating land and money to 
several people and gave away gifts to a number of people 
on the occasion. During the Yajna, his family members 
were also seated on the Yajna Vedika along with him. While 
everyone was watching the grand spectacle, a handsome 
boy entered the Yajnasala holding a small umbrella made of 
palmirah leaves. As He was approaching the altar, Emperor 
Bali’s daughter Ratnamala saw Him. She was captivated 
by the beauty and effulgence of that charming young boy. 
Immediately, she was lost in deep contemplation, thinking, 
“How fortunate it would be if I had a child like Him!” The 
boy went straight to the altar. 


The Dialogue Between The Emperor And The Divine 
Boy 

While everyone present in the Yajnasala was watching 
Him happily, Emperor Bali welcomed Him, washed His feet 
reverentially, offered a garland and made Him seated on 
an ornate chair. He then enquired the young boy, “Who are 
You? Where did You come from and for what purpose?” 


The young boy replied, “I have heard that Emperor 
Bali is doing several acts of charity. I too have a desire to 
be fulfilled.” The Emperor then enquired, “What is it?” The 
boy replied, “I don’t need anything much. I will be happy 


Live Up To The Expectations Of Emperor Bali 171 


if a small piece of land measuring three feet 1s given to Me 
in charity.” Emperor Bali wondered, “What! Such a small 
request! I thought You would ask for some big things. I am 
surprised at your small request. Is that enough? You may 
ask for something more.” The young boy replied that it 
would be enough if His request was fulfilled. 


He covered the entire earth with one step and the sky 
with the second and was waiting to take the third step. But, 
there was no space left for the third step. Emperor Bali 
then told the boy, “Dear one! You covered the entire Earth 
with one step and the sky with the second. Now, there is 
no space to keep the third step. Hence, please keep Your 
foot on my head, if You wish.” So saying, he bent his head 
before the boy, who was none other than Lord Vishnu come 
in the form of Vamana Avatar. The moment Vamana set His 
foot on the head of Emperor Bali, Bali was pushed down 
under its weight to the nether world! That was how he was 
liberated by Lord Vishnu. 


The Origin Of Onam Festival 


The people of Emperor Bali’s Kingdom were very sad 
at the developments. They expressed their forlorn feelings 
thus: “Oh God! Our Emperor 1s no more with us. He used to 
rear us like his own children. He 1s our protector. How can 
you live without him?” Their helplessness and agony over 
the separation from their beloved King were very painful. 
The happy event of Yajna that was being celebrated on a 


172 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


grand scale came to an abrupt end. This is an example of the 
saying “Pleasure is an interval between two pains.” As the 
people were thus grieving, Emperor Bali declared from the 
nether world, “Oh, my dear children! You are all very dear 
to me. I will always look after your welfare, wherever I am. 
I will see that you do not undergo any trouble. I will protect 
you. You need not feel that I am away from you in a different 
world. Every year on this day, I shall come and see you. 
Commemorate this day of my coming as a festival. Take a 
bath, wear new clothes and enjoy a feast with a variety of 
dishes on this day.” From then on, the people of Kerala are 
celebrating that day as ‘Onam festival’ in remembrance of 
their most beloved King and protector Bali. 


Kerala, The Land Of Nature’s Bounty 


Emperor Bali used to do a lot of good work for the 
benefit of people and make them happy. This 1s the reason 
why the people could not bear the separation from their 
beloved King. 


Even today, Kerala remains a land of plenty and 
prosperity. Nature showers its bounty on the people of 
Kerala. In fact, the rains start in Kerala and then spread 
to the entire country. There is no dearth of food grains 
and drinking water in Kerala, which is nature’s gift to the 
people of Kerala. It 1s customary to see people in other states 
worrying about arrival of the monsoon saying, “Oh! The 
rains have not yet started in Kerala.” It is a land where the 


Live Up To The Expectations Of Emperor Bali 173 


omnipresent God had incarnated as Lord Vamana. He may 
incarnate in one place but is present everywhere. 


God is omnipresent, though at times He incarnates 
in a place with a form. God is only one, not two though 
people refer to Him by different names and forms. Ekam 
Sat viprah bahudha vadanii (truth 1s one, but the wise refer 
to it by various names). It 1s only our illusion to ascribe 
different names to God like Rama, Krishna, Govinda, Allah, 
Jesus, etc. The sun is only one and it appears in different 
parts of the world at different times. It is now 9.00 a.m.; 
but it is night in the U.S.A. Similarly, the one God dwells 
in different people in different forms. You should not be 
under the impression that God has different forms. He 
is beyond names and forms. Ekoham bahusyam (God 1s 
one, but manifests as several beings). Divinity is present 
everywhere and in every country and in every individual. 
It is omnipresent. Since your perceptions are different, you 
ascribe different names and forms to the one God. 


Good Qualities Of The People Of Kerala 


The land of Kerala 1s the gift of God. The people of 
Kerala follow the commands of the noble Emperor Bali 
even today. That is why the state has developed in several 
ways. There 1s no dearth of food and amenities for a happy 
living in Kerala. Emperor Bali provided all comforts to the 
people before he left for his abode. It 1s a small state and 
densely populated. Whatever may be the size of population, 


174 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


people enjoy a lot of comforts, peace and happiness in 
Kerala. 


Of course, changes in people’s aspirations and lifestyle 
are taking place in recent times due to the impact of Kali 
Yuga. But, the core of their hearts and feelings remains the 
same. They still follow the Vedic injunctions Sathyam vada, 
Dharmam chara (speak truth and follow righteousness). 
They respect the elders and serve them with love and 
affection. What could be the reason for this? Love for God. 
It is a land where love for God exists even today. They 
have fear of sin. Those who have love for God naturally 
develop fear of sin. Consequently, such people will have a 
high degree of morality in society which is very important 
for its orderly functioning. Thus, the people of Kerala 
scrupulously observe the three principles of Daiva preeti, 
Papa bheeti and Sangha neeti (love for God, fear of sin 
and morality in society). They respect elders and give due 
recognition to them. 


One should have morality and integrity. The same 
principles have been enshrined in the Vedic injunction, 
Sathyam vada, Dharmam chara (speak truth and follow 
righteousness). The people of Kerala follow these two 
principles scrupulously in their daily lives. 


Love Your Mother And Show Due Respect To Her 


It is not enough to celebrate the Onam festival with 


Live Up To The Expectations Of Emperor Bali Vd 


a lot of religious fervour and devotion. You have to live 
up to the expectations of the noble emperor Bali. It 1s said 
Matrudevo bhava, Pitrudevo bhava, Acharyadevo bhava, 
Atithidevo bhava (revere your mother, father, preceptor 
and guest as God). First comes the mother in that order. 
She gives birth to you, brings you up and teaches you 
good things in your formative years. Then begins the role 
of father. He is your second guru. Then the teacher (guru) 
teaches you education to enable you to make a living in the 
world. And finally God takes command. Thus, your life in 
this physical world begins with your mother and culminates 
in God. Hence, you should not under any circumstances 
forget your mother. You should love your mother more 
than anyone else and show her due respect. You will find 
that the people of Kerala respect the elders very much, 
particularly their mothers. They lend a helping hand and 
take good care of the elders. They keep the elders happy 
always. How fortunate are the people of Kerala to have an 
Emperor like Bali, whom God Himself accompanied to 
Vaikunta (heaven)! 


The Celebration Of Onam 


What is Onam? It is a day on which people take a 
good bath, wear new clothes and pray to God with a pure 
heart. The people of Kerala prepare a variety of tasty 
dishes, particularly with banana. They in fact, prepare 
twelve varieties of dishes with the banana fruit. It is a 
unique celebration. They prepare these dishes with a pure 
and loving heart. Hence, they will be very tasty. They offer 


176 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


these preparations first to God wholeheartedly, with a lot 
of devotion and then partake of it along with their family 
members and relations. They serve these dishes one after 
the other. Both the cooking and serving the dishes 1s done 
with a pure and loving heart in the true spirit of Onam 
celebrations. They keep their houses clean and maintain a 
sacred atmosphere for God to manifest. They consider them 
not merely as houses, but temples of God. 


It is only in Kerala that such a sacred atmosphere 
prevails. Even 1f some people have some misgivings about 
the festival of Onam, they got them cleared and the festival 
is celebrated 1n its true spirit as a day on which Emperor 
Bali conferred blessings on his people from Vaikunta (the 
abode of Lord Vishnu), where he reached ultimately. It is 
a tapas (penance) for the people of Kerala to remember 
the words of Emperor Bali on this day and lead their lives 
accordingly in a spirit of love and service. “Love all and 
serve all”! There can be no greater penance for anyone. 


Whomsoever you come across, offer your salutations. 
Even if you encounter your enemy, offer your salutations 
to him first. Surely, he will reciprocate your noble gesture. 
Thus, people have to conduct themselves with mutual love 
and unity. It is only such people that deserve to be called 
human beings. They are, in fact, the people with morality. 
You have to develop such morality today. Love for God 
enjoins one to develop morality in society. Hence, you 
have to develop Daiva preeti, Papa bheeti and Sangha 





Live Up To The Expectations Of Emperor Bali 177 


neeti (love for God, fear of sin and morality in society). 
Do not ever forget these three principles. Those who have 
no morality are not human beings at all! Can a nation or 
race exist without morality? No! You also must develop the 
qualities of humility and obedience, besides morality. This 
was in fact, the message of emperor Bali to his people. If 
you can cultivate and develop these qualities, your life will 
be sanctified. 


Onam Discourse, Prasanthi Nilayam. 2-9-2009 


ji Atmarama (Divinity) in every one 
prompts him to stick to truth and to the 
moral code; you have only to listen and obey 
and get saved. Some hear even its whisperings; 
some listen only when it protests loudly; some 
are deaf; some are determined not to hear. But, 


all have to be guided by it, sooner or later. Some 
may ascend a plane, others may travel by car or 
board a bus, some may prefer a train journey, 
others may like to trudge along — but, all must 
reach the goal, some day or other. 


Sri Sathya Sai Baba 


178 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


o get angry is but the effort of a moment 
but, to get peace, to become unaffected 
by the ups and downs of life, is the result of 
years of training in Vedanta. It can be well 
established only on the basis of the belief that 
all material things which fall within the range 
of sensuous experience are fundamentally 
non-existent. They are Maya, products of 15 
illusion, of the tendency to see many where 
only ‘One’ exists. You see corpses proceedin : 
cial the other to the graveyard; but ea Respect Mother—First And Foremost 
move about unconcerned. You feel you are 
eternal. In fact, you are. That is the real you, I 
mean. Just as the water you drink is eliminated EONS ago, there was darkness everywhere. There 
as perspiration, the karma that you accumulate A 
is eliminated through karma, gladly borne. So, 
bear both ‘mirth and moan’ with equal calm. 
Like the akasa (space) in the pot merging with 
the akasaa outside the pot, silently, fully, with 
no trace of separation or distinctness, merge 
with the Universal. 


were no human beings or any other creatures. It 
was pitch darkness all over. Then there was torrential rain 
for years together and as a result of this deluge, oceans were 
formed and mountains arose. Gradually the stars appeared 
in the sky. The sun too shone and shed its rays on the earth. 
The oceans and the sky became blue. The colour blue is 


That is real saranagati (surrender, indicative of the vastness of oceans and the sky. God is 
salvation, liberation). also vast and hence He 1s portrayed as blue in appearance. 
Gradually forests and hills, insects and creatures, birds and 

Sri Sathya Sai Baba beasts grew on the earth. Millions of creatures of different 


species as also humans started inhabiting the earth. 





Bhagawan’s Concern For Devotees 


180 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


Once several years ago, I visited Anantapur. I was 
very young then. I stayed in the bungalow of the District 
collector. He came to Me and requested, “Swami! There are 
a number of deer here. You please take two of them along 
with You and keep them in Your Ashram.” The Prasanthi 
Nilayam building was not built yet. I brought those two 
deer and kept them in Bangalore first. Gradually, they 
multiplied into hundreds. There was not enough space for 
their movement there. Hence, they were shifted later to 
Prasanthi Nilayam and kept in a separate deer park. Thus, 
God’s creation multiplies day by day. 


It is raining outside. I find some ladies getting drenched 
in the rain. You allow those ladies inside. The gents too! 
I am sorry that so many devotees on the ladies and gents 
side are standing in the rain to have the Darshan of Swami 
and hear His discourse. No one can fathom the mystery of 
God’s actions. 


When I was studying in the Middle school in 
Kamalapuram, a small town near Kadapa, a district 
headquarters in the present state of Andhra Pradesh, I was 
very young and short. A village fair used to be held on a 
grand scale every year in a place called Pushpagiri, which 
was located between Kamalapuram and Kadapa. One day 
the drill teacher in our school told us, “There will be a grand 
cattle fair in Pushpagiri next week. Several people from all 
over the district and neighbouring villages would come to 
participate in that fair. We have to send volunteers from our 


Respect Mother - First And Foremost 181 


school to regulate the crowds and also to do some service 
to them.” The drill teacher was also our scout master. He 
insisted that all the boys of our school must necessarily 
participate in the scout camp and help the people visiting 
the fair. He particularly told Me, “Raju! You must be the 
leader of this scout camp.” I protested saying, “Sir! They 
are all older in age than Me. How can I control those boys? 
I cannot.” Then all the boys and teachers unanimously 
supported the idea of My being the leader of the camp. 


The next day, our drill teacher called all the boys and 
instructed that all of us shall wear a khaki shirt and knicker, 
along with a leather belt and a whistle. He also insisted 
that each one of us should wear boots, carry a stick and a 
torchlight. How could I procure all these items? I did not 
have even a paisa in My pocket. 


Two of My classmates by name Ramesh and Suresh 
and Myself used to sit on a three-seater bench 1n our 
classroom with the two boys on either side of Me. Ramesh 
was the son of a wealthy Sirastadar (a revenue official). He 
was of the same height as I was. He went to his father and 
requested him, “Father! I like the khaki dress very much. 
Please get two pairs of khaki shirt and knicker stitched for 
me.” He did not, however, reveal the fact that he proposed 
to give the second pair to someone else. The next day he 
brought one pair in a cloth bag and put it under My desk 
along with a small chit. He wrote, “Raju! You are my 


182 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


brother. If You don’t mind, please take this dress. Do not 
return it to me. If You do so, I will feel very bad and commit 
suicide.” My policy is that I do not accept anything from 
anyone. I strongly felt that friendship based on giving and 
taking (things) would not last long. I, therefore, returned 
the clothes with a note, “If you and I are to continue as 
good friends, you take these clothes back.” Ramesh was 
literally in tears at My insistence. He took the clothes back, 
very reluctantly. 


Selling Books To Meet Pusphagiri Camp Expenses 


All the boys volunteering for the scout service were to 
start for Pushpagiri, the next day. It was a journey of eleven 
miles by walk, since no buses plied on that route in those 
days. The boys contributed five rupees each for meeting 
the expenses during the period. But, I had no money, 
not even a paisa. I, therefore, thought of a plan. I used to 
keep My books always neat and tidy. In those days, very 
few boys were in a position to purchase new books when 
they were promoted to a higher class. Hence, they used to 
purchase second-hand textbooks at a reduced cost. A poor 
boy approached Me to buy My textbooks. There used to 
be a heavy syllabus even for lower classes in subjects like 
History, Geography, Civics, etc. The cost of My books 
totalled to eighteen rupees and My books looked like brand 
new ones. The boy was not 1n a position to pay that amount. 
Hence, I told him “You don’t feel sorry. You just pay Me 


Respect Mother - First And Foremost 183 


five rupees and take the books.” The boy felt very happy 
and immediately paid the amount. 


In those days, currency notes were rare. Therefore, he 
paid the entire amount in small coins packed 1n a piece of 
cloth. It was tied 1n an old cloth, which gave way unable 
to bear the weight of the coins. The coins were strewn all 
over the room, making a big sound. On hearing the sound, 
the lady of the house came there and enquired, ““Where did 
You get all this money? Did You steal from my trunk?” She 
began admonishing Me. I explained to her, “No, mother! 
I sold My books to this boy. He gave Me the coins.” The 
poor boy witnessing this incident told her, “Mother! I gave 
those coins to Raju towards the cost of His books, which I 
purchased from Him.” The lady did not believe his words 
and punished him too. She took away all the coins and I 
was left with not even a paisa. 


Long And Lonely Walk To Pushpagiri 


The boys participating in the scout camp were all rich 
and well-dressed. They came to My house to take Me along 
with them. In the circumstances in which I was placed at 
that time, I was not in a position to go along with them. 
If I tell them I am suffering from fever, they will bring a 
thermometer and read My temperature. If I tell them I am 
suffering from some ailment, they will take Me to a doctor 


184 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


and get Me examined by him. Hence, I told them, “I am 
suffering from stomachache. I cannot accompany you 
today.” The boys felt sorry and reluctantly left for the scout 
camp without Me. 


Thereafter, I started alone the same night in the 
moonlight. I walked and walked and reached Pushpagiri at 
daybreak. I was very much tired, having walked for eleven 
miles at a stretch. I was hungry and thirsty. I wanted to 
wash My hands and mouth and looked around for water. 
There was no water anywhere near. There was a masonry 
tank nearby in which water was stored for bathing cows 
and buffaloes. The water was very dirty. Feeling helpless, 
I washed My face with that dirty water itself and drank 
some to quench My thirst. Then, I noticed there on the tank 
(bund) someone had left behind a packet of beedies (country 
cigarettes) and one anna coin. The beedies were, of course, 
of no use to Me. Hence, I threw them away. I took the one 
anna coin and exchanged it for four smaller coins (bottu). 


As I was returning, I noticed a person sitting on 
the roadside playing cards spread over a cloth, inviting 
passersby to bet on the cards, shouting, “Club, Spade, 
Diamond, etc.” He invited Me, saying, “Raju! You are a 
lucky boy. Come, come! Bet some amount on any card of 
Your choice and I will give You double that amount, if You 
win.” No doubt it was a sort of gambling, but I was helpless 
at that time. I started putting one coin on a different card 


Respect Mother - First And Foremost 185 


each time. Every time I was winning the bet and getting 
double the amount I put. Thus, I played the game till I 
could make sixteen annas. Then, I decided that that was 
enough and left the game and returned with the money I 
already earned. 


Since I was feeling hungry, I purchased three dosas 
with one bottu. In those days, dosas were available at the 
rate of one for a dammidi (1/3 of a bottu). Thus, I managed 
with two bottus a day eating dosas. Though I was attending 
the service activities normally just like any of the other 
boys, in My heart of hearts I was aware of the fact that 
betting (gambling) was a bad practice and I should not have 
resorted to it. I knew of the story of Dharmarayja losing his 
everything including his wife, brothers and kingdom in the 
Mahabharata. 


The Fury Of Seshama Raju 


At the end of the scout camp, I was left with one 
bottu. | purchased some sweets, fruits, flowers, kumkum 
and some bangles for My sister-in-law. Seshama Raju, the 
elder brother of this body had gone for a course of teacher- 
training and had just returned. As soon as I stepped into the 
house, I noticed that he was drawing lines in a notebook 
with the help of a wooden ruler. He was very angry that his 
wife had to fetch water during My absence of three days 


186 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


and, therefore, she was very much tired. When I offered her 
the sweets and fruits brought by Me from Pushpagir1, she 
threw them on the floor. She refused to accept even Aumkum, 
which is a sign of auspiciousness. Seshama Raju was furious 
after this incident. He took the ruler in his hands and beat 
Me on the forearm with the ruler, which broke into three 
pieces. My hand was swollen. I did not reveal this incident 
to anybody. I tied a bandage Myself with a wet cloth to the 
swollen hand. 


The next day, Seshama Rayju’s son died. He sent a 
telegram to father to come immediately. In those days, 
there was no post office or telegraph office in Puttaparthi. 
The telegrams were sent to Bukkapatanam and from there 
a messenger would take it to Puttaparthi. Pedda Venkama 
Raju, the father of this body used to go to Bukkapatanam 
regularly to purchase necessary items in the village fair. 
He saw that telegram there and immediately rushed to 
Kamalapuram. He spoke to the members of the family first 
and then enquired as to why My hand was swollen and 
bandaged. I tried to explain away the incident as a very 
insignificant one and told him that I hit a door in the house 
accidentally and nothing serious had happened. The lady 
in the neighbouring house intervened then and informed 
Pedda Venkama Raju, “Sir! It 1s not an isolated incident. 
Your elder son beats the boy everyday. We are very much 
pained to witness His suffering.” 


Respect Mother - First And Foremost 187 


Young Sai Attends School After Finishing Daily Chores 
At Home 


Seshama Raju used to be very angry with Me since 
his wife used to make complaints against Me daily saying 
that I did not attend to this work, that work, etc. My daily 
chores in their house included making hot water for bath, 
preparing coffee early in the morning for Seshama Raju and 
his wife, doing odd jobs in the house and most important, 
fetching drinking water two times, both in the morning and 
evening, from a canal, which was at some distance from 
the house. In order that I finish all these jobs and attend 
to school as per schedule, I had to get up very early in the 
morning, that is, at about 3 O’clock. 


In spite of all this hectic schedule, I was very happy 
that the people in the village were of good nature and used 
to love Me very much. They used to make affectionate 
enquiries about My welfare daily. They were very fond of 
My singing. When I went to Pushpagiri to participate in 
the scout camp, all this busy schedule came to a standstill. 
Though the neighbours were very considerate towards Me 
for My hard work and good nature, people in Seshama 
Raju’s family could not put up with My absence and the 
disruption in the daily routine. They used to shout at Me, 
if on any day I was a little late in bringing water from the 
canal. Of course, I used to ignore that shouting and carry 
on My work as usual, patiently. 


188 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 
The Return Of Sathya To Puttaparthi 


The Griham Abbayi (father) informed Me that night 
that he had to go out for answering his nature call. There 
was no light. There was darkness all around. I held a small 
kerosene lamp in one hand and a jug of water in the other 
and accompanied him to an isolated place. I put those things 
on the ground and tried to return. But, he held My hand and 
with great agony told Me, “Sathya! Did I ever beat You on 
any day in all these years? You are undergoing so much of 
suffering at the hands of these people here. You come away 
from this house. Come! Let us leave for our village early in 
the morning.” I tried to pacify him saying, “It is not proper 
for Me to leave the house now, especially when they are 
immersed 1n grief at the death of their son. You please go 
first. I will come later.” Thereupon, Griham Abbayi left for 
Puttaparthi, very reluctantly. 


On reaching home, he informed Griham Ammayi 
(mother) about the situation prevailing here. She could not 
contain her agony and shed tears at My plight. She told 
Griham Abbayi, “Sathya is a very good boy. I never beat 
Him on any day. I now understand that Seshama Raju is 
beating Him regularly, listening to others’ words. I cannot 
bear this any more. We can bring up Sathya somehow, even 
by selling salt 1f need be. He need not depend on others for 
His upbringing. You please go and bring back Sathya to our 
house.” Griham Abbayi tried to explain his inability, but 
she was insistent. He, therefore, gave a telegram, “Mother 


Respect Mother - First And Foremost 189 


serious, come down to Puttaparthi.” Then, I had no option 
but to return to Puttaparthi. 


There used to be a merchant by name Kotte Subbanna 
in Kamalapuram those days, who used to sell the famous 
children’s tonic, “Bala Bhaskara’. He gave us some amount 
for our journey to Puttaparthi, since neither I nor Griham 
Abbayi had any money with us. We reached Anantapuram 
with great difficulty. There used to be a lawyer’s family in 
Anantapur, who were all good people. The entire family 
was devoted to Swami. They invited us to partake lunch in 
their house. 


Sathya Sings Prayer Songs In Melodious Voice 


We had our lunch 1n their house and finally returned 
to Puttaparthi. As soon as we entered our house, Griham 
Ammaryi held My hand and enquired, “There 1s swelling still. 
Do You have pain also?” Thereafter, she applied several 
home- made medicines including a paste of rice bran on 
the affected part and also gave hot water fomentation. Poor 
lady! She tried her best to make Me cheerful. Every one 
around Me cried on seeing My swollen hand. I told them, 
“Nothing to worry; everything is healed up.” Since then I 
decided to stay in Puttaparthi, permanently. Seshama Raju 
came on a visit during holidays. Griham Abbayi and Griham 
Ammayi both chided him profusely saying, “You took this 
boy along with you to get Him educated; but you put Him 
to great torture. What kind of an education is this? Go away! 


190 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


We don’t give You food even!” Thereafter, Seshama Raju 
was transferred to Uravakonda. He took Me again with 
him in order to admit Me in the High school there. There 
were good teachers there, especially Sri Tammiraju and 
another by name H.S. Ramana who used to teach us English 
language. He was so fond of Me that he used to take Me 
to his house. Not only these two, all our teachers used to 
be very affectionate towards Me since I was a good singer 
with a melodious voice. 


One day they put Me on the stage during a function 
and asked Me to sing a song. I sang the following song: 


Take any vegetable of your choice. 
Only one anna a measure. 
Take brinjals; they are very tasty. 
The well was deep and 
It was difficult to draw water; so too, 
the life in Uravakonda was difficult to forget. 


(Telugu song) 


All the teachers praised the song and congratulated 
Me for singing that song. Later, they asked Me to sing the 
daily prayer song in the school assembly. I sang thus: 


Moment to moment, Thy clarion call resounds 
Hearing Thy magnanimous words, 
The Hindus, Buddhists, Jains, Parsis, Muslims 
and Christians come to Thy throne From east 
and west, making a garland of love 


Respect Mother - First And Foremost 19] 


Hail to Thee, 
Who unites all humanity! 
Hail to Thee, 
Who controls the destiny of Bharat! 
Hail to Thee! Hail to Thee! 


That was our prayer song which I used to sing daily 
in the school assembly. The teachers of our school used to 
stand on either side of Me during the assembly and shed 
tears of joy at My melodious singing. I used to have a very 
good voice. 


The Declaration Of Sai Mission 


One day, I announced to the people around Me that 
it was time for Me to leave the school as well as the house 
and embark on My mission to alleviate the suffering of 
humanity. I revealed My true nature earlier thus: 


Know that Iam Sai, verily. 
Cast off your worldly relationships 
Give up your efforts to restrain Me 
The worldly attachment can no longer bind Me 
None, however great, can hold Me. 


(Telugu poem) 


Everyone cried aloud, unable to bear separation from 
Me. The headmaster of our school, Lakshmipathi declared 
a holiday for the day. Everyone including the teachers, 
students and public felt very sad at My decision to leave 
them. 


192 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


The next day, one Muslim boy was asked to go up the 
stage to sing the prayer song. He too was a good singer with 
a melodious voice. But, the moment he went up the stage, 
he became highly emotional and wept uncontrollably unable 
to bear separation from Me. He sat down expressing his 
inability to sing the prayer. The singing of the daily prayer 
was discontinued from then on. Instead, the headmaster of 
the school used to say a few words and conclude. 


I gave up studies since then. At the time I discontinued 
studies, I was only in the third form (eighth class). But, 
people around Me used to wonder at My scholarship 
thinking that I might have obtained a degree or so. I used 
to write poetry and kept Myself aloof from people. I 
used to maintain silence. Even when I was in the house, I 
maintained the same profile. I just used to have food and 
come out and sit on the Chitravati sands. There is a hill by 
the side of the river where I used to go up and sit silently. 
Several people including children from the neighbouring 
villages and also from Uravakonda used to visit this “Sai 
Baba.” Subbamma used to cook and serve food for them. 
She used to feel very happy at her service, thinking that she 
was serving Swami 5 classmates. Since then, the number of 
people visiting Swami has increased by leaps and bounds. 


Once the Maharaja of Mysore, Jayachamaraja 
Wodayar came in his car. The motorable road was only 
up to Penukonda. He, therefore, travelled in a bullock cart 


Respect Mother - First And Foremost 193 


from Penukonda to Karnatanagepalli and from there to 
Puttaparthi by walk. He pleaded with Me, “Swami! Why 
are You putting Yourself to trouble, residing in Puttaparth1? 
You please come to Mysore. I will arrange to build a big 
mansion for You.” I told him, “A tree must grow in the same 
place where it was born. [fit is plucked out and transplanted 
elsewhere, it will not grow. This ‘tree’ must also grow in 
the same place where it was born.” The Maharaja was a 
great devotee. He used to visit the Chamundeswari temple 
daily in the morning and evening and sing a song specially 
composed in praise of Goddess Chamundeswarl. 


Development of Road to Puttaparthi 


The Maharaja of Mysore visited Puttaparthi again 
on another occasion. By that time, a motorable road was 
laid from Penukonda to Bukkapatanam. He telephoned to 
the Governor of Andhra Pradesh saying, “Why don’t you 
lay a good road to reach Puttaparthi? How much money 
is being wasted on all and sundry schemes! You please 
arrange to lay a good road to Puttaparthi immediately.” 
The Governor instructed the Government accordingly and 
after a protracted correspondence, a chief engineer by name 
Tiruvannai Iyengar was finally sent to undertake a survey 
of the project. It was planned to lay a bypass road direct 
to the Mandir, without touching the Chitravati Road. The 
Maharaja of Mysore offered to bear the entire expenditure 
for the project. Before starting the work, the Chief Engineer 
surveyed the area travelling in a bullock cart. He found that 


194 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


the river encircled the village on three sides and only the 
fourth side was available for laying a road. He stayed for 
three to four days here and reached Mandir in that route by 
a bullock cart. He confirmed that route and passed orders 
finally to lay a ‘black top’ road in that route, drilling a big 
hole in a hill blocking the way. At last, a direct road to reach 
the Mandir in Puttaparthi was ready, without touching the 
Chitravati River. 


Once, the road was made ready, a number of people 
including Rajas and Maharajas with their families started 
visiting Puttaparthi. Notable among them were the Rajas 
of Bobbili and Venkatagiri. They used to bring tents along 
with them and stay 1n those tents. Gradually, the number of 
people visiting Puttaparthi increased by leaps and bounds. 
The people in the villages around Puttaparthi used to argue 
with them saying, “Should we not have an opportunity to 
have Swami’s darshan, sparshan and sambhashan? Is He 
meant only for the Rajas, Maharajas?’” I used to pacify 
them saying that all are My devotees and I don’t make 
any distinction between rich and poor. Later, the Rajas of 
Bobbili, Trivandrum and the younger brother of Trivandrum 
Raja who was a film director, made a lot of conveniences 
here like building houses for the visiting devotees. 


The former Chief Minister of Andhra Pradesh late 
Dr. Bezawada Gopala Reddy built a hospital in Puttaparth1. 
In spite of his busy schedule as the Chief Minister, he used 
to make regular visits to Puttaparthi. He continued the same 


Respect Mother - First And Foremost 195 


till his last breath. He used to attend every function held 
in Prasanthi Nilayam. In due course, millions of devotees 
from all over India and all parts of the world started coming 
to Prasanthi Nilayam. 


Respect Your Mother, She Is Very Important 


In fact, Ihave not come down to deliver discourses on 
any particular form of God. Divinity is only one by whatever 
name and form people refer to Him. The goal is one and love 
is one. The names and forms may be different. Some may 
refer to Divinity as “Atma’’; others as “Aum.” Yet, both are 
same. The names Rama, Krishna, Govinda, Narayana, etc. 
may be different, but, God is only one. You contemplate 
on any name, but God is only one. The Upanishads exhort, 
Matrudevo Bhava, Pitrudevo Bhava, Acharyadevo Bhava, 
Atithidevo Bhava (revere your mother, father, preceptor and 
guest as God). First and foremost, respect your mother. She 
is very important! 


In this sacred land of Bharat 
Forbearance is the real beauty 
In this country the nectarine feeling is 
The feeling of Love towards one’s mother 


(Telugu poem) 


Even if the mother and son go to a court in a property 
dispute, the mother would tell the lawyer, “He is my son” 


196 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


and the son would say, “She is my mother.” Hence the 
relationship between a person and his / her parents 1s lasting. 
Even after the physical body ceases to exist the motherly 
relationship exists. A mother is always a mother. Hence, 
there can be no greater, respectable and sweet feeling than 
motherhood. Many people write letters to Me addressing 
Me as “Mother Sai.” They refer to Me as their revered 
mother. I also address all of you as “children.” 


Discourse in Sai Kulwant Hall, 
Prasanthi Nilayam., 27-9-2009 


ffi ills are traceable to faulty 
iving. And what is that traceable faulty 
living? It is the ignorance of one’s real Nature, 
ignorance so deep-rooted that it affects 
thoughts, words and deeds. The drug that 
can cure it, is patented under different names: 
Jnana, Karma, Upasana (contemplation) and 


Bhakti. They are all the same in potency, and 
curative power. The difference lies only in the 
method of administration either as a mixture 
or as a tablet or as an injection. 


Sri Sathya Sai Baba 





16 


Love Is The Royal Road 
To Reach God 


Forbearance is the real beauty in this sacred land 
of Bharat. The nectarine feeling in this country 
is the feeling of love towards one’s mother. 


(Telugu poem) 


HATEVER you may have already learnt, there 

is still so much to be learnt in the sacred land 
of Bharat. The land of Bharat 1s pious, divine, glorious and 
ever new. Anyone born in this holy land 1s a blessed one. 


Man Is Responsible For All his Sufferings 


What is the purpose of human birth? It is to experience 
the love of God. Only those who are recipients of God’s love 


198 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


can bring about transformation in the world. Society today 
is full of unrest and suffering. Wherever you see, there is 
nothing except sorrow. Many natural calamities like floods 
are causing great devastation. This is not something caused 
by God. Man himself is the cause of all his sufferings. God 
always teaches man the path of righteousness and not that 
of unrighteousness, injustice and impropriety. The Vedas 
declare: Sathyam Vada, Dharmam Chara (speak truth, 
practise righteousness). 


God is one, but, people call Him by different names 
like Rama, Krishna, Govinda, Narayana. It is only due to 
his delusion that man observes differences in these names. 
You may call God by the name of Allah or Jesus, it is all the 
same. In fact, there is only oneness in this world. Ekatma 
Sarva Bhutantaratma (one Atma dwells in all beings). Ekam 
Sat Viprah Bahudha Vadaniti (truth is one, but the wise refer 
to it by various names). Man himself 1s the cause of all his 
delusion. You think that you are in the grip of sorrow. But 
this sorrow 1s of your own making; it is not given by God. 
Everything is the creation of your own thoughts; God 1s 
not responsible for it. Do not think that God 1s responsible 
for any of your sufferings. God gives only happiness. 
Nitvanandam, Parama Sukhadam, Kevalam Jnanamurtim, 
Dwandwateetam, Gagana Sadrisham, Tattwamasyadi 
Lakshyam, Ekam, Nityam, Vimalam, Achalam, Sarvadhee 
Sakshibhutam, Bhavateetam, Trigunarahitam (God 1s the 
embodiment of eternal bliss, wisdom absolute, beyond the 


Love Is The Royal Road To Reach God 199 


pair of opposites, expansive and pervasive like the sky, the 
goal indicated by the Mahavakya Tattwamasi, one without 
a second, eternal, pure, unchanging, witness of all functions 
of the intellect, beyond all mental conditions and the three 
attributes of Satwa, Rajas and Tamas). 


If you enquire into the teachings of Vedanta, you will 
realise that God has nothing to do with your sufferings 
and difficulties. God always helps. Your thoughts are 
responsible for your happiness and sorrow. It is a great 
mistake to think that someone else is the cause of your 
difficulties and sufferings. You should love all and serve 
all. Love is present not only in human beings, but also in 
birds and animals. All can experience love including birds, 
animals and insects. Whomsoever you see, there is God in 
him in the form of Atma. If you hate someone, it amounts 
to hating God. Therefore, do not hate anyone. Do not be 
angry with anyone. If you hate someone, you are, 1n fact, 
hating yourself. Similarly, 1f you abuse someone, you are 
abusing yourself. Every human being is a mirror. You see 
yourself in the mirror. There may be many mirrors, but, 
you see your own reflection in all of them. Everything 1s 
reaction, reflection and resound. Do not think that someone 
else has abused you. It is only you who abuse yourself. But, 
man today is not realising this truth. You should develop the 
faith that God is present in the form of Atma in whomsoever 
you see. Therefore, it is not good to hate or ridicule anyone. 
Love all. Love is the royal road to reach God. No other 


200 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


path except the path of love can take you to God. All the 
Sadhakas (spiritual practitioners) who attained God could 
reach Him only through love. 


Follow the Path of Love 


Sakkubai always chanted ‘Ranga, Ranga, Ranga’... 
But, others made fun of her. Her mother-in-law and her 
husband subjected her to great ordeals. Ultimately, Lord 
Panduranga came to her help and she was able to reach 
Pandharpur. Thus, she became a shining example of 
devotion and dedication for the entire world. That 1s why 
SO many people came to see her. She never thought that 
Panduranga was separate from her. She contemplated on 
Panduranga in all the three states, viz., Jagrat (waking), 
Swapna (dream) and Sushupti (deep sleep). But, modern 
man does not know who God 1s and where He 1s. In fact, 
God is present everywhere, wherever you see. Many 
people who earlier did not believe in God and even showed 
disrespect to the idols of gods have become devotees of 
Swami. Unknowingly people may commit mistakes, but, 
once they realise their mistake, they will repent. Repentance 
is true atonement. It is God who pervades the entire world. 
Out of their ignorance, people may say many things about 
God. But, once they realise the truth, they will know that 
God is one. 


We see many poisonous creatures like snakes and 
scorpions. God has given them power only for their 
protection. When a scorpion bites, it has no intention to 
harm you. It bites you only out of its fear that you might 


Love Is The Royal Road To Reach God 201 


harm it. Even a tiger in the forest will not harm you if you 
do not provoke it. It will pounce upon you only when you 
provoke it. In this manner, for everything there 1s reaction, 
reflection and resound. Whatever you do, you are bound 
to reap its consequences. If you do something bad, you 
will receive only bad results. Do not think that God has 
given this bad result to you. On the other hand, if you do 
something good, you will have good results only. Man’s 
thoughts are responsible for his happiness and suffering. 
Therefore, you should have only good thoughts. 


A human being should have human qualities. But, 
unfortunately, human values are not to be seen 1n man today. 
Man is behaving like an animal. Therefore, fault lies in 
man and not in anybody else. One should accept one’s own 
mistakes instead of finding fault in others. Today, there are 
few who do good. On the other hand, we find everywhere 
people indulging in bad deeds. Recently, there were severe 
floods in some parts of the country. Many people went to 
help the flood victims. But there were others who gave no 
help and at the same time criticised those who helped the 
people affected by floods. Many people criticised even 
devotees like Radha and Sakkubai who always chanted the 
name of God. Ultimately, Krishna taught them a lesson. 
Therefore, never criticise anyone. If some people develop 
good thoughts, you should follow them and feel happy 
about it. 


God is the ocean of bliss. But, sometimes you unjustly 
criticise Him because of your own evil qualities. Whatever 


202 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


good or bad you get, it comes from you only and not from 
God. Therefore, try to correct yourself. First of all, you have 
to annihilate your ego. That means cutting of your little 
‘Tl’, which makes the sacred symbol cross (+) worshipped 
by the Christians. You can realise your Aham (Self) only 
when you root out your ego. When you know yourself, you 
will know everything. Man today tries to know everything 
except the principle of Atma. He is able to fly in the sky, 
keep an account of the number of stars, but, he is unable to 
do the ‘homework’ given to him by God to know himself. 
He is following the evil path because he does not try to 
know his true Self. 


Know Thyself 


God’s love is immanent 1n every being. You prepare a 
number of sweets like Mysore Pak, Gulab Jamoon, Burfi, 
Palkova, Jilebi, etc. In all these, sugar is the same. Similarly, 
God permeates all beings. Sarva Jiva Namaskaram Kesavam 
Pratigachchati (whomsoever you salute, it reaches God) 
and Sarva Jiva Tiraskaram Kesavam Pratigachchati 
(whomsoever you criticise, 1t reaches God). Everything 
happens by the Will of God. One who understands this 
truth is a real human being. What 1s it that you must know 
today? You should know your mistakes and rectify them. 
That is enough. Help Ever, Hurt Never. You become a true 
human being when you know this truth. What does the term 
‘human being’ mean? A human being is one with morality 
and character. When people adhere to the path of morality, 
they will have no suffering. It is only to teach such lessons 


Love Is The Royal Road To Reach God 203 


to man that God incarnates on earth. Man should know the 
unity in diversity. You may describe the glory of any name 
of God, but God is one. He is present in everyone as the 
Atma which has no name and no form. The same Atma 1s 
present in all living beings. You see so many lights here. 
They appear to be different from each other but the electric 
current in all of them is the same. When you turn off the 
main switch, everything will become dark. Various names 
and forms such as Rama, Krishna, Govinda, Narayana are 
like the bulbs. The same divinity is present in all these 
names and forms. 


First of all, you should understand the nature of your 
mind. You have to keep your mind under your control. 
Then everything will become good for you. What do 
the Vedic Mantras signify? They signify the oneness of 
the Atma. There is no greater spiritual practice than to 
realise the oneness of the Atma. This is the goal of all 
the spiritual practices like Japa, Tapa, Yajna (chanting, 
penance, sacrifice), etc. Therefore, develop faith in unity 
and not diversity. When you develop faith in unity, you will 
experience peace and happiness. 


Know your Real Name 


When you ask God, “Who are You?”, He will reply, 
“Tam Atma.” He will not say, “I am Rama, I am Krishna, I 
am Venkateswara, I am Sai Baba.” God is only one. This 1s 
the eternal truth. He is the same in all the three periods of 
time — past, present and future. The same divinity is present 


204 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


in Vyashti, Samashti, Srishti and Parameshti (individual, 
society, creation and Creator). Therefore, do not put your 
faith in diversity. 


When you are in difficulty, you chant the name of 
Venkateswara, Rama or Krishna. But, you do not remember 
them when you have no difficulties. However, right from 
your birth, you chant the Mantra, “Soham” (1 am God) 
with each inhalation and exhalation. Ultimately, you should 
realise, “I am God.” Your parents may have given you 
a certain name. If I ask, “Who are you?”, someone will 
say, “I am Ramaiah’”, and someone else will say, “I am 
Krishnaiah.” These names are given to you by your parents 
and not by God. Soham, Soham, Soham (1 am God, I am 
God, I am God). This 1s the name given to you by God. 
This is the name given to everyone, whichever country 
or religion or community he may belong to. Those who 
realise this divine principle and act accordingly are truly 
blessed. You may attend any number of meetings and listen 
to anumber of discourses, but what you have to ultimately 
know 1s only one thing and that is Aham (Self). 


Many people try to describe the glory of Swami in 
many ways. But, it is all their delusion; they do not know 
My Reality. What is My name? It is not Sathya Sai Baba, 
though the world knows Me by this name. People should get 
rid of this delusion to know My Reality. Today, everybody is 
trying to realise the truth except the politicians. If only they 
realise the truth, the entire nation will prosper. Politics 1s 
the cause of all the conflicts that we see today, everywhere. 
Politics has affected not only the general public but also the 





Love Is The Royal Road To Reach God 205 


police, the army and the entire administration. How many 
people are getting killed because of politics! Therefore, 
do not put your faith in politics and do not follow politics. 
Whosoever tells you something good, you should accept 
and follow. Samasta Lokah Sukhino Bhavantu (May 
all the beings of all the worlds be happy!). This is My 
Message. 


All living beings should be happy. Wherefrom can you 
derive happiness? You can derive it only from the Atma. 
People want peace. But where is peace? Outside, you find 
only pieces. Peace 1s present only in love. [f you develop 
love, you will have everything. 


Very happy! 


Sri Sathya Sai Panduranga Kshetra, Hadshi, 
Pune, 29-10-2009 


sie Lord does not test a man just 
for fun; He does not pile calamity on calamity 
because He enjoys it. Examinations are held, to 
measure achievement and to award marks and 


honours. You must ask to be examined, so that 
your progress may be recorded. 


Sri Sathya Sai Baba 


SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


Saenana (spiritual effort) requires 
regular habits and moderation in food, 
sleep, and exercise. Fasting weakens 
the intellect and reduces the strength of 
discrimination. The body, the mind and 
the spirit, all three must be equally looked 
after. Unless you have “muscles of iron and 
nerves of steel,” you cannot contain in your 
head the tremendously transforming idea of 
Adwaita, of your being the Universal itself, 


the Eternal Reality itself! 


Lesser strength can only think in terms of 
servitude or subsidiary roles. To see the 
Truth as Truth, and the untruth as untruth, 
clarity of vision and courage of vision are 
both needed. 


Sri Sathya Sai Baba 





17 


Be Good, Do Good And See Good 


Bereft of truth, righteousness, peace and love, the 
value of all your education 1s zero; bereft of truth, 
righteousness, peace and love, the benefit of all 
your acts of charity and kindness is zero; bereft 
of truth, righteousness, peace and love, the utility 
of all your positions of power is zero; and bereft 
of truth, righteousness, peace and love the result 
of all your good deeds is zero. Sathya, Dharma, 
Santi and Prema (Truth, Righteousness, Peace 
and Love), are verily the pillars of the mansion of 
Sanathana Dharma. What else is to be conveyed 
to this assembly of noble souls. 


(Telugu poem) 


208 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


In spite of his education and intelligence, a 
foolish man will not know his true Self and a 
mean-minded person will not give up his evil 
qualities. What is the use of acquiring education 
which cannot lead you to immortality? Acquire 
the knowledge that will make you immortal. 


(Telugu poem) 


EOPLE pursue education and obtain high degrees 

in different disciplines. But, in their day-to-day 
life their behaviour is totally at variance to the principles 
they learnt. In spite of their high academic qualifications, 
they woefully lack the knowledge about the essence of 
education. What they acquire 1s only worldly, evanescent 
and unreal education. 


There are millions of students and highly educated 
people in the world. They obtain all sorts of degrees starting 
from A to Z. But, of what use are their degrees? What is 
their contribution for the welfare of the world? Do they 
help poor and the forlorn at least to a small extent? They 
earn crores of rupees; but they don’t give even a penny in 
charity. They are too selfish. They do not at all control their 
desires. One who controls his desires can work wonders in 
the world. People are not at all satisfied with their earnings. 
They accumulate huge amount of wealth and still crave 
to earn more. The Vedas declare Na karmana na prajaya 
dhanena tyagenaike namrutattwa manashu (immortality 1s 


Be Good, Do Good And See Good 209 


not attained through action, progeny or wealth; it 1s attained 
only by sacrifice). People do not at all strive to attain 
immortality. Wherever you see and whomever you come 
across, you find selfishness, selfishness and selfishness 
alone. Of what use 1s the education of such selfish people? 


Education, Educare And Their Benefits 


No doubt, education has to be pursued and some 
activities have to be undertaken in the world for leading 
a comfortable life. One has to take care of the worldly 
needs for himself and his family like food, clothing and 
Shelter. But, to what extent? These are all activities that 
one undertakes for the sake of oneself and one’s family, 
not for others. Modern education is breeding selfishness. It 
is for acquiring goods and services for one’s own comfort. 
These are worldly pleasures. The qualities of kama, krodha, 
lobha, moha, mada and matsarya (desire, anger, greed, 
delusion, pride and envy) drive man’s efforts in pursuit of 
worldly pleasures. No doubt the worldly education helps 
to provide comfort and joy in the objective world, but it 
does not at all contribute to inner bliss. It is only the five 
human values of Sathya (truth), Dharma (righteousness), 
Santi (peace), Prema (love) and Ahimsa (non-violence) that 
confer inner bliss. 


A person who cultivates these five human values will 
always be happy. The five senses of action provide external 
pleasure; but the five human values confer inner bliss. 


210 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


Education helps to obtain various conveniences for 
external pleasure, whereas inner bliss can be experienced 
only by Educare. There is a lot of difference between 
Education and Educare. Education involves reading of 
books written by someone and listening to the lectures 
delivered by someone. Educare, however, has nothing to do 
with books. It has no form at all! It is Truth that has no form. 


The Upanishads ordain “Sathyam vada, Dharmam 
chara”’ (speak truth, practise righteousness). Truth has 
to be spoken and righteousness has to be practised. But, 
nowadays, people lecture about these values but do not 
follow. This is not correct. 


Love is one quality that 1s common to all human 
beings, nay, animals, birds, beasts, and even insects. Every 
living being loves its progeny. And, love is divine. Whoever 
cultivates love, God manifests in them. Jt is only the divine 
quality of love that saves us from sorrows, difficulties and 
calamities. Unfortunately, people do not cultivate love 
and go after transient things. “Love 1s God, live in love”. 
Worldly possessions give momentary pleasure, but love 
confers eternal bliss. Real love manifests from the depth 
of one’s own heart. One has to attain such divine love. 
Wherever you go, whatever activity you may undertake, 
let your heart be filled with love. Such a person, wherever 
he is, whether in the town or in the forest or in the sky or 
in a deep sea will surely be protected. Divine love neither 


Be Good, Do Good And See Good 211 


grows nor diminishes. It always remains the same. 
God Does Not Make Any Distinction Between People 


Ekameva adviteeyam Brahma (God 1s one without a 
second). To attribute various names to God such as Rama, 
Krishna, Govinda, etc., is only your imagination. That 
which has neither birth nor death is one and only one. It has 
no beginning and no end. That 1s Brahma. Hence, whenever 
someone enquires “Who are you? What is your name?” 
You have to reply “Aham Brahmasmi” (1 am Brahman). 
There is nothing real and eternal except Brahman. Hence, 
one should not waste his time in pursuit of transient things. 
What is the use of acquiring such objects? No doubt worldly 
education is necessary. However, always remind yourself 
that it 1s all temporary. 


Brahman is One without a second. Zero gains value 
only when it is placed after the number. Likewise, the 
zero of Samsara (worldly life) will have value only if it 
is associated with the One that is Brahman. We are going 
after the impermanent and transitory things forgetting the 
One. We think that the qualities of anger, envy, jealousy, 
pride, etc., are God — given, but it is not true. God does not 
make any distinction between people by granting positive 
attributes to some and negative qualities to others. All these 
differences are man-made. God has nothing to do with them. 
When our wish 1s fulfilled, we praise God. On the other 
hand, if something goes wrong we attribute our failure to 


212 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


God and blame Him. God is only a witness to everything 
that goes on in the world, good or bad. He neither gives 
nor receives anything. All our sorrows and difficulties are 
of our own making. 


Mind Alone Is Responsible For Joy And Sorrow 


The thoughts that flow from our mind are expressed 
through speech. Hence, mind is the source for our speech. 
And, this mind has its origin in our breath (inhaling and 
exhaling). Therefore, the inhaling and exhaling (Soham) 
is Brahman verily and the mind represents Vishnu. It is 
said, Manomoolam idam jagat (the world 1s a projection of 
the mind). Our Vaak (speech) represents Siva. Hence, we 
need not go in search of the Trinity, Brahma, Vishnu and 
Maheshwara somewhere in a distant place. God is in us, 
with us, above, below and around us. In fact, you are God. 
Your mind alone is responsible for your joy or sorrow. We 
think these are thrust on us by someone from outside. No, all 
these experiences flow from you only. You are responsible 
for everything. If you realise that these experiences emanate 
from your own mind and think that you are God, you will 
become God. On the other hand, if you identify yourself 
with the world and think “I am so and so”, you will remain 
separate from God. 


One should not cultivate excessive desires “Less 
luggage, more comfort makes travel a pleasure.” Hence, 
reduce the luggage of your desires. It 1s natural, people 
have some desires. But, one has to enquire which one of 


Be Good, Do Good And See Good 213 


those desires is good for him and which causes harm to 
him. Unfortunately, this sense of discrimination 1s lost 
in present times. All these desires which are the result of 
kama, krodha, lobha, moha, mada and matsarya (desire, 
anger, greed, delusion, pride and envy) have their origin 
in the mind. 


When you marry a girl, you develop love for her in 
the beginning. After sometime, if for any reason she goes 
against your wishes, you develop hatred for her. Your anger 
and hatred will ultimately land you in difficulties. If you can 
reduce your desires and expectations, you will be able to 
lead a happy married life. Students too behave in the same 
way. As one goes on acquiring degrees, he loses his peace 
because of limitless desires. 


Whatever may be one’s expectations in pursuing 
higher education, one has to put into practice what one 
has learnt in the college or University. Merely acquiring a 
number of degrees without putting into practice what one 
has learnt through education is a waste. It does not help him 
in any way. Education without practising the principles of 
education leads to loss and worry. Hence, practice (Abhyasa) 
is of utmost importance. For example, you are enacting a 
drama. Is it not true that you do a number of rehearsals 
before finally performing on the stage? It is the practice 
that makes you perfect. Hence, practice is needed in all 
your endeavours — reading, writing, medicine, surgery, etc. 


214 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


The Gita says: 


Sreyohi Jnanamabhyasat, 
Jnanaddhyanam vishishyate, 
Dhyanat karmaphala tyaga, 

Tyagat Santiranantaram. 


(Sanskrit verse) 


(Better indeed is knowledge than practice. Better than 
knowledge 1s meditation on God. But better than meditation 
is renunciation of the desire for the fruits of actions. For, 
there follows peace immediately. ) 


Where is peace? Peace is very much in us only. It is 
futile to search for peace somewhere in the outer world. If 
one wants to attain peace, one has to search for it in oneself. 


Mother Is The Foundation For The Mansion Of Your 
Life 


You have acquired all this knowledge from the text 
books and from your teachers. This 1s bookish knowledge. 
If you put it into practice, 1t becomes practical knowledge 
which will remain with you permanently. The rain water 
is pure. When you place a vessel while it is raining, you 
can collect pure water. It is like distilled water. By drinking 
that water, you will not be troubled by any ailment. When 
the same water is mixed up with other substances, it gets 
polluted. In the same manner, the mind which is always 
pure is polluted by desires. Hence, you should not pollute 


Be Good, Do Good And See Good 215 


your mind by cultivating desires. Keep the mind always 
pure. Whenever a desire arises 1n your mind brush it aside 
to keep your mind free from pollution. Apart from reading 
your text books and acquiring knowledge, keep your mind 
always pure and free from pollution. This is what you have 
to learn today. 


You may or may not worship God. But, you must 
respect your mother and father who are responsible for 
your birth. Respect your mother. Keep her always happy. 
No one can estimate or describe a mother’s love. No one 
can pollute it. If only you are able to win the love of your 
mother, 1t amounts to acquiring all degrees. Our scriptures 
enjoin on us to respect mother, father, teacher and God 
in that order. First and foremost is the mother who gave 
you birth. The father brings you up and puts you on the 
road to development. The mother is the foundation for the 
mansion of your life; father represents the wall and the 
Guru (teacher) is the roof. And, finally, God is your life 
itself. Hence, those who yearn for God must love their 
mother first. If only you keep her happy, all other things of 
happiness will be added unto you. Nowadays, people keep 
their aged parents in the old age homes. This is not correct. 
The Upanishads exhort one: Matrudevo bhava! Pitrudevo 
bhava! Acharyadevo bhava! One who forsakes his mother 
is not a human being at all! It is your mother who brought 
you up to this stage. Hence, you should love your mother 
and serve her when she falls sick. You must develop the 


216 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


feeling that whatever your mother says is for your good 
only. You should not get angry when she chides you. Even 
her anger is for your good only. 


Krishna’s Compassion For Kuchela 


Once Kuchela, a poor Brahmin, went to meet his 
childhood friend Krishna. He was afraid that the guards 
standing at the gate of Krishna’s palace might not let him in. 
But, God 1s so compassionate that He will not forsake any 
individual. Lord Krishna Himself came to him and enquired, 
“Dear friend Kuchela, what do you want?” Kuchela replied, 
“Swami, I do not want anything. I will be happy if I have 
Your love and grace. Oh Lord! That is enough”. When 
Kuchela returned to his place after taking leave of Krishna, 
he could not recognise his house. In place of his hut, now 
stood a palatial building. His wife and children were moving 
about in gorgeous clothes, wearing glittering ornaments. 
This is the gift of love from God. Hence, if only we are 
able to win God’s love, everything else will be added unto 
us. Therefore develop firm faith in God. 


You will not come up in life unless you get rid of 
your bad qualities. Even if you have accumulated wealth 
and attained positions of power, they will not last long. It 
is not the wealth, but noble qualities that are important for 
a human being. Hence, develop human qualities. You call 
yourself a human being. Unless there are values in you, 
how can you be called a human being? It is only when you 
develop noble qualities that you are entitled to be called 


Be Good, Do Good And See Good 217 


a human. God will protect a person with human values 
by constantly guarding and guiding him. Hence, develop 
human values; do not crave for money. We often come 
across people changing jobs with a hope to get high salaries. 
Do not develop this craze for money. Money comes and 
goes, morality comes and grows. 


Develop morality and love for God. When you develop 
love for God, the demonic qualities in you will be removed. 
When people get rid of the demonic qualities, society itself 
will change into a better society. You will earn a good name. 
People will praise you, “So and so is a good man. We must 
have people like him’’. If you wish to earn such a good 
name, you must be fully involved in prayer to God. The 
prayer must constantly ring in your heart. Love for God, 
fear of sin and morality in society, these are the qualities 
that you have to develop. Then only you will be entitled to 
be called a good person. Be good, do good and see good. 
Never entertain bad thoughts. It is quite common to get bad 
thoughts in your age, but do not give them a place in your 
heart. Just brush them aside. 


Our Boys Are Always Good Boys 


You may be a boy now. But, you will grow into an old 
man after some years. Child, boy, man, grandfather - these 
are all the different stages in one’s life. They all belong to 
the same person. Only the names and the body change; but 
the individual is one. Similarly, God 1s one in whichever 


218 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


name and form He is worshipped. The names and forms 
ascribed to God may differ but God is one, as per the saying 
“Ekam Sat viprah bahudha vadanti’. Develop total faith 
in this maxim. Wherever you are and whatever activity 
you are engaged in, constantly contemplate on God. Then 
only your life will be fruitful. May you all develop good 
qualities, good behaviour, good thoughts and good feelings. 
Be happy. Our boys are always good boys. 


Do Not Give Scope For Unnecessary Contacts 


Today, wherever you see, you find people spending 
time watching cinemas and TV shows and hearing cinema 
music from tape recorders. In addition, almost everyone 
irrespective of sex and status in society 1s using cell phones. 
People will be wasting a lot of time talking to someone 
through the cell phones. Even they talk to strangers. Because 
of the proliferation of the entertainment media and the 
indiscriminate use of cell phones, human beings have lost 
their value. Very often, due to the misuse of cell phones, 
people, especially the younger generation, land themselves 
in serious trouble. Most often, the cell phones are put to 
misuse than proper use. I would advise you, particularly 
the boys and girls, not to give your cell number to anyone. 
You will face great danger by doing so. Try to avoid using 
cell phones. Even if you buy one, do not give your number 
to others indiscriminately. There are some people who 
continuously talk over cell phone for hours together. This 
is totally wrong. By doing so, you will be committing sin. 


Be Good, Do Good And See Good 219 


Once you give your cell number to others, they will call 
you back. You will feel happy in the beginning. Later, they 
will be talking to you frequently. Unnecessary contacts will 
develop by doing so. Finally, they mislead you and spoil 
your life. In the beginning, they introduce themselves to 
you saying, “I am your friend’. The friendship gradually 
leads to establishing relationship. You will be deceived and 
you will land in deep trouble in the end. Hence, do not give 
scope for such unnecessary contacts. 


Earn Good Name For Yourselves, Your Parents And 
The Institution 


You always spend your time in the contemplation 
of the divine name or reading good books. Today is the 
convocation day. Some of you might be entering into 
the outside world, having acquired degrees. Let your 
contact with the outside world be good. It is possible that 
there may be significant changes in the lives of most of 
the students from today. I wish you all should earn good 
name for yourselves, your parents and the institution in 
which you studied. Samuel Sandweiss also told you the 
same thing in his convocation address. He talked about 
his divine experiences. The advice of these elders must be 
imprinted in your hearts. They always speak good words. 
I am very happy. It is not possible for Me to talk to you all, 
individually. Hence, I gave a discourse that is applicable 
to all. Our students are all good when compared to those 
in the other institutions. Let that good name be upheld. I 


220 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


am very happy. 

(Bhagawan wanted all the students to sing a song. 
The students sang in chorus the song: “Hum ko tum se pyar 
kitna’’) 


Your song has given Me immense happiness. 


Convocation Day , Prasanthi Nilayam, 22-11-2009 


eath stalks your footsteps like a 

tiger in the bush. So without further 
waste of time, endeavour to give up sloth and 
anger; be tranquil amidst the storms; mix in 
tranquil company. 


Let the flagrant smoke of divine thoughts, 
full of love to all, rise around you; why try to 
scatter fragrance from scent-sticks available 
in the market? 


The flame of jnana (experiential knowledge 
of Supreme Reality) can reduce to cinders the 
impulses inherited through many births and 
many experiences. In the heat of that crucible, 
dross is burnt and precious metal is isolated. 


Sri Sathya Sai Baba 





18 


Install God In The Altar of Your 
Sacred Heart 


The sun appears serene and peaceful. 
The days have become shorter, 
And the cool wind ts blowing. 


(Telugu poem) 


HIS festive season brings all prosperity to the 

people filling the granaries of the farmers with the 
newly harvested grains in plenty. Not only the farmers, all 
people in general feel happy and enjoy this season. People 
attribute their happiness and prosperity to God. Where is 
God? God is everywhere. He is omnipresent — in you, above 
you, below you and around you. He has no particular name 


222 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


or form. Neither has He birth nor death. It is only when 
there is birth, there will be death too! Hence, God has no 
birth, no death! He is present in every living being as Atma 
Swarupa (Embodiment of Divine Atma). Man today is 
unable to realise that Atma Tattwa. 


Bharat is a sacred land. It has given birth to many 
noble souls and chaste women. 


This land of Bharat has given birth to many noble 
women like Savitri who brought her dead husband 
back to life; Chandramati who extinguished wild 
fire with the power of truth; Sita who proved her 
chastity by coming out of blazing fire unscathed 
and Damayanti who reduced an evil-minded 
hunter to ashes with the power of her chastity. 
This land of piety and nobility attained plenty 
and prosperity and became the teacher of all the 
nations of the world because of such women of 
chastity. 


(Telugu poem) 


God Expects Only A Pure And Sacred Heart From 
Devotees 


Sri Rama released Sita from the captivity of the demon 
Ravana who confined her in Lanka for ten months. Rama 
took her into His fold after putting her to the test of fire. The 
fire god presented her before Rama, saying, “Oh! Rama! 


Install God In The Altar Of Your Sacred Heart 223 


Sita is a great woman of chastity. She 1s so much devoted 
to her husband that she did not look at the face of even 
one male in all these ten months.” Sita came out of the fire 
unscathed and the fire god himself attested to her chastity. 
One can imagine how great and noble she was! Can there 
be a parallel to such women in any country in the world? 
The country of Bharat 1s situated 1n the middle of the seven 
seas. Every man and woman in this country has to conduct 
themselves as Purushottama (noble male) and Pativrata 
(chaste woman) respectively. No wonder several Avatars 
(incarnations) took birth in this sacred land. Great men and 
women and noble souls may be born in any country. But 
it is only in the country of Bharat that Avatars took birth. 


Today, people aspire for everything in the world except 
for God. People leave even their motherland in quest of 
wealth and money. This is not a positive development, 
especially for the Bharatiyas; for, they are expected to rise 
above the desire for money. God is one who always gives; 
He never takes. God desires only love from us, nothing 
else. The country of Bharat 1s so noble and sacred. But, the 
people of this country are leaving, seeking greener pastures 
elsewhere. However, those with a pure and unblemished 
heart are sticking on to their native country. What God 
expects from His devotee is only a pure and sacred heart. 


The Importance Of Human Values 


People ascribe different names and forms to God. In 
fact, God is only one. He 1s beyond all names and forms. 


224 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


He takes on a name and form according to the wishes and 
aspirations of a particular devotee. When you contemplate 
on the form of Jesus and wish to see Him in that form, 
He manifests before you as Jesus. Sarvatah Panipadam 
Tat Sarvatokshi Siromukham, Sarvatah Srutimalloke 
Sarvamavrutya Tishttati (with hands, feet, eyes, head, 
mouth and ears pervading everything, He permeates the 
entire universe). God is present in every human being, nay 
in every living being. 


Daivam Manusha Rupena (God 1s in the form of a 
human being). That is the reason why, the human values 
are considered to be so sacred and important. It 1s not 
enough to simply have a human body. In keeping with the 
human form, one should also cultivate the human values 
of Sathya (Truth), Dharma (Righteousness), Santi (Peace), 
Prema (Love) and Ahimsa (Non-violence). You should not 
tell a lie under any circumstances. If you adhere to truth, 
righteousness will follow. Where truth and righteousness go 
together, there peace will be. Where there is peace, there will 
be love too. There can be no place for violence, when there 
is love. Unfortunately, today there 1s violence everywhere 
due to the absence of love among people. Whomsoever you 
come across these days, there 1s unrest and unrest. 


The Words You Speak Must Always Be Sweet And Soft 


People perform Japa (chanting of God’s Name) and 
Tapa (penance) to obtain peace. But, there is no peace 
anywhere. Wherever you see, only pieces, pieces and 
pieces! Hence, one has to develop love in order to get peace. 


Install God In The Altar Of Your Sacred Heart 225 


First and foremost, one has to develop love. “Love 1s God, 
God is Love.” “Truth is God, God is Truth.” Truth and 
Love are the embodiments of Divinity, verily. Though God 
is one, people ascribe different names like Rama, Krishna, 
Govinda, Narayana, etc., to God. The different names and 
forms ascribed to God are the outcome of the imagination 
of poets and painters. For example, Ravi Varma portrayed 
God in different forms based upon his imagination. But, 
God cannot be limited to a particular name and form. All 
names and forms are His and He transcends them too! 
God 1s immanent in all living species including the human 
beings. The entire creation is the manifestation of Divinity. 


God has no desires and aspirations. He 1s selfless. 
Everything in the outside world is the reaction, reflection 
and resound of your inner being. This is a cloth (showing 
a handkerchief). Strictly speaking, this 1s not a cloth; it 1s 
a bundle of threads. The threads woven together assumed 
the form of a cloth. Similarly, the thoughts and desires of 
a human being make his / her mind. They, in turn express 
themselves in the form of speech. The words lead to actions 
through the sense organs. In the process, man entertains 
certain bad thoughts and feelings. Why did God give eyes 
to a human being? Only to see good. Similarly, the ears are 
meant to hear good things and the tongue to speak good 
words. The words you speak must always be sweet and soft 
and never harsh. Thus, man has to consider every limb and 
organ in the body given to him by God as sacred and make 


226 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


proper use of it. Such a sacred body has to be dedicated to 
God and none else. God gives you all that is necessary for 
your life’s journey. You should, therefore, install God in 
the altar of your pure and sacred heart. 


The Significance Of The Cross 


God is omnipresent. The sky is God and the earth is 
God. All the human beings are embodiments of Divinity. 
God is immanent in every human being 1n the form of breath 
(Soham). Man has to realise this truth. It is only when you 
realise the true nature of God that you can be considered to 
have acquired Jnana (wisdom). Jnana 1s not mere bookish 
knowledge. There are several educated people who acquired 
vast knowledge from the textbooks. But, who 1s a Jnani 
(realised soul) in the real sense? Only that person who has 
realised, “I am not the body, I am not the mind; I am God 
verily”, is a real Jnani. 


When you say, “this is my body”, who are you? 
To whom are you referring? The expression ‘my body’ 
connotes that you are separate from the body. When you say, 
“This is my mind’, the mind 1s separate from you. Similarly, 
when you say, “This is my Buddhi (intellect), it means the 
Buddhi is separate from you. In all these expressions, what 
is that ‘my’? That ‘my’ is ‘I’. This ‘Tl’ 1s what was referred 
to by Jesus Christ as the ego, that has to be cut. That 1s the 
real significance of the cross. You cut the ego. 


Install God In The Altar Of Your Sacred Heart 22] 
The True Nature Of A Human Being 


Man is bound by two things — ‘I’ and ‘mine’. That 
is the human bondage. If you can get released from these 
two bonds, what remains is ‘you’ only. Now you are with 
the body. Supposing you have to leave the body tomorrow. 
At that time, who are you and where are you? You do not 
know! The body is like a dress; a robe. Once you get rid of 
attachment to this dress, your true nature will be apparent. 


The same truth has been explained 1n the saying “The 
one you think you are, the one others think you are and the 
one you really are.” That 1s the true nature of a human being. 
When someone enquires who you are, you will answer, “I 
am so and so.” You will give your name. In fact, that name 
is given to you by your parents and not by God at the time 
of your birth. Supposing you enquire God, ““Who are you?” 
He will reply, Aham Brahmasmi (J am Brahman). Every 
individual should remind himself or herself “I am Brahman, 
I have no other name.” If someone enquires, “What is your 
name?”’, you should reply, “My name is Brahman.” If you 
are constantly aware of your true nature thus, that 1s Atma 
Tattwa. You need not have to contemplate on anything else. 
Whenever you come across a friend or any acquaintance, 
you greet him with a namaskar. This implies that you are 
in fact paying obeisance to the Divinity immanent in the 
individual. Hence, do not entertain the feeling of ‘I’, ‘I’, 
‘I’. All these physical bodies are like the roles played in a 


228 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 42 


drama. They change. The world itself is a cosmic drama. 
You must constantly remind yourself that you are playing 
your role in the cosmic drama and your real nature is that 
you are an Embodiment of Divine Self (Atma Swarupa). 
Have you any doubts in this regard? If you are entertaining 
any doubts, you will be confused. 


Live In The Present, That Is The Reality 


Unfortunately, today man does not know about his own 
true nature. How then can he know about God? Hence, first 
and foremost know thyself! Enquire into yourself, “Who 
am I? Who am I?” You will realise, “I am I, [am Atma’, 
“Tam I, | am Atma’, “I am I, I am Atma.” If you forget 
this Divine Self, what remains 1s ‘deep wine’! Hence, you 
should become divine. Rama, Krishna, Govinda etc., are 
only references to Divinity in the common parlance. An 
individual is referred to by several names, based upon 
the relationships at the physical level. One person refers 
to another saying, “He is my son-in-law.” Someone else 
says, “He is my son.” A third person says, “He is my 
brother.” Thus, man gets into bondage as the relationships 
increase. From where did this bondage emerge? It 1s all of 
your own making. You marry a girl and refer to her, “She 
is my wife.” But, before marriage who was she? You do 
not know. After some years when she departs finally, you 
do not know anything about her. Thus, you do not know 
who she was before marriage or where she had gone after 
her departure. The wife-husband relationship is only in 





Install God In The Altar Of Your Sacred Heart 229 


between. Hence, do not worry about the past. Past is past 
and future is uncertain. You do not know, you have no 
knowledge of either the past or the future; you are aware 
of only the present. Hence, /ive in the present. That is the 
only reality. 


(Bhagawan concluded His discourse with the Bhajan, “Hari 
Bhajan Bina Sukh Santi Nahin ...) 


Christmas Discourse, Prasanthi Nilayam, 25-12-2009 


n this sacred land, people have forgotten 
the real source of sacredness, of holy life, 
of living in peace with oneself and others. 
Now, the time has come to remind them of it. 
With jewel in the neck, the wearer has been 
searching for it everywhere else. A person 


has to hold the mirror to the face. The Vedic 
clarion call will soon ring in ears of human- 
ity. The Avatar has come to remind man and 
to redirect him along the True path. 

Sri Sathya Sai Baba 


