SATHYA SAI SPEAKS 


VOLUME - 41 


Discourses of 
BHAGAWAN SRI SATHYA SAI BABA 
Delivered During 2008 


SRI SATHYA SAI SADHANA TRUST 


Publications Division 
Prasanthi Nilayam - 515134 
Anantapur District, Andhra Pradesh, India 
STD: 08555 : ISD : 91-8555 Phone: 287375, Fax: 287236 
Email: enquiry@sssbpt.org URL www.sssbpt.org 


© Sri Sathya Sai Sadhana Trust, Publications Division 
Prasanthi Nilayam P.O. 515134, Anantapur District, A.P. India. 


All Rights Reserved 


The copyright and the rights of translation in any language are reserved 
by the Publishers. No part, passage, text or photograph or Artwork of this 
book should be reproduced, transmitted or utilised, in original language 
or by translation, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, 
photo copying, recording or by any information, storage and retrieval 
system without with the express and prior permission, in writing from 
the Convener, Sri Sathya Sai Sadhana Trust, Publications Division, 
Prasanthi Nilayam, Andhra Pradesh India - Pin Code 515134, except for 
brief passages quoted in book review. This book can be exported from 
India only by the Publishers - Sri Sathya Sai Sadhana Trust, Publications 
Division, Prasanthi Nilayam, India. 


International Standard Book Number: 978-8 1-7208-709-8 


978-8 1-7208-543-8 (set) 





Second Edition: August, 2009 


Published by: 


The Convener, 

Sri Sathya Sai Sadhana Trust, Publications Division 
Prasanthi Nilayam, India - Pin Code 515 134 

STD: 08555 ISD: 91 - 8555 

Phone: 287375 Fax: 287236 

E-mail: enquiry@sssbpt.org 


Printed at: 


Publisher’s Note 


“Worship mentally the feet of the Spiritual 
Preceptor (Manasa Bhajare Guru Charanam).” That 
was the first clarion call to the suffering humanity given 
by Bhagawan Sri Sathya Sai Baba as a fourteen year lad 
from a garden near a Telugu pundits house. 


Years later, on the auspicious day of Vijayadasami 
in 1953, opening the flood gates of public discourses 
Bhagawan declared, “You will see me more and more 
in the task of Upadesha teaching erring humanity and 
directing the world along the path of Truth, Righteousness, 
Peace and Love.” True to the divine declaration, there 
has been a seemingly unending flow of divine love and 
compassion in the form of hundreds of discourses during 
the following five decades and more, giving solace and 
divine wisdom, guiding and goading mankind to lead a 
life of love, service and concern for fellow human being. 


These discourses, never fading and ever fresh 
bouquet of flowers as they are, spreading the fragrance of 
divine love, compassion and grace to the entire humanity 


crossing the frontiers of caste, creed and colour and 
embracing all races and religions, stand testimony to the 
Divine Will of Bhagawan. 


Sri Sathya Sai Sadhana Trust, Publications Division 
is happy to present in the hands of the eager readers yet 
another fresh flower in the timeless divine bouquet, the 
41s volume in the series Sathya Sai Speaks, containing 
19 priceless discourses with the fond hope that they will 
benefit immensely from its ‘fragrance’. 


With pranams at the Lotus feet of Bhagawan, 
Convener 


Sri Sathya Sai Sadhana Trust, Publications Division 
Prasanthi Nilayam 


2S ee ee ee ee 


— 
ro) 


ae 


12 


3: 
14. 


Iles 
16. 
ve 
18. 


Le. 


Contents 


All Are One; Be Alike To Everyone................... 1 
Revere Your Mother And Father As God............... 15 
Understand The Principle Of Unity... 29 
Redeem Your Life By Good Actions.................. 39 


Have Self-confidence And Achieve Everything. 51 
Respect, Honour And Make Your Mother Happy. 65 
Namasmarana Is The Highest Spiritual Practice ..... 77 
Seeing Unity In Diversity Is True Spirituality 93 


Windertake Rama GHOUandiiscccihasccistensmacssiens 107 
. Develop Faith And Self-confidence To Gain 
RG LEP AIAG AUTOM scat nearsntaseenaussachteMsnensseanatheasieteesess vies eal 
Develop Hducare And: Be. United is sccicccscrccrsssseceseses 133 
. Ideal Parents Have Ideal Children...........00.... 145 
Love Is Truth: Truth Is Love. Live In Love.......... 161 
Educare Leads To Unity Of Thought, 
NV ORG AI, TSE ss csnchcvanssesnweite ban surnenvtisveasdenctmsataentens 173 
Develop Self-confidence To Achieve God-realisation......... 187 
All Are One, Be Alike To Everyone ....02..:0.s000:23:. 199 
Love Is God, Live In. LOVE sssccscssscccicvsaveviicctevensens 213 
Lead A Happy Life With A Feeling Of 
Camaraderie And © Fraternity .cieiccncccscciencnsiunn ya | 


Contemplate On God,The Real Hero, For Victory 239 


1 
All Are One; Be Alike To Everyone 


The sun appears serene and peaceful. The 
days have become shorter, and the cool wind is 
blowing. The fields are ripe with golden crops. 
Marigold flowers are blossoming like garlands 
of pearls on the banks of rivers. The farmers 
are rejoicing and singing. The sweet festival 
of Sankranti comes in the month of Pushya (a 
month in Indian calendar), filling our homes 
with the newly harvested grain. 


(Telugu poem) 


AN needs several objects in this world; yet, 
none of them is permanent. All are like 
passing clouds. What you think as permanent in this 
world is, in fact, impermanent. Hence, one has to strive 
to achieve that which is permanent, real and eternal. 
The Bhagavad Gita declares, “Mamaivamso jivaloke 


2 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


Jivabhuta sanathana” (the eternal Atma in all beings is 
a part of My Being). I am in you, with you, around 
you, above you, below you. There is no place in this 
Universe where God is not present. Similarly, there is 
no name or object which does not belong to Him. The 
Upanishads proclaim the same truth in the declarations, 
“Easwara sarva bhutanam” (God is the Indweller of 
all beings) and “Jsavasyam idam sarvam” (the entire 
universe is permeated by God). Unable to realise this 
truth, the human being laments “wherever I look, I find 
only human beings; I am not able to find God”. “Yad 
bhavam tad bhavathi” (as are the feelings, so are the 
results) Supposing you wear a particular dress and stand 
before a mirror, you will find the same reflection in 
the mirror. Similarly, your own thoughts and feelings 
reflect in the outside world. Everything is reaction, 
reflection and resound. Your own life style is reflected 
in the outside world. Whatever you speak comes back 
to you as a reply. But, people think that it is someone 
else who is speaking these words. This is the truth. 
However, different people explain this truth in different 
ways in keeping with the aphorism, “Ekam Sat viprah 
bahudha vadanti” (truth is one, but the wise refer to it 
by various names). Every form you see in the outside 
world is in fact your own reflection. 


Basic Human Values Are The Vital Airs Of 
Human Being 


There are several thousand people gathered in this 
hall. But, there is only one heart in all of them; that is the 


All Are One; Be Alike To Everyone 3 


spiritual heart. I am not referring to the physical heart. 
Unfortunately, people are unable to repose their faith 
in this spiritual heart, in spite of their best education. 
You are all educated, well educated. 


In spite of his education and intelligence, a 
foolish man will not know his true Self and a 
mean-minded person will not give up his evil 
qualities. (Telugu poem) 


This is not the type of education you have to 
pursue. This is the category of worldly education. This 
type of education we learn from an Institution under 
the guidance of a teacher. Today, all our education, 
words and speech are only artificial. There is something 
deeper which forms the basis for everything. That is 
fundamental truth. It does not come under the realm 
of education. It is ‘Educare’. Education is worldly 
whereas “educare” is other-worldly. Educare is not 
something that can be seen with the naked eye. It lies 
in the depth of our heart. It has to be brought out by 
conscious effort. Where is peace? Is it outside? No; 
only pieces and pieces are outside. Peace is in your 
heart. Similarly, love. Love is in your heart. It cannot 
be seen. Love is God; Live in Love. This also forms 
part of educare. So also non-violence. It is not in 
the outside world. The world today is torn apart 
with conflicts. We don’t find peace anywhere in the 
world. Truth, Righteousness, Peace, Love and Non- 
violence constitute the five vital airs of a human being 


4 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


(Panchapranas). Love is the undercurrent that flows 
in all these human values. Follow truth, keeping love 
as the basis in your heart. Truth is eternal. Truth is 
God. It is not subject to changes in time. Let love be 
reflected on the mirror of Truth. Whenever you come 
across a person not of your liking, you consider him as 
your enemy keeping in mind your worldly relationship 
with him. You begin to hate him. This is not correct. 
He is, in fact, not different from you. You and he are 
one only. Hence, it amounts to hating yourself. There 
is nothing like another person or object in this world. 
There is only one. First and foremost, we have to 
realise and follow this truth. Unfortunately today we 
are not able to find truth at all in this world. Whether 
it is in the field of education, politics or worldly life 
- we don’t find truth at all Even in the court of law, 
the seat of Justice, people swear upon God and speak 
untruth. Thus, wherever you go untruth or falsehood 
is rampant. People spend a lot of money for the sake 
of establishing truth. It is not necessary. If only people 
cultivate love for one another, it is enough. Whenever 
you come across someone whom you consider as your 
enemy, say, “Sir, my pranams to you’. He will, in turn 
offer his pranams to you. As are our feelings so are 
his. Our own thoughts and feelings are reflected by 
the other person. 


Peace, Truth, Love Are In One’s Own Bosom Only 


You don’t find peace at all in the world today. 
Wherever you go, you will find only ‘ga/ata’ (confusion 


All Are One; Be Alike To Everyone 5 


and conflict) - be it the market place, bazaar or a 
shop. Even if you go to a hotel, you will find someone 
quarrelling with the waiter saying, “this idly is not good, 
vada is not tasty or that dosa is not fried properly”, 
etc. You do not find order anywhere in this world. 
Everywhere it is confusion and conflict. In fact, the 
word ‘peace’ is not to be found anywhere in the world. 
On the other hand, the atmosphere here in Prasanthi 
Nilayam is totally different. There is absolute peace 
in this hall. You don’t find this peace anywhere else 
in the world. So also, the feeling of love. You do not 
find this love anywhere else. That is the reason why 
lakhs and lakhs of people from all over the world 
congregate here. 


Why do people go to holy places and pray? For 
what purpose? For acquiring peace, happiness, bliss and 
love. These boys studied in Brindavan and Puttaparthi. 
They travelled all over the country and even abroad. 
But, they could not get peace of mind anywhere even 
for two minutes. In fact, peace is in one’s own mind. 
There is no use searching for peace in the outside 
world. Similarly, truth and love are also to be found 
in one’s own bosom only. When you cultivate love, 
you can achieve anything in the world. Swami is an 
Embodiment of Love. Love is His biggest property. 
My duty is to share that love with you all. If you 
are able to understand Swami’s love in true spirit and 
make use of it in proper way, you will prosper. Except 
Swami’s love, nothing can protect you. You will have to 


6 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


understand this Prema tatwa. All are brothers and sisters. 
But, differences arise even amongst the brothers and 
sisters. Hence, cultivate love for one another. Always 
maintain a cheerful disposition, with a sweet smile on 
your face. You should never put up a ‘castor-oil face’. 
Then only your life can become noble and ideal. You 
must always be happy and cheerful. What do you lack 
in? you have everything, with Swami’s love and grace. 


Some people are not able to put up with difficulties. 
However, if only they keep a little patience, even that 
pain and suffering will turn out to be an occasion for 
rejoicing. Pleasure is an interval between two pains. 
“You are not one person, but three: the one you think 
you are; the one others think you are and the one you 
really are.” ‘The one you really are’ is the real truth. 
You must be reading several books. But if you are not 
able to keep your head in proper condition, all that 
reading will become useless. Hence, the ‘head’ is very 
important. That is ‘Educare’. 


You must have read volumes and volumes of books, 
written by great people. Each one of the authors must 
have highlighted a particular aspect of Divinity. But, the 
sum total of all these descriptions that represent Divinity 
is one only. Sometimes, your own mind turns against 
you. It is the result of your own thoughts. Everything 
is reaction, reflection and resound. Both good and bad 
are in you only, not in the outside world. When your 
vision is bad, you will see bad. On the other hand, when 


All Are One; Be Alike To Everyone vs 


your vision is good you will see God everywhere. If 
you forsake truth and love and begin to see the world 
from that stand point, then you will find differences 
everywhere. 


The Feeling Of Oneness Brings Self-satisfaction 


Embodiments of Love! Dear Students, 


You are all working in far-off countries, yet you 
remember Swami and try to be in His Divine presence 
at least for a few days every year. This is your good 
fortune (loud applause). There could be only one reason 
for it, your love for Swami. But for the bond of love 
between you and Swami, you would not have come here 
along with your families incurring huge expenditure, 
undergoing a lot of physical strain. You must realise 
this truth. You might have studied in Brindavan or 
Prasanthi Nilayam and now working in different 
countries. Wherever you are, remember always that 
Swami is with you and in you. If someone enquires 
from where did you come, you will reply that you are 
from Brindavan or Prasanthi Nilayam. You say so for 
your own satisfaction. But, the truth is, Swami is in 
you, Brindavan is in you and Prasanthi Nilayam is in 
you only. If one wishes to attain self-satisfaction, one 
has to realise that all are one. 


Religions are many but goal is one. 
Clothes are many but yarn is one. 
Jewels are many but gold is one. 
Cows are many but milk is one. 


8 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


Beings are many but breath is one. 
Castes are many but humanity is one. 


(Telugu poem) 


Human beings may be of different complexion, 
but the bliss they experience in their hearts is only one. 
We must aspire for that bliss, disregarding individual 
differences. The differences are only temporary. Divinity 
is only one; it assumes different forms in different ages. 
Lord Vishnu assured different forms in Krita Yuga. 
The same Lord came as Lord Rama in the 7reta and as 
Lord Krishna in the Dwapara Yugas (Ages). The same 
Divine principle (God) is referred to as Brahma (The 
Generator), Vishnu (the Organiser) and Maheshwara 
(the Destroyer). The different names are ascribed for 
the purpose of identification. 


When someone enquires your name, you mention 
a particular name. In fact, that name was given to you 
by your parents. You were not born with that name. 
At the time of your birth, you were just a baby. The 
names were given subsequently. Unfortunately, today 
we are indulging in controversies even in the case of 
God, on the basis of names and forms. Whomever you 
come across, he or she is an embodiment of Divinity, 
verily. For example, you come across a beggar. He 
is also God. God is in that form. Hence, offer your 
salutations to him. Nothing wrong in doing so. All 
are one; be alike to everyone. Love all and serve 
all, be he a beggar or a millionaire. 


All Are One; Be Alike To Everyone 9 


Several changes may occur in this year, at the 
physical level. But, there will be no change at all in 
the spiritual realm. It is possible that there may be 
some conflicts here and there in the secular world. 
There may be a few permutations and combinations 
in the political field. Some new parties and alliances 
may be formed. ‘Parties, parties and parties’... what 
are ‘parties’, anyway? For tea only, not parties. We 
must treat all human beings alike. By doing so, all 
people will be happy. Good and bad, pleasure and pain 
- everything must be faced with a sense of equanimity. 
That is the foremost duty of a human being. The human 
mind is susceptible to several changes, on account of 
the food one takes and the company one moves in. 
The mind is like a mad monkey. It is not an ordinary 
monkey, but ‘mad monkey’. Strictly speaking, the mind 
is a component of the mankind. Hence, it should be 
kind. Unfortunately, today we are converting it into a 
monkey. A man should always be a man. Let others 
do whatever they wish to us, unknowingly. But, we 
should not consciously think in terms of doing harm 
to others. This is My advice. 


Unity, A Step Towards Divinity 


This body is approaching the 83rd year. In all 
these years, I have never done any harm to anyone or 
caused any pain to anyone. I have never spoken untruth. 
I always speak truth and truth only. It causes Me great 
pain when I see untruthfulness. Let us, therefore, speak 
only truth and nothing but truth. Surely, victory will be 


10 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


ours. You always tread the path of truth. Love all. It 
is easy to love someone, but quite difficult to hate. If 
you love others, there will be unity among you. All 
will become one. Where there is unity, there will be 
purity. Where there is purity, there Divinity will be. 
Hence, if you wish to attain Divinity, you must develop 
unity. And, for achieving unity, people should shed 
their narrow-mindedness. This is a handkerchief. It is 
made up of several threads. If you remove one thread 
after the other, finally there will be no handkerchief 
at all! The cloth is made up of threads and they in 
turn are made out of cotton. Similarly, there can be no 
humanness without human beings. The humanness must 
be gradually transformed into Divinity. A divine person 
will have divine power. In fact, you all possess divine 
power. There is not a single human being without divine 
power. But, no one is aware of his innate divine power. 


People ask Me very often a question: “Swami, how 
can we achieve unity?” In fact, unity is the very nature 
of humanity. Forgetting this truth, people go on arguing, 
“He is different from me, I am different from him’, 
etc. Divinity can never be attained by such arguments. 
Always think that you and others are only one. You say, 
“So and so is my father; so and so is my mother; so 
and so is my sister.” These are not real relationships. 
Father, mother, sister, etc., are only relationships at the 
body level. It is only out of marriage, the husband-wife 
relationship has arisen. Otherwise, who is a husband and 
who is a wife? These are all man-made relationships. 


All Are One; Be Alike To Everyone 11 


However, as long as the relationship exists one should 
respect that relationship and follow it. The husband 
and wife should never hurt each other. If either of 
them commits a mistake, it should be gently brought 
to the individual’s notice for rectification. Harassing, 
abusing and physical violence are bad practices. They 
should never be resorted to. If all of you live in unity 
and constantly contemplate on God, you will achieve 
purity. Then, Swami will surely give you Darshan right 
where you are (applause). I belong to you all (applause). 
You all belong to Me. I do not differentiate between 
individuals. All are mine and I belong to all. There 
may be differences in certain aspects among people, 
from the worldly angle. But, there should not be any 
difference at the spiritual level. 


Always Adhere To Truth 


Dear boys, you have come here with great love 
for Swami. May your hearts be filled with love up to 
the brim. Always speak truth. You may encounter 
certain difficulties in speaking truth. Does not matter, 
adhere to truth. Then you will surely achieve success. 
We should never be afraid of speaking the truth. We 
should even be prepared to fight for truth. Truth alone 
triumphs (Sathyameva Jayate). Hence, always speak 
truth. Untruth will fetch you bad reputation. Adhere 
to truth under all circumstances. Cultivate love. Truth 
is love and love is truth. If you are guided by these 
two like the two eyes, you will always succeed in life. 
There is no use worshipping God repeating the word 


12 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


bhakti (devotion) as an empty rhetoric. You may be 
very intelligent. You might have also acquired vast 
knowledge. However, if you do not develop a sense 
of discrimination, all your intelligence and knowledge 
will be reduced to zero. Hence, discrimination is of 
utmost importance. You analyse whether your point of 
view is right or wrong. If you are convinced that your 
point is right, stick to it till the end. The world today 
is in a state of utter confusion and chaos. Wherever 
you see, there is endless strife. The world today is 
filled with selfishness and self-interest. As long as these 
two take predominance, it will only lead to defeat. 
You are all students of Sri Sathya Sai College. You 
should therefore live up to the ideals of the Sathya Sai 
Educational Institutions. If people praise that so and so 
is a good boy, he is a student of Sri Sathya Sai College, 
I will be very happy. You all must earn that good 
name. It gives Me great happiness (applause). There 
is nothing greater that I can wish for. I am not asking 
this for My sake. You should earn a good name for 
your own sake. Bangaru! (dear golden ones!) conduct 
yourselves accordingly. Wherever you are, do not 
forget to contemplate on the divine name of God. You 
may contemplate upon any name like Rama, Krishna, 
Govinda, Narayana, Madhusudana, Trivikrama, etc. 
Though the names are different, God is only one. He 
is Sahasra seersha Purusha sahasraksha sahasra pad 
(the Cosmic Being has thousands of heads, eyes and 
feet). Adhere to truth and love always. 


All Are One; Be Alike To Everyone 13 


(Bhagawan continued his discourse after singing 
the bhajan “Hari Bhajana Bina ...”’) 


The joy we derive by singing bhajans cannot be 
attained by any other means. There is so much joy in 
singing bhajans and extolling the glory of God. I can 
also sing bhajans melodiously. But, at the moment I 
have a very bad throat. Bhajans give great joy. Even 
if others do not share this joy, you sing bhajans for 
your own joy. I am very happy. (Addressing the old 
students) When do you propose to leave for your 
places? Wherever you go, Swami’s grace is with you 
in abundance. I will distribute prasadam to you all 
tomorrow. May you all return to your places with 
joyous memories of this divine congregation. 


New Year Message, Prasanthi Nilayam, 1-1-2008. 


Strive for the happiness of the community and 
of the human race. Pray that all men everywhere 
may have peace and plenty. Be eager to do good 
and be good...Moderation in food, moderation in 
talk, and in desires and pursuits; contentment with 
what little can be got by honest labour, eagerness 


to serve others and to impart joy to all these are 
the most powerful of all the tonics and health- 
preserves known to the science of health, the 
Sanathana Ayur Veda, the Veda of the full life. 
Sri Sathya Sai Baba 





14 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


Use all chances you get to develop your 
skills, your health and your character. That is 
your present duty. Make lasting friendships. Do 
not by any action of yours cause pain to another; 
nor suffer pain yourself, by foolishness or sheer 
bravado. 


In your school, I find there are some girls 
too; treat them with great respect and do not speak 
slightingly of them. They are your sisters and by 
honouring them, you bring honour to yourselves 


and your sisters. Respect for women is a sign of 
real culture. 


So, I call upon you to read good books; revere 
your teachers and to love all. Do not dishonour 
your elders; cultivate the spirit of service and 
learn how to serve the sick and the needy and 
seize every chance to help others. Or at least, 
desist from causing sorrow to others. 


Sri Sathya Sai Baba 





2 


Revere Your Mother And Father 
As God 


Emperor Nala, who reigned over a vast 
kingdom, could not take with him anything 
when he passed away. Did King Mandhata, 
who adorned the Krita Yuga, carry any wealth 
with him when he left the earth? Even Lord 
Rama, who built a bridge across the ocean, is 
not to be seen on the earth today. Many kings 
have ruled over the earth, but none of them 
could carry even a fistful of dust with him. 
Oh noble one! do you think you can carry the 
kingdom and its riches on your head when you 
leave the world? 


(Telugu poem) 


AN has not brought anything into this world 
at the time of his birth. Property, wealth, 


16 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


bank balance, etc., are all acquired in the middle, during 
the course of his life’s journey from birth to death. He 
cannot take these along with him while departing from 
this world. Then why should man worry over losing 
them in between? 


Never Forget God Who Is Supreme 


You are not born for shedding tears. Hence you 
should also leave this world happily. Why should you 
have to worry about the ephemeral things like wealth and 
property which are physical, fleeting and impermanent? 
Such an attitude is unbecoming of a human being. 
These are all gifts from God. There are four concepts 
which you must always keep in mind - the Vyasti (the 
individual), Samasti (society), Sristi (creation) and 
Paramesti (God). The Sristi (creation) emerged out of 
Paramesti (God). From Sristi came Samasti and Samasti 
itself consists of Vyasti (individuals). Without Vyasti 
(individual) there can be no Samasti (society). Hence, 
ultimately these are all God’s gift. Are we making any 
efforts to shed tears for the sake of God? No. we are 
worried about passing clouds, which are ephemeral. 
This is not the true nature of a human being. 


You might have noticed that when thick clouds 
gather in the sky, the sun or the moon is obscured by 
them. It should not bother you. Just wait for a few 
minutes. The dark clouds move away and the sun and 
the moon are back shining brightly. What is required 
is a little patience. 


Forbearance is the real beauty in this sacred 


Revere Your Mother And Father As God 17 


land of Bharat. Of all the rituals, adherence 
to truth is the greatest penance. The nectarous 
feeling in this country is the feeling of love 
towards ones mother. Character is valued far 
higher than the very life itself. People have 
forgotten the basic principles of this great 
culture and are imitating Western culture. Alas! 
The Bharatiyas are not aware of the greatness 
of their cultural heritage just as a mighty 
elephant is not aware of its own strength. 
(Telugu poem) 


The power that a human being possesses is 
unparalleled. The human being is most powerful. That 
is the reason why even God incarnates in the form of 
a human being (applause). It is said Daivam manusha 
rupena (God is in the form of a human being). A 
human being is the crown of God’s creation. And, 
God is supreme. It is a sacrilege to forget such an 
omnipresent, omniscient and omnipotent God. We must 
constantly contemplate on God. You may be engaged 
in a variety of tasks. But, you should never forget God, 
who is changeless and eternal. That should be your 
true nature. Your true nature should always remain 
the same. 


The root cause for all the troubles we face is we 
forget God and hanker after illusory worldly things. 
Happiness or sorrow is all our own making. God is 
always blissful. He always gives us happiness, joy 


18 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


and bliss. We, out of our illusion misinterpret God’s 
gifts as difficulties and feel sorry for the same. Your 
own feelings are responsible for your suffering. Hence, 
change your feelings, develop a positive attitude and 
you will never experience pain and suffering. 


Today, you all have come here wearing white shirts 
and black blazers. Our Anil Kumar thought, “When our 
boys are wearing black coloured blazers, why not I?” 
He also wore a black coat and attended this function. 
This is imitation. In fact, the whole world is full of 
imitation. Such imitation is not a good sign. It may 
give you a momentary pleasure only. 


There were kings and emperors in the past who 
ruled the world, but all of them left this world empty- 
handed. They could not take even a blade of grass 
along with them. No doubt we can enjoy good things 
as long as we live in this world. Thereafter, we cease 
to have any relationship with them. All the worldly 
relationships are of our own making only. We should 
not maintain such artificial relationships. As long as 
you live, be happy and enjoy your life. But, your joy 
should not be like the one you derive when you eat 
an ice-cream, which melts away in a short time. Real 
joy springs forth from your heart. That is bliss. You 
should experience that bliss continuously. 


The body is made up of five elements. It is bound 
to fall. We as human beings feel happy when a child 
is born and feel sad when someone dear to us dies. 
You should never give scope for sorrow. You may 


Revere Your Mother And Father As God 19 


encounter any number of sorrows and difficulties. But, 
you should face them with courage and faith in God, 
thinking, “I am a part of Divinity; I will not therefore 
feel sorry or shed tears.” Lord Krishna declared in 
the Bhagavad Gita : 


“Sreyohi Jnanamabhyasath 
Jnanaddhyanam Visishayathe 
Dhyanath Karmaphala Tyagah 
Tyagah Santiranantaram” 


(Better indeed is knowledge than mechanical 
practice. Better still is meditation. But, better than 
meditation is renunciation of the desire for the fruit of 
karma (action). For, peace follows renunciation.) 


The Divine Principle Alone Is Eternal In This 
Fleeting World 


As long as one develops a desire for the fruit of 
one’s actions, one will not have peace of mind. You 
take the case of an individual. Before marriage, he was 
one and only one. After marriage he becomes two. The 
couple begets a child after one year. In the beginning, 
he has only two legs; after marriage, they have four; 
after the child is born they multiply into six legs. Thus, 
as the family grows, the number of legs also grows and 
they will end up in sorrow. It is not of God’s making. 
It is the result of one’s mental weakness. 


You participated in the Annual sports meet and 
performed various feats. You derived joy out of it. 


20 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


Pleasure or pain, everything is the result of your own 
actions. Nothing is permanent in this world. All are 
fleeting. One need not be elated or depressed for 
anything. Whatever is born today is bound to die at 
sometime or the other. No one knows for sure what 
happens to us the next moment. You are an embodiment 
of Divinity. The Divine Principle in you is eternal. 
That lives today, tomorrow and the day after tomorrow. 
Hence, you should treat the past, present and future as 
one though our experiences in the three phases of time 
are different. You should not give much credence to 
these experiences. Past is past; it will not come back. 
We are not sure of future. Present is the only reality 
with which we should be concerned. This is not ordinary 
present, but omnipresent because the past as well as 
future are present in it. 


Dear Students! 


All your experiences in this changing world are 
only momentary and unreal. They are like passing 
clouds. You need not be too much worried about them. 
You are marching forward. Continue your life’s journey 
with steadfast faith in God. Why should you have to 
look back and brood over the past? Some people worry 
for everything, not only about their education but in 
life too. They are worried about some individuals who 
are no longer living. Whoever is born has to depart 
from this world at some time or the other. God is the 
only one present at all times - past, present and future, 


Revere Your Mother And Father As God 21 


since He is omnipresent. He may assume different 
forms and names at different times in keeping with 
the aspirations and imagination of the devotees. Keep 
aside your imaginations and God can be perceived as 
one and only one Divine principle at all times. 


A few days ago, people celebrated the New Year all 
over the world. From where did this New Year come? 
It has not suddenly descended from heavens. There can 
be no ‘new’ without ‘old’. The old transforms itself 
into new and the new becomes old after sometime. 
Thus, old and new are like the object and its reflection. 
Hence, you should not attach much importance to 
these variations in time. Constantly contemplate on the 
timeless principle, that is Divinity. If at all you are 
worried about some sorrows and difficulties troubling 
you, keep them aside. Some boys are worried about 
their examinations, which is totally unnecessary. You 
must face the examinations boldly and write the answers 
confidently to the extent of your preparation. God will 
take care of the rest. It is the courage and confidence 
that will fetch the desired result. This courage is also 
termed as ‘pushti’ (strength). 


There are six evil qualities which form part of the 
human psyche - Kama (desire), Krodha (anger), Lobha 
(greed), Moha (delusion), Mada (pride), Matsarya 
(jealously). The same qualities reflect in the outside 
world. Hence, keep your inner consciousness clean. 
Then, you can win over the outside world in all areas. 


22 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


Embodiments of Love! Dear students! 


You are acquiring degrees in several branches of 
knowledge. But, of what use are they? 


Modern education leads only to argumentation, 
not to total wisdom. What is the use of 
acquiring education which cannot lead you to 
immortality? Acquire the knowledge that will 
make you immortal. 


(Telugu poem) 
Develop Sense Control 


What is the use of acquiring so many degrees 
without realising one’s own nature? The education 
that we pursue must ultimately bring some benefit to 
the society. You should pursue such type of education. 
Share your knowledge with others. Then only your 
outlook will be broadened. The very purpose of your 
humanness will be fulfilled. Vyasti (individual) is only 
one. When another individual joins him, it becomes 
Samasti (society). 


Develop the power of senses by developing control 
over your senses. It is only by sense control that a human 
being can be called a Vyakti. Unfortunately, today we 
do not at all find sense control anywhere. The senses 
are allowed to run amuck in the outside world. The 
senses are created by God for making proper use of 
them by a human being by exercising proper control 
over them. It is not for indiscriminate ‘enjoyment’ of 
God’s creation. The birds, insects and animals are, 


Revere Your Mother And Father As God 23 


however doing the same. Even ants are raising families 
and sustaining them. You need not have to follow their 
example. You are a human being. 


Whoever has created you, will also provide for 
your sustenance. You need not worry about your food 
and other needs. You may earn five thousand dollars 
a month abroad. No doubt it is a big money when 
converted into Indian rupees. But, compare the cost of 
living in India and abroad. The five thousand dollars you 
earn in foreign countries is equivalent to five hundred 
rupees in India. This much amount is sufficient here. 
Several people go abroad with great hopes. But, what 
is there abroad? That broadness lies in your heart. You 
need not go abroad. Develop broad-mindedness. Remain 
here. Take good care of your parents, wife and children. 
Make your children acquainted with Indian culture and 
spirituality. That is true education. Does education mean 
reading and writing? Can you call all those who have 
learnt to read and write educated people? No, not at all. 
Knowledge without discrimination and not beneficial 
to the society - can it be called education? Education 
that does not develop discrimination is totally void. 
Real education is that which comes from within, that 
is Educare. What all the teachers teach is only that 
which is contained in the books. Real education is not 
available in the books. 


Hence, dear students, don’t waste your time reading 
books and acquiring merely bookish knowledge. You 


24 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


read throughout the night, without sleeping. Thereby 
your health is spoiled. Hence, you have to read only 
those books which are necessary for your purpose, 
not all the trash you find in the bazaar. People read 
several books, cinema magazines and newspapers 
which are in no way useful to them. When you open 
a newspaper, it is full of advertisements and cinema 
pictures. There is nothing you can learn from them. 
You follow your conscience which guides you. If you 
follow your conscience you are worthy of being called a 
human being. You don’t become a human being simply 
because you have certain limbs like hands, legs, eyes, 
ears, nose, etc. Even small insects have them. Can you 
equate yourself to them? Certainly not. You must lead 
the life of a real human being and set an example to 
others. You must be an example in true culture. 


Humanity Is Your Caste 


There is a subtle difference between caste and 
culture. You belong to the caste of humanity, for, 
there is only one caste - the caste of humanity. It is 
an inborn gift from your parents. On the other hand, 
the culture is something that is adopted in your life. 
Culture teaches you what is to be done and how. It is 
based upon certain traditions. None can change your 
caste which is humanity. Based upon your inborn 
caste of humanity, you can follow a culture. Another 
important point to be noted in this context is that 
caste and culture devoid of discrimination are not only 
useless, but harmful too. Your knowledge and sharp 


Revere Your Mother And Father As God 25 


intellect are not that important. Discrimination is of 
utmost importance. You must be able to choose that 
which is useful and necessary for you. You have to 
switch on a light when you are in darkness. It is not 
proper to switch on a light when there is already light 
in the room. 


Dear Students! 


It is not knowledge or energy that you have to 
develop, but the power of discrimination. Whatever 
object you come across, first enquire with in yourself: 
“Ts it good or bad, is it useful to me or not?” Before 
you take up a particular work, think carefully whether 
it is worth or not. Being a human being, develop the 
quality of humanness. Do not at all cause pain to your 
parents who are responsible for your birth. The Vedas 
emphasise the need for showing utmost reverence to 
the parents by declaring, “Matru devo bhava, Pitru 
devo bhava, (revere your mother and father as God). 
Children today do not care for their parents. They 
consider wife, the ‘artificial doll’, as the central point 
of their life. They follow the dictates of the wife, 
ignoring the parents who gave birth to them and 
nourished and nurtured them all through undergoing 
several difficulties. You may love your wife; nothing 
wrong in that. But, you should obey your parents too. 
Parents deserve your utmost concern. All others come 
after the parents. First and foremost, you love your 
mother and follow her commands. It is only when you 


26 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


make her happy that your life too will be happy. If 
she sheds tears for any reason, you will have to suffer 
for your entire life time. There are very few people 
today who have recognised the value of a mother’s 
love. If the mother were to say something they try to 
snub her saying, “Keep quiet; I know everything.” Yet 
others bluntly tell her, “Shut up. You need not advise 
me. I am highly educated. I have taken a number of 
degrees. Do I not know?” You may have taken degrees 
in the academic field. But, did you acquire a degree in 
general knowledge useful for leading a balanced life? 
Only the parents can teach that knowledge. One has 
to serve his father and mother and make them happy, 
apart from acquiring high degrees. Then only can one 
lead a happy and peaceful life. These are the things 
one has to learn and carefully follow in life. 


Dear Students! 


Do not underestimate the importance of singing 
the glory of the Divine name. Hari Bhajana Bina 
Sukha Santi Nahi..... Participate in bhajans which 
bring a lot of peace and confer bliss on you. Bhajan 
is a group activity where a number of people come 
together (Samasti) and sing the glory of God. One 
important point in Bhajans is that everyone should join 
in singing the bhajans. There would be a lead singer 
and all others follow him. If you are not confident of 
your voice at least repeat the Divine name in your 
heart. Unfortunately, today people have no time even 


Revere Your Mother And Father As God 27 


for that. You may forget any item of work in your daily 
life. But, you should never forget Namasmarana and 
Nama Sankirtana. The Divine name is eternal. Hence, 
constantly contemplate on the Divine name. 


Sankranti, 15-1-2008, 
Prasanthi Nilayam. 


It is a good sign that more and more 
youngsters are coming forward to join the Seva Dal 
and take part in service activities. The participation 
of youth is necessary for the welfare of the world. 
We should rejoice when they turn over a new leaf 
in their life. There is a commonplace saying that 
you should not rejoice and distribute sweets, etc. 
when a child is born; but you should do so only 
when the son grows up and earns a good name as 


a ‘Satputra’ (good son). You cant please Me just 
by joining as a member of the organisation. I shall 
wait for the day when you turn over a new leaf 
and transform yourselves into better individuals. 
You should become ‘Guna-sheelas’ (persons of 
sterling character and good qualities). 

Sri Sathya Sai Baba 





28 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


I do not insist that a person should have faith 
in God. I refuse to call any person a nastika (an 
atheist). Beings exist as a result of His Will, in 
accordance with His Plan; so no one is beyond 
His Grace. Besides, every one has Love towards 
some thing or other, and that Love is a spark of 
the Divine; every one has ultimately to base his 
life on some one Truth; that Truth is God. No life 
can be lived out in complete defiance of Truth; 
one has to pay heed to truth and speak the truth 


to some one in order to make life worth living. 
Now, that moment is God’s moment and at that 
moment when he utters the truth or loves, or serves 
or bends, he is a theist. 


So, it is not even bhakti that is essential. It 
is Love, truth, virtue, the eagerness to progress, to 
serve, to expand ones heart, to take in the whole 
of humanity in ones Love to see all as Forms of 
the Divine Consciousness. 


Sri Sathya Sai Baba 





3 
Understand The Principle Of Unity 


People undergo a lot of difficulties and struggle 
day and night for the sake of money. They even 
stealthily resort to unfair means to earn money. 
Their ego and mental aberrations add to their 
sufferings. So long as the world is in such a bad 
condition, man cannot escape from sufferings. 
He can attain peace and prosperity only when 
he is true to his word and his mind is full of 
sweetness. One cannot have the vision of God 
with a disturbed or wavering mind. 

(Telugu poem) 


Embodiments of Love! 


ODAY the entire world revolves round money. 
Right from a student to a vegetable vendor, 
everyone runs after money. One cannot definitely say 
that this man has more craving for money or that man. 


30 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


But everyone considers money as the be-all and end- 
all of life. People undergo all sorts of difficulties for 
the sake of money, but there is none who undergoes 
difficulties for the sake of God. God protects all. One 
may have any amount of money, but life without God 
is no life at all. However, such people are very few in 
number who give highest importance to God in their 
life. There are fewer still who contemplate on God. 


God Is Present In Everyone In The Form Of 
Love 

That is why we have started Bhajans. There may 
be a few who take to wrong path even after joining 
Bhajans. But, by and large, people will contemplate on 
God when they sing His glory. There may be many 
types of waves in the ocean, but water in all of them 
is the same. Similarly, people may have different types 
of thought currents but the same God is present in all 
of them. Beings are many but the atmic principle in 
all of them is the same. Ekatma sarva bhutantaratma 
(one atma dwells in all beings). Ekam Sat viprah 
bahudha vadanti (truth is one, but the wise refer to 
it by various names). Those who adhere to this truth 
are in fact real devotees. The essence of all the Vedas 
lies in establishing this truth. But such people who 
understand this truth are not to be seen today. Never 
forsake truth. When truth and righteousness come 
together one can experience peace and love. Truth is 
the basis of everything. Sathyameva adviteeyam Brahma 
(Truth is Brahman which is one without a second). 


Understand The Principle Of Unity 31 


Truth embodies the form of love. 
Embodiments of Love! 


Love does not come from somewhere outside. It 
is immanent in the heart of everyone. Man cannot live 
without love. This love assumes many forms, such as, 
love between husband and wife, mother and child, and 
between friends. In spite of its different forms, love 
is the same. If someone asks you where is God, you 
can say that God is present in the heart of everyone 
in the form of love. This love signifies the principle of 
oneness. The life that is led by observing the principle 
of love is true life. Without the principle of love it is 
no life at all. All other values are contained in love. 


Here is a small example. A few days ago, Shourie 
left his mortal coil. Many people joined his funeral 
procession. When his body was cremated, the five 
elements of his body merged with their source - earth 
merged with earth, fire with fire, air with air, so on 
and so forth. What remained in the end? Just a heap 
of ash! But the atmic principle in him followed its 
divine course. 


Everything is immanent in Brahman. Brahman is 
one without a second. Therefore, if someone asks you 
what is your name, you should reply, “Aham Brahmasmi 
(1 am Brahman); | have no other name.” People call 
God by many names, such as, Rama, Krishna, Govinda 
Narayana, but Brahman is one. Brahma sathyam jagan- 


32 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


mithya (Brahman alone is real, the world is unreal). 
People give many names to God. Names are given 
according to the liking of individuals. Mother gives 
some names to her children and calls them by those 
names. In the same way, we call people by various 
names in this world. But God has only one name and 
that is Brahman. One who understands the principle of 
Brahman becomes Brahman himself. All the names of 
God such as Rama, Krishna, Govinda Narayana refer 
only to Brahman. Hence, we should not attach too 
much importance to names. Sathya, Dharma, Santi, 
and Prema are divine principles. When we adhere to 
these divine principles, we can attain the proximity of 
God. Contemplate on any name of Brahman, with the 
feeling that He is present in all. You may identify others 
by any name, but Brahman is present in all of them 
since He is omnipresent. Wherever we see, we find 
only Brahman. Brahman is the only reality. Therefore, 
we should always contemplate on Brahman. Everyone 
should chant “Namah Sivaya, ... Namah Sivaya, . 
Namah Sivaya.” The principle of Brahman is present 
in this sacred Panchakshari mantra. 


I have been seeing both Easwaramma and Pedda 
Venkama Raju for the last one month. They also 
appeared before Me when I was coming to Sai Kulwant 
Hall. Even Satyajit who sleeps in My room has seen 
them. Both of them were wearing yellow dress. Yellow 
colour represents the principle of Brahman. Today I 
wanted to bring out an yellow colour Linga. But as I 


Understand The Principle Of Unity 33 


was coming to the Hall, all the students, devotees and 
residents of the Ashram prayed to Me, “Swami, You 
need not bring out Linga because we cannot bear the 
suffering that You undergo. We want to see only Your 
blissful form.” 


My heart is totally pure. Whatever I will must 
happen. The heart of the worldly people is always 
unsteady. But Sai’s heart is steady and changeless. 
How can there be any change in the principle of truth? 
Nobody can understand this eternal principle of truth. 
Once there was a yogi who mastered the Vedas and 
other scriptures after putting in a lot of hard work. 
When he was asked what he had learnt, he told that 
he had mastered all the Vedas, Puranas (mythological 
texts) and other scriptures. However, what is that from 
which all these scriptures originate? All these have 
originated from the Word. What is the form of the 
primordial Word? It is Pranava or Om. God is embodied 
in sound. All other forms of energy emanate from it. 
In the same way, the sound of Siva’s Damaruka when 
He performs His cosmic dance contains the sound of 
all the musical instruments. There is a song which 
describes the cosmic dance of Siva. The form assumed 
by Siva while performing the cosmic dance is possible 
only for divinity and none else. We should never forget 
such a divine form. 


Lord Siva is lost in ecstasy 
Parameswara, Sambasiva is lost in ecstasy, 


Dancing and dancing the Tandava dance 


34 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


With Sage Narada accompanying on Tanpura and 
The Lords matted locks are shining brilliantly. 
Wielding the Trident, Siva is dancing 
Tadhim, Tadhim, Tadhim Tadhimtaka. 
Lord Siva... 
With Goddess Saraswati playing Veena and Indra, 
the flute, Lord Vishnu on Mridanga, 
Dhimi Dhimi Dhimi Dhimitaka. 
Lord Siva... 
With Ganga coursing through his matted locks, 
And the third eye flashing on his forehead, 
As the crystal rosary sparkled and glinted, 
Siva danced the Tandava. 

(Telugu song) 


Man Should Remember His Divine Parents 


The cosmic dance of Parvati and Easwara is most 
enchanting. None other is capable of performing it. 
Parvati and Easwara are the divine parents of all the 
people of the world. We will be free from all suffering 
when we constantly remember them. But today nobody 
remembers them. How can then people have protection? 


Once when Siva and Parvati were moving about 
in the sky, they saw a person cutting the branch of a 
tree on which he was sitting. As he was on the verge 
of falling, Parvati prayed to Siva to save him, “Oh 
Lord, please save him when he falls on the ground.” 
But Siva said to Parvati, “It is you who saw him first. 
It is you again who realised that he would die when he 


Understand The Principle Of Unity 35 


falls down. So, it is your responsibility to save him.” 
Then Parvati submitted, “Dear Lord, when someone 
falls on the ground, he will either utter ‘Amma’ (mother) 
or ‘Appa’ (father). If this man utters ‘Amma’, then I 
will save him, but if he utters ‘Appa’, you should save 
him.” Easwara agreed to this proposal. As the branch 
broke, both Siva and Parvati came forward to save him. 
But while falling, this man did not utter either ‘Amma’ 
or ‘Appa’; he uttered ‘Ayyo’ (alas). Though both Siva 
and Parvati were waiting to save him, he did not call 
them. The moral of the story is that we should always 
remember our parents. One who does not remember his 
parents even in times of difficulty is really a fool. Lord 
Easwara and Mother Parvati are universal parents. If 
one constantly remembers them, one will not encounter 
any difficulty or suffering. Unfortunately, today people 
do not remember their parents. That is the reason why 
they lack protection. 


When our end approaches, we should remember 
either our divine mother or divine father. Those who 
remember their divine parents are really blessed ones. 
What to talk of our divine mother and divine father, 
people today do not remember even their own parents. 
Why should one remember one’s mother? It is the 
mother who carries you in her womb for nine months 
and gives birth to you. She brings you up bearing all 
difficulties. He is a fool who does not remember his 
mother with gratitude. Similarly, your father bears all 
types of difficulties to provide education to you and 
brings you up in life. Is it possible for you to progress 


36 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


in life without going to a preceptor and acquiring 
education? Hence, everyone should always remember 
his parents. You may or may not remember anybody 
else, but you must remember your parents. 


Message Of Sivaratri 


Easwaramma is the mother of this body. The 
meaning of the word ‘Easwaramma’ is ‘mother of 
Easwara (God)’. In the history of Divinity, Mother 
Easwaramma exemplifies Divine Motherhood. Not 
only this. Pedda Venkama Raju, the father of this body, 
signifies the lord of seven hills. Now both of them are 
residing in Vaikunta (heaven). Swami is the incarnation 
of both Parvati and Easwara. In the triune Sai Avatars, 
the first one was Shirdi Sai, the second is Parthi Sai 
and the third will be Prema Sai. Prema Sai will bring 
about complete unity of mankind. Love is the unifying 
force in the world. Now we do not find any unity in 
the world. There are differences and differences all 
along everywhere. There will be complete unity only 
when love manifests in the heart of man. Then all will 
become one. There will be unity of caste, culture and 
country. When somebody asks you, where you have 
come from, you should not say that you have come 
from Mysore (Karnataka) or Andhra Pradesh or Tamil 
Nadu. You should say that you have come from Bharat. 
You should proudly proclaim, “Bharat is my country.” 
In fact, Bharat is the home of everyone. When I visited 
East Africa, Idi Amin asked Me where I had come 
from. I did not say that I had come from Karnataka or 


Understand The Principle Of Unity 37 


Andhra Pradesh. I told him, “I have come 
from Bharat.” If everybody develops such feelings of 
allegiance to his country, then the whole country will 
prosper. Very soon, the whole of India will be united 
and all the differences will disappear. It is necessary 
that there is unity of caste, culture and country. When 
there is unity between these three, then all of us will 
become united and live like brothers and sisters. The 
history of Bharat exemplifies this spirit of oneness. 


In the story of the Ramayana, both Kausalya and 
Kaikeyi shared their pudding of the Yajna with Sumitra 
when the bowl containing her share of pudding was 
taken away by an eagle. While Kausalya gave birth to 
Rama and Kaikeyi to Bharata, Sumitra gave birth to 
Lakshmana and Satrughna, both of whom served their 
elder brothers Rama and Bharata respectively. Thus, 
all the three wives of Dasaratha and his four sons set 
highest ideals of unity and love in the world. In keeping 
with the noble traditions set by the Ramayana, we 
should always maintain unity, morality and spirituality. 
The name Sumitra itself signifies that she was a good 
friend to one and all, and a paragon of all virtues. 
Similarly, Sita’s other name, Vaidehi, signifies that she 
was the daughter of Videha (one who transcended body 
consciousness). The Ramayana, the Mahabharata, the 
Bhagavata and other scriptures contain names which 
signify great qualities of persons bearing those names. 
In the same way, God is called by different names, all 
of which have deep inner meaning. The name of this 


38 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


body is Sathya Sai. But this has a deep inner meaning 
and it signifies one who reclines on truth (Sathya Sayee). 


We should all become united. People may speak 
different languages and pursue different disciplines 
of education, but all should follow the principle of 
one country, one caste and one culture. The present 
differences have arisen because people are divided on 
the basis of caste, language and culture. The message 
of Sivaratri is that Bharat should achieve the objective 
of unity of the entire country. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Wherever you may go, you should say with a sense 
of pride that you belong to India that you follow Indian 
culture and speak its language. It would be very nice 
if you understand the principle of unity, develop faith 
in it and lead your life accordingly. There should be 
unity of caste, culture and country. Only then can our 
country achieve desired progress. The name ‘Bharat’ 
contains two syllables ‘Bha’ and ‘rat’. ‘Bha’ signifies 
God and ‘rat’ stands for love. Hence, Bharat is that 
country where people have love for God. You should 
understand this truth and treasure it in your heart. 
(Bhagawan sang the Bhajan “Hari Bhajan Bina ...’) 
Whoever wishes to have Santi (peace) must participate 
in Bhajan. Bhajan alone can confer true peace on us. 


Sivaratri, 6-3-2008, 
Prasanthi Nilayam. 


4 
Redeem Your Life By Good Actions 


Man is born out of Karma, 
He lives and dies in Karma. 
Karma is verily God, 
And it is responsible for man’s 
Happiness and sorrow. 
(Telugu poem) 


KARMA is verily the life of man. Whatever 
actions man undertakes to perform from morning to 
evening, he should first understand and then perform. 
This is the primary duty of man. The nature of the action 
that you perform determines the type of result you get. 
When man performs good deeds, he will have good 
results. On the other hand, when he performs actions 
with evil intention, the results are bound to be bad. 


Man Should Behave Like A Human Being 


40 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


Bats fly in the sky like all other birds which perch 
on the branches of trees to take rest. However, unlike 
other birds, bats hang from the branches with their 
head down and feet up. Has anybody tied them in this 
manner with a thread? Or, has someone forcibly put 
their heads down? No. It is the result of their Karma. 
In the same way, if man harbours evil thoughts and 
performs evil actions, he is bound to get evil results. 
However, if he performs good actions, he will get good 
results in accordance with the nature of his actions. 
When we look at them, even bats appear to be like 
other birds. But, they have a different fate unlike other 
birds, which fly freely. 


We cannot escape from the consequences of our 
actions. But we perform bad deeds and expect good 
results. There is none who desires bad results after 
performing good actions. However, every action has a 
result in accordance with its nature. When you write 
correct answers to the questions put by your teacher 
in the examination, you get good marks. But if you 
commit mistakes your marks will be deducted. In the 
same way, one who is born as a human being should 
perform actions after enquiring what is good and what 
is bad. To perform good actions is the primary duty 
of man. To perform bad deeds is the attribute of an 
animal. You should always remind yourself that you are 
a human being and that you should perform only such 
actions which behove a human being. You should ask 
yourself before performing any action, “Am I behaving 
like a human being or an animal?” We should perform 


Redeem Your Life By Good Actions A 


actions after examining them in a proper way. A human 
being should perform actions which befit his human 
birth. If you act contrary to human nature, even your 
neighbour will chide you, saying, “Having been born 
as a human being, you are behaving like an animal.” 
In this manner, man will be punished by his fellow 
human beings if he behaves like an animal. Therefore, 
man should conduct himself like a true human being. 
It is a disgrace to humanness if man behaves like an 
animal. Man must conduct himself in a manner which 
is appropriate for a human being. The result of good 
actions will be good and bad actions will be bad. 


Do Not Forget Your Humanness 


There is no need for God to punish you for the 
bad actions performed by you. Your own bad actions 
will give you the punishment. It is not possible to 
get good result out of a bad action and vice versa. 
We should understand the truth that we are born as 
human beings only to perform good deeds. The word 
‘Manava’ (man) consists of three syllables Ma, na, va. 
Ma means ignorance, na means without, va means to 
conduct. A human being is one who conducts himself 
without ignorance. One who is born as a human being 
must conduct oneself like a human being and speak 
sweetly and softly. Among the birds also. there are 
many categories. Some of them sing sweetly and give 
happiness to all. But there are others like crow which 
are disliked by people and are driven away when they 
start cawing. One feels like listening to the song of a 


42 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


cuckoo for any length of time. Similarly, the type of 
treatment that we receive from others is in accordance 
with our speech and behaviour. We are born to do 
only good deeds. A human being should always help 
his fellow human beings. Help Ever, Hurt Never. We 
should not hurt anybody. Sometimes, we hurt others 
knowingly. This is a greater mistake. God has given 
mind, intellect and chitta (mind stuff) to man to use 
them in a proper way. It is for this reason that the 
Vedanta declares Manah eva manushyanam karanam 
bandhamokshayo (mind is the cause of bondage and 
liberation of man). The mind that has been gifted by 
God to man should be put on the right path. It is not 
the real nature of a human being to criticise others, 
to make fun of them or to hurt them. Man should be 
devoid of all such evils. When even animals are doing 
service to man, there is nothing great if man helps his 
fellowmen. Having been born as human beings we 
should love our fellow human beings like our brothers 
and sisters. That is the hallmark of a true human being. 


First and foremost, man should obey the command 
of God. The same divine principle is present in all 
human beings. Daivam manusha rupena (God is in 
the form of a human being). Man should implicitly 
follow the command of God who incarnates as a 
human being. You should listen to the command of 
God and not of your friends who may be very close 
to you. We are born as human beings. Our appearance 
is also like a human being. So, we have to conduct 


Redeem Your Life By Good Actions 43 


ourselves like a human being. Never harm anybody by 
your thoughts, words or deeds. Conduct yourself as a 
human being and uphold your humanness. Whatever 
caste or culture you may belong to, you should acquire 
goodness in accordance with that. Since you are born 
among human beings, live among human beings, you 
should follow humanness. Only then will your life as 
a human being become worthwhile. If you forget your 
humanness, there is no use in performing any amount 
of Japa, Tapa, Yoga and Yajna (recitation, penance, 
spirituality and sacrifice). Whatever spiritual practice 
you may undertake, you can be called a human being 
only when you uphold humanness. 


First Achieve The Unity Of Thought, Word And 
Deed 


You should perform only such actions which will 
please God. Then only does your life as a human being 
become meaningful. Jantunam nara janma durlabham 
(of all living beings, human birth is the rarest). You 
should not waste such a precious and rare human 
birth. You will lose your humanness completely if you 
indulge in falsehood, injustice and unrighteousness. 
Therefore, you should have good thoughts, good speech 
and good vision. See Good, Do Good, Be Good. This 
is the inner meaning of human life. There are people 
who may appear to be good and smiling but their 
mind is filled with evil intentions. This is not good. 
Manasyekam vachasyekam, karmanyekam mahatmanam; 


44 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


Manasyanyat vachasyanyat, karmanyanyat duratmanam 
(Those whose thoughts, words and deeds are in perfect 
harmony are noble ones; those who lack harmony of 
these are wicked). One should have unity of thought, 
word and deed. If you have unity, then you will attain 
purity and purity will lead you to divinity. Therefore, 
one should have purity in order to attain divinity. Saying 
one thing and doing something other than that is not 
good. This is no unity at all. How can you have purity 
when you are devoid of unity? Therefore, if you want 
to have purity, you must have unity. Suppose somebody 
criticises you, you should think that this also is for 
your good. Whatever others may do, think that it is 
all for your own good. Perform all actions with the 
aim of redeeming your life. You should see to it that 
you do not lose your humanness. You may lose any 
property, but do not lose the property of humanness. 
Lead your life always smilingly and blissfully. But 
laughing unnecessarily is also not good. You should 
perform all actions with good intentions. When you 
perform good actions, your thoughts will also be good. 
When your mind is filled with good thoughts, all your 
bad thoughts will disappear. Therefore, you should 
always develop only good thoughts. This will lead to 
good health. We should love everyone. Love All, Serve 
All. If you adhere to these principles, you will always 
have good health. 


It is necessary for man to be healthy. Health is 
not limited only to physical body, it includes mental 


Redeem Your Life By Good Actions 45 


well-being also. Never eat improper food. Eat only 
those food items which are good and sacred and 
have been sanctified by offering to God. Do not offer 
improper food to God. Offer only sacred and satwic 
(pure) food to God in clean utensils. You get the result 
in accordance with the offering that you make. As are 
the actions, so will be the result. It is not possible to 
get good results by performing bad actions. Therefore, 
we should perform good actions and experience good 
fruits. Then only can we have good health. If we eat 
good food, we will have good thoughts. But people 
today say one thing and do something else. 


Once a sanyasi came to a house and begged for 
food. The housewife said to him, “My dear son, go 
to the river and have your bath. Meanwhile, I will 
prepare food for you.” This sanyasi was an epitome of 
laziness. He said to her, “Mother, for sanyasis like us, 
Govindeti sada snanam (reciting the name of Govinda 
is like having a bath).” Then the intelligent housewife 
gave him a befitting reply, saying, “Govindeti sada 
bhojanam (reciting the name of Govinda is like having 
food). Hence, you may go.” It is meaningless to say, 
Govindeti sada snanam to justify our laziness and not 
to have a bath. When you say that reciting the name of 
Govinda is like having a bath, you should also accept 
that the recitation of His name amounts to having food. 
We should observe propriety in our life. 


Understand The Importance Of Good Company 


46 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


Sometimes, you may get bad thoughts. You should 
immediately change them into good thoughts. For this, 
good company is necessary. “Tell me your company, I 
shall tell you what you are,” it is said. When you join 
good company, you become good. On the other hand, 
when you are in bad company, you become bad. Hence, 
always have good company. How can anybody accept 
you as a good person when you indulge in smoking, 
drinking and meat eating? If you want to be good, 
perform only good deeds. Whatever is the type of action 
you perform, you will get the result according to that. 


Human life is most sacred. It is attained as a result 
of merits earned in many previous births. Thousands of 
people have gathered here. For what? Only for God. 
Many people gather at places like liquor shops also. 
But there you cannot have good thoughts. Therefore, 
we should always have good company. 


We should join good company and develop good 
feelings. Do not have jealousy, anger and ego. Not only 
that. You should have gratitude for every good thing 
done to you by others. Gratitude is very important. 
One with a sense of gratitude will reap its good fruits 
wherever he may be. There are some people who betray 
even those who have done good to them. This is not 
good. We should be grateful even for a little good 
done to us. Your life will be a mere waste if you lack 
gratitude. Develop good qualities. Wherever you may 
go, you should conduct yourself with good feelings and 
serve everyone. Even if you come across your enemy, 
you should offer your greetings to him. Then he will 


Redeem Your Life By Good Actions 47 


also reciprocate in the same manner. On the other hand, 
if you talk to him with disrespect, he will also show 
disrespect to you. Our entire life is reaction, reflection 
and resound. If you want to achieve good results, you 
should lead a good life. If you work hard and study 
well, you will secure first rank. But if you do not study 
well, how can you get good marks? If you do not study 
well and yet get good marks, people may doubt that 
you have copied in the examination. Your conscience 
is your witness that you got good marks because you 
had written your examination well. Hence, do good 
and experience goodness. Only then will your life as 
a human being become meaningful. Live your life as 
a human being. 


You need not pray to God for protection. Your 
goodness will protect you. Your goodness is your true 
support in life. Manasuku manasu sakshi (mind is the 
witness of mind). We do not need any other witness. 
Lawyers say, “witness, witness, witness”. But what 
sort of witness? Not always a true witness. Our true 
witness is only our mind. Whether it is for earning 
money or for developing virtues, we should act in a 
righteous manner. We should do only such acts which 
are acceptable to our conscience. Self-satisfaction is very 
important. We can perform self-sacrifice only when we 
have self-satisfaction. Students! right from this age, you 
should develop good feelings. That is true education. 
There is no use reading big books without developing 
good feelings. There are many students who appear 
to be studying all the time. But nobody knows what 


48 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


they are really studying. You should study something 
only after knowing that it is good for you. You should 
not read those books which teach you to go on paths 
contrary to humanness. 


Perform All Actions To Please God 


You are all students. Hence, your only objective 
should be to acquire education. But what sort of 
education? Atma Vidya (education of the Self). You 
should study for self-satisfaction. Some students 
study day and night. But nobody knows what they 
are studying. They have big big books and in those 
big books they keep trash books and read them. Their 
parents feel happy thinking, “Our child is reading 
the Mahabharata!” You should not resort to such evil 
practices. When you act in this manner, you will lose 
respect in society. Not only that, your life itself will 
be ruined. 


First and foremost, students must control their 
anger. Thereafter, they should develop forbearance. Not 
merely that, they should always be peaceful. Only when 
you are peaceful can you understand the real meaning 
of what you are studying. At this age, students have a 
sacred heart. Offer your pure heart to God. You may 
not be able to please everybody in this world, but you 
can please God. If you return the money given to you 
by someone, he will be satisfied. But you should return 
not only the money, but give him your love also. You 
should treasure that gratitude in your heart. Then only 


Redeem Your Life By Good Actions 49 


you can say that you have repaid your debt. Everybody 
wants happiness. But where is happiness? “Hari bhajan 
bina sukh Santi nahin ...” (There can be no happiness 
and peace without chanting the name of God). That 
is why Guru Nanak started the practice of community 
singing. When many people sing the glory of God 
together, at least a few of them may be able to focus 
their mind on God and achieve self-satisfaction. Some 
people may be dozing during Bhajans, while the mind 
of some others may be wandering here and there. But 
at least one person’s mind will be focused on God. 
Hence, community bhajan singing is very good, which 
will fill your heart with bliss. 


Yesterday was Sivaratri. Sivaratri means auspicious 
night; the night to develop virtues. Day and night come 
one after the other. But all nights are not Sivaratris. 
The night on which you recite the name of God is real 
Sivaratri. That is the night which brings auspiciousness 
to you. Hence, you should develop good feelings in 
your heart at least on Sivaratri. 


Sivaratri, Prasanthi Nilayam, 7-3-2008. 


Students should realise the importance of 
service, to realise the Divine. It makes one’s; life 


significant and purposeful. 


Sri Sathya Sai Baba 





50 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


Doctors must proceed to slums and villages 
and help the dwellers. There is urgent need for this 
type of seva. Lawyers must take up the cases in 
which wrongs are committed on the poor through 
their ignorance and plead on their behalf for 
justice. They could devote time for at least two 
or three such cases per week. Their pleadings 
on behalf of the poor should not be cursory and 
casual. They must be as earnest and as effective 
as the rest... 


This day is really a day of joy. I am happy 
I am amidst persons dedicated to service. It is 
essential that members of such Clubs pay attention 
to our spiritual advancement also, for that ensures 
our attainment of the goal of Life. 


The worldly and the spiritual are like the 
two wings of a bird, the two wheels of a_ vehicle, 
equally essential and equally important. By means 
of spiritual sadhana, earn spiritual wealth and 
share it with those whom you serve. 


Sri Sathya Sai Baba 





5 


Have Self-confidence And Achieve 
Everything 


The land, whose sons are known for name and 

fame across the continents, 

The land whose heroes fought invaders and 

conquerors to achieve freedom, 

That famed land whose sons of wisdom and 

scholarship are the praise of the globe 

That land of saints, poets, singers and divine 

songsters, 

Oh sons of Bharat, go forth and uphold your 

heritage and be worthy of your glorious past. 
(Telugu poem) 


T is not possible to describe the greatness and 
glory of the land of Bharat. There are many 
men of affluence as well as great leaders even today. 
But what is the use when they are not prepared to get 


52 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


rid of their greed and devote their life for the welfare 
of the needy. Born in this sacred land, the Bharatiyas 
should try to sanctify their life by serving the poor 
and needy. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Divinity exists in all in the form of consciousness. 
The doctor and the judge who spoke earlier, talked about 
Swami and His mission. But their talk was limited more 
to worldly matters than to spirituality. One may acquire 
all types of education, but, without spiritual knowledge, 
all this is just a waste. People today have everything, 
except self-confidence. In the word ‘self-confidence’, 
‘self? refers to ‘I’. What is the meaning of ‘I’? That 
which cannot be seen by the physical eyes, or heard by 
physical ears or comprehended at the physical level is 
‘T’. It is divine, auspicious and all-pervasive in the form 
of consciousness (Chaitanya Sakti). All beings in the 
universe are the creation of God. There is nothing in this 
world which is not divine. People observe differences 
between one another. This is a great mistake. All are 
one. Ekam Sat viprah bahudha vadanti (truth is one, 
but the wise refer to it by various names). There is 
no second entity in this world. Sarvatah panipadam 
tat sarvathokshi siromukham, sarvatah sruthimalloke 
sarvamavruthya tishthati (with hands, feet, eyes, heads, 
mouth and ears pervading everything, He permeates 
the entire universe). 


There is none in this world in whom God is not 


Have Self-confidence And Achieve Everything 53 


present. Everything is permeated by divinity. Nobody 
has a right to say that this is divine and that is not. 
God is present even in difficulties, sorrow and misery. 
Though we have the capacity to understand this divine 
power, we are, unfortunately, not able to use that. 
When we observe the natural scenario around us, we 
see vast areas of land and a number of rivers such 
as Yamuna, Ganga, Pinakini, Cauveri, Tungabhadra, 
Godavari, Saraswati, etc. In spite of having such a vast 
land with numerous rivers, there is scarcity of food for 
man. What is the reason? The reason is that he is not 
making proper use of his innate power and potentiality. 
Instead, he is misusing his powers and wasting his 
intelligence. If he makes efforts in the right direction, 
he can achieve everything. 


What We Ought To Know Beyond Our Senses 


You should have faith that everything that you see 
in this world is an aspect of divinity. There is nothing 
else other than this. Only One exists in this world and 
there is no second. We are unable to understand this 
truth and we suffer from many misconceptions. We are 
prepared to believe what others write in their books, 
but no one is prepared to have faith in one’s own 
self. People have all types of confidence except self- 
confidence. What is the use of having everything except 
self-confidence? If only we have self-confidence, we 
can achieve everything; there is nothing in this world 
which we cannot accomplish. We should make efforts 
to recognise this principle of Atma which is divine, 


54 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


auspicious and ever new. But man today does not make 
efforts to know himself. When we ask anyone who he 
is, he will tell his name given to him by his parents. 
If you put the same question to God, He will say 
Aham Brahmasmi (1 am Brahman). As we are unable 
to recognise the truth, we take to wrong path and get 
confused. We do not make efforts to know what we are 
supposed to know. On the other hand, we try to know 
that which is not possible for us to know by our senses. 
Is it possible to know divinity which 1s all-pervasive? 
It is impossible. Hence, whatever happens, recognise 
it as the Will of God. All the differences are born out 
of our own feelings of mine and thine. In fact, there is 
no difference between you and Me. You and I are one 
(loud applause). Do not think that God exists separately 
in a particular place. Think that you are God. You are 
not the body. Body is like a water bubble. Mind is 
like a mad monkey. Intellect is wavering. Hence, you 
are neither the body nor the mind, nor the intellect. 
You are you. You should make proper efforts to know 
this truth. 


The Rama Story 

Tomorrow is Rama Navami. This is the day on 
which Sri Rama was born. There is a story about it. 
In Treta Yuga, King Dasaratha ruled over Ayodhya. He 
married Kausalya who was the daughter of the king of 
Kosala. After some time, she gave birth to a daughter. 
She was named Santa. But Dasaratha was not satisfied 
with the birth of a female child and wanted a male child. 


Have Self-confidence And Achieve Everything 55 


Therefore, he gave her to a friend who adopted her. 
Thereafter, he did not have any other issue. Therefore, 
he wanted to have another wife. As per the prevalent 
customs in those times, he had to seek the consent of 
the first wife before marrying another woman. Therefore, 
Dasaratha went to Kausalya and said to her, “I am 
thinking of marrying again.” She replied, “Certainly you 
may do as per your wish.” After securing the permission 
of Kausalya, he married Sumitra in the hope of getting 
a son. But she also did not bear him a child. Therefore, 
King Dasaratha became very worried. At that time he 
received the information that the king of Kekaya had a 
beautiful daughter by name Kaikeyi. He approached the 
king of Kekaya and proposed that he wanted to marry 
his daughter, telling him that he already had two wives. 
He always spoke the truth. Sathyannasti paro Dharma 
(There is no Dharma greater than adherence to truth). 
He never said anything that was untrue. He explained 
to the king of Kekaya everything in detail. Then the 
king of Kekaya said, “You already have two wives 
and they have not borne you any children. Now you 
want a third wife. I can give my daughter in marriage 
to you on the condition that the son born to her will 
be the heir to your kingdom”. Dasaratha agreed to that 
condition. Manthara, who was the main associate of 
Kaikeyi, was hearing all their conversation. 


Accordingly the marriage was performed with 
great rejoicings. However, she also did not bear any 
child even after the passage of a long time. Therefore, 


56 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


Dasaratha decided to perform the Putrakameshti Yajna, 
as suggested by his well-wishers. Sage Rishyasringa, 
along with his wife Santa came to Ayodhya to perform 
the Putrakameshti Yajna. 


On the eleventh day of the performance of the 
Yajna, an effulgent being appeared from the fire in 
the sacrificial altar with a vessel containing a payasam 
(sweet pudding). Dasaratha gave the payasam to sage 
Vasishta and requested him to distribute it equally among 
the three queens. Accordingly, Vasishta distributed the 
payasam to Kausalya, Sumitra, and Kaikeyi. Kausalya 
and Kaikeyi took their share of the pudding to their 
respective puja rooms. Each of them was happy thinking 
that her son would be the future king of Ayodhya. 
Kaikeyi thought Dasaratha would crown her son as 
per the promise made by him at the time of marriage. 
Kausalya thought, she being the first wife, her son had 
every right to become the king. But Sumitra had no 
such claims. She was a paragon of virtues. Her name 
‘Su-mitra’ itself signifies that she was a good friend 
to one and all. She carried her bowl of pudding to the 
terrace and placed it on the parapet wall while drying 
her hair in the sun. Suddenly, an eagle swooped down 
and carried away the bowl and left it on the Matanga 
Mountain. Anjana Devi found the bowl and partook of 
the sacred pudding. Consequently she became pregnant 
and gave birth to Hanuman. 


Sumitra ran down and informed Kausalya and 


Have Self-confidence And Achieve Everything 57 


Kaikeyi about what had happened. Kausalya and Kaikeyi 
came to her rescue and shared their pudding with her. 
Kaikeyi gave half of her share to Sumitra. Kausalya 
did the same. In due course, Kausalya gave birth to 
Rama, Kaikeyi to Bharata, and Sumitra to Lakshmana 
and Satrughna. Kausalya and Kaikeyi had one son each, 
whereas Sumitra had two sons. When we enquire into 
the reason, we can understand the mystery behind it. 
The sons of Kausalya and Kaikeyi were happily playing 
in their cradles whereas Sumitra’s sons were crying all 
the time, and were not taking milk. Sumitra was at a 
loss to know the reason for their crying and tried in 
vain various types of yantras, mantras and tantras to 
make them comfortable. Ultimately, she went to Sage 
Vasishta and told him about her predicament. Sage 
Vasishta closed his eyes. His yogic vision enabled 
him to know the truth. He said to Sumitra, “As you 
partook of the sacred pudding given by Kausalya, you 
gave birth to Lakshmana who is an Amsa (part) of 
Rama. Similarly, Satrughna is born out of the share 
of pudding given to you by Kaikeyi. So, he is a part 
of Bharata. Put Lakshmana by the side of Rama and 
Satrughna by the side of Bharata. Then they will rest 
peacefully.” Sumitra did as instructed by Vasishta. Both 
Lakshmana and Satrughna stopped crying and started 
playing blissfully in their cradles. This was the basis of 
the intimate relationship between Rama and Lakshmana, 
Bharata and Satrughna. 


Since both the sons of Sumitra, namely, Lakshmana 


58 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


and Satrughna, were always in the company of Rama 
and Bharata, she had nothing much to do. Time and 
again she would go to Kausalya and Kaikeyi to see how 
her sons were playing with their elder brothers. After 
seeing them, she would shower her love and affection 
on them. In this manner all the four sons of Dasaratha 
grew up in an environment of love and happiness. 
Sumitra was very happy because she thought her son 
Lakshmana would serve Rama and Satrughna would 
serve Bharata when they grew up. 


Rama, Lakshmana, Bharata and Satrughna grew up 
as young men of great valour and learning under the 
loving care of their parents and Guru Vasishta. When 
Rama and Lakshmana went to protect the Yajna of sage 
Viswamitra, he took them to the court of King Janaka 
to participate in the Swayamvara of his daughter Sita. 
Then Rama broke the Siva bow and won the hand 
of Sita. The marriage of Rama and Sita became an 
occasion of great rejoicing in Mithila. The people of 
Mithila sang joyous songs, welcoming one and all to 
witness the marriage of Sita and Rama. 


Welcome to all for Rama s wedding; 

together we shall witness the joyous scene. 
Many have gathered already, 

decked up in all their finery. 

With necklaces the ladies are adorned 

of jewels pure and gleaming. 

Rama shall tie the knot today to beauteous Sita. 


Have Self-confidence And Achieve Everything 59 


Oh, what a fine match they make! (Telugu song) 
The women of the kingdom came to participate 
in the wedding and joyfully sang blithesome songs: 


Come let us go and see the marriage of 
Rama and Sita, 
The sight shall confer great merit. 
Blessed are those who see this scene. 
Oh, come one and all, watch with joy the 
sacred marriage. 

(Telugu song) 


After marriage, as they were returning to Ayodhya, 
they heard a deafening sound. As they wondered where 
the sound had come from, Sage Parasurama appeared 
and roared, “Who is the one who broke the bow of 
Siva?” “It is I who has done it,” said Rama. “If that is 
so, let us see if You can break my bow,” saying so he 
gave his bow in the hands of Rama. Rama broke even 
that bow with His left hand. Seeing that, Parasurama 
offered his salutations to Rama and submitted his two 
kalas (splendours) to Rama, who was already endowed 
with twelve kalas. Rama thus shined with his own 
twelve kalas, two kalas from his brothers and another 
two given by Parasurama, that is, with all the sixteen 
Kalas of the Virat Purusha. With the surrender of 
Parasurama, Rama’s power became full and complete. 


In due course of time Dasaratha realised that 
he was growing old and that it was time he should 
have crowned one of his sons as heir to his kingdom. 


60 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


Since Rama was the eldest of the four sons and he 
had all the qualities of a worthy king, he thought of 
crowning him as the heir to his kingdom. This news was 
received by the subjects of the kingdom with great joy 
and happiness because all of them thought that Rama 
was most suited to assume the reigns of the kingdom. 


When Manthara heard this news, she went to 
Kaikeyi and reminded her of the two boons granted to 
her by Dasaratha. She suggested to her that she must 
demand from Dasaratha that Bharata be crowned as 
his heir to the kingdom and Rama be sent to the forest 
for fourteen years. Though Kaikeyi loved Rama more 
than Bharata, she was influenced by the evil advice 
of Manthara. She removed all her ornaments and lay 
down in great anger in her chamber. Dasaratha went 
to her chamber and enquired as to what the reason for 
her anger was. When Kaikeyi demanded the two boons 
granted to her by Dasaratha earlier, he was very much 
distressed. But as Kaikeyi persisted with her demands, 
he relented and agreed to make her son Bharata the 
crown prince of Ayodhya. But when she put forth the 
second demand, asking him to send Rama to the forest 
for 14 years, Dasaratha was crestfallen. However, Rama 
immediately agreed to make Bharata the heir to the 
kingdom and go to forest for fourteen years to uphold 
the promise given by his father to Kaikeyi. But when 
Lakshmana heard this he became very angry. In a fit of 
rage, he even thought of putting Kaikeyi and Manthara 
to death. Rama pacified him saying that it was their 


Have Self-confidence And Achieve Everything 61 


foremost duty to follow the command of their father 
and that he should not do anything that would bring 
disrepute to their father. 


Kaikeyi wanted Rama to go to the forest 
immediately. Lakshmana and Sita also decided to follow 
Rama. Lakshmana went to his mother Sumitra and 
sought her permission and blessings to serve Rama in the 
forest. Sumitra was very happy to hear that Lakshmana 
was following Rama to serve Him. Lakshmana then went 
to his wife Urmila. As he entered her room, she was 
making a painting. She was a good painter. Lakshmana 
enquired as to what she was painting. She replied that 
she was making a painting of Rama’s coronation. 


On hearing this Lakshmana told her that Rama 
was not going to be crowned and was going to the 
forest for 14 years. He also informed her that he had 
decided to go with Rama to the forest for 14 years. 
Urmila did not have any objection to it and said, 
“Protect Rama and Sita just as eyelids protect the eyes. 
They are everything for you. Consider them as your 
father and mother. Never be slack in serving them. 
Never think of me even for a moment in the forest 
for these fourteen years. Only Sita and Rama should 
be uppermost in your mind.” Saying this, she offered 
her salutations to him. 


Sita, Rama and Lakshmana got into the chariot and 
proceeded to the forest. Dasaratha ran after the chariot 
saying, “Oh Rama, stay for a while. Let me see your 


62 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


beautiful form at least for some time. Any way I cannot 
stop you from going.” The shock of separation from 
Rama was too severe for Dasaratha to bear. He did not 
eat anything and he refused to drink even a drop of 
water. All the time he was saying, “Rama, Rama ...” 
In this way remembering Rama every moment, he left 
his mortal coil. All this happened because there was a 
reason behind this and it was like this: 


Once Dasaratha went to the forest for hunting. As 
he reached near the bank of a stream, he heard a noise 
and thought that some wild animal was drinking water. 
On hearing this sound, he shot an arrow at the source 
of the sound. That arrow hit Sravana Kumar which 
proved fatal. Sravana Kumar had come to the stream to 
take water and quench the thirst of his old mother and 
father who were blind and helpless. He was the only 
support of his parents and carried them with him in a 
kavadi (a bamboo stick with two baskets at each end) 
to all places of pilgrimage. When Dasaratha realised 
what he had done, he was grief-stricken that he had 
caused the death of the only son of his old parents. 


Before dying, Sravana Kumar requested him to 
carry the water to his old parents. When Dasaratha 
informed his old parents about the tragic death of 
their son, they were drowned in inconsolable grief and 
cursed him that he would also die a tragic death due 
to separation from his son. That is what had happened 
to Dasaratha. After all, a curse uttered by noble souls 
cannot be reversed. 


Have Self-confidence And Achieve Everything 63 


After the marriage of Sita and Rama, Viswamitra 
left for the forest. 


It is not enough if we worship Rama only on 
His birthday. When Rama returned to Ayodhya all the 
people of Ayodhya joyously welcomed Him singing 
His glory and chanting His name. In Bharat, we do 
not find any village which does not have a temple of 
Rama or a person who does not know the name of 
Rama. Wherever we go, the name of Rama is heard . 
Though thousands of years have passed, Rama’s name 
is as fresh and new as it was in the past. Rama is 
ever new. The name of Rama gives joy to everyone. If 
even an old woman is asked she would say, “I may 
not be able to say any other word but I constantly 
chant the name of Rama.” Not even one person would 
be found in a village who does not know the name 
of Rama. There is no village where you do not find 
temples of Rama. Even if the people are not able to 
build a temple, they will erect a small shelter covered 
with a couple of sheets and install the idol of Rama 
in it. Even after the passage of thousands of years, the 
name of Rama is known everywhere and is held in 
high esteem by the people. Nowadays even in Russia 
people are chanting the name of Rama. In fact, the 
name of Rama has spread to every nook and corner 
of the world. The name of Rama is the crest jewel of 
all names. Everybody can easily chant this. Therefore, 
whatever task you are engaged in, you should constantly 
chant the name of Rama while performing that task. 


64 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


When you step out from your home or when you are 
on your way to college, you should keep chanting the 
name of Rama all the while. The name of Rama should 
become your life-breath. 


Tamil New Year, 18-4-2008, 
Prasanthi Nilayam. 


Once you try with all your might, the Lord’ 
Grace will be there to help you forward. The first 
step in the spiritual discipline is the cleansing of 
the speech. Talk sweet without anger. Do not boast 
of your scholarship or attainments. Be humble, 
eager to serve; conserve your speech. Practise 
silence. That will save you from squabbles, idle 
thoughts and factions. 


Again, practise the attitude of joy when others 
are joyful and of grief when others around you are 
grieved. Let your heart move in sympathy. But the 
joy and grief have to be translated into service; 
they should not be mere emotions. 


Sri Sathya Sai Baba 





6 


Respect, Honour And Make Your 
Mother Happy 


Students - Boys and Girls! 


ENKATARAMAN has spoken to you 

regarding today’s function in a befitting 
manner. He is a very learned man who has worked in 
the Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai. He has 
also worked in some specific areas of science, earlier 
pursued by Sir C.V. Raman. He is the winner of many 
awards. 


Now, what can I say about the mother of this 
body? Man has actually three bodies — physical, mental 
and spiritual. Therefore, you are not one person but 
three — 1. The one you think you are, i.e., body, 2. 
The one others think you are, i.e., mind, and 3. The 
one you really are, 1.e., Atma (spirit). Your true form 
is the Atma, not the body or the mind. 


66 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


The Life Principle Is The Mother, Not The Body 


In the circumstances that prevail today, there 
are very few who honour their mother. Your mother 
carried you in her womb for nine months and gave you 
birth after undergoing many difficulties and hardships. 
Forgetting such a mother is like forgetting God. This 
amounts to forgetting yourself. Mother is your first 
teacher. It is the mother who feeds and nourishes you. 
It is on the lap of your mother that you grow up and 
experience all types of happiness. None should forget 
the love that he receives from his mother. First and 
foremost, our mother deserves our highest respect. 


After the death of his mother, many people told 
Sankaracharya to take the body out. But Sankaracharya 
told them, “Neither my mother is going to leave me, 
nor I am going to leave my mother. My mother and I 
are one forever. Bodies are different but the principle of 
the Atma is the same in both of us. You may go away 
from me but none has any right to separate my mother 
from me. Her body will be cremated in the compound 
of the house.” Accordingly, Sankaracharya cremated the 
body of his mother in the compound of his house. None 
can estimate the feelings of the mother. Even today 
people of Palakkad either cremate or bury the body of 
their mother in the compound because they feel that 
such a great person like Sankaracharya had done it and 
that they should also follow the same. In the beginning 
many people criticised Sankaracharya, saying in spite 


Respect, Honour And Make Your Mother Happy 67 


of being a learned scholar, he had committed such an 
act of impropriety. Knowledge of the scriptures is not 
that important; it is cultural refinement that has great 
value. Culture is that which brings about refinement. 


Physically your mother may not be with you, but 
your love for her should remain the same. The mother of 
this body sent a letter to me when I was in Kodaikanal. 
After that I came to Brindavan (Bangalore). Once she 
prayed that My name should be on her lips at the time 
of her death. When she passed away in May 1972, 
Summer Course was in progress at Brindavan. She 
was hale and hearty. All of a sudden she called out, 
“Swami, Swami, Swami ...” I replied, “I am coming, 
I am coming ...” When I came down the stairs, she 
breathed her last. 


So long as there is life in the body, we should 
take care of it. Once the life goes away the body has 
no value. Truly speaking, who is the mother? It is the 
life principle that is the mother, not the body. Body is 
like a water bubble, mind is like a mad monkey. What 
for we should keep the body? Immediately, I asked for 
the car to be brought and sent her body in the car to 
Puttaparthi. I remained in Brindavan. For the summer 
course, students had not come just from one college but 
from various colleges all over India. They all thought 
that Swami would not come to the class that day. Then 
what? Exactly at 9 0’ clock, I entered the classroom 
smilingly. Students were surprised to see Me there. 
They were all thinking, “What is this? Swami’s mother 


68 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


has passed away and He has come to the classroom.” 
Mother does not go anywhere. The body that was being 
addressed as ‘mother’ has left. But the mother is with 
Me only. Hence, there was no need to be sad. So long 
as I am there, mother is always with Me. Therefore, 
I told the students to be happy and not to feel sorry 
that the mother of this body had left her mortal coil. 
At that time V.K. Gokak was the Vice Chancellor. He 
was also surprised thinking, “What, Swami is talking 
like this!” I have not taken birth from the physical 
body. After all what is this body! It exists when five 
elements are there in it. Body is like a bag containing 
five elements. When the five elements leave the body, 
it becomes an empty bag. Hence, one should not have 
undue attachment with the body. 


All mothers and children should develop these 
feelings of detachment. So long as the mother is alive, 
we should respect her, honour her and make her happy 
in every possible way. There is no need to be sad 
when she leaves the body. Even here in Puttaparthi, 
people said, “What is this? Swami has sent the body 
of Easwaramma, but He Himself has not come?” What 
for I should go with the body? Body is only a vesture. 
It is like a leather bag. When the five elements leave 
the body, the five senses also go with it. Then why 
should we grieve over the lifeless body? I arranged 
for whatever was supposed to be done at the worldly 
level. I remained in Brindavan and conducted the 
summer classes happily. In this world, all the physical 


Respect, Honour And Make Your Mother Happy 69 


relationships are of our own making. Otherwise, who 
is related to whom? This relationship of mother and 
son is only at the physical level. The mother came, 
performed the acts that she was destined to perform 
and then left. I have to perform My duty. Therefore, 
I engaged Myself in the performance of the task for 
which I have come. When we see from the worldly 
point of view, the body is physical and ephemeral. 


The body is made up of five elements and 
is bound to perish sooner or later, but the 
indweller has neither birth nor death. The 
indweller has no attachment whatsoever and 
is the eternal witness. 

(Telugu poem) 


We should keep Dehi (indweller) in our view and 
not the physical body (Deha). Everyone forgets the 
body when he goes to sleep. When you can forget it in 
your sleep, why can’t you forget it forever? However, 
so far as your parents are there, you should make them 
happy. Do not ignore their well-being. We should look 
after our parents and treat them with love and respect. 
However, we should not have undue attachment to 
the body. The relationship between husband and wife 
is there only after the marriage. Wife comes in the 
middle of your life but mother is there with you right 
from the birth. It is sheer foolishness to forget your 
mother who is with you since your birth and get 
entirely immersed in the love of your wife who comes 


70 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


in the middle of your life. Other relations like sons, 
daughters, grandsons, sons-in-law, etc., are also formed 
in the middle of one’s life. In fact, all worldly relations 
are temporary; they come and go like passing clouds. 
You have connections with these relations so long as 
you exist. Where is the connection when you yourself 
are not there? Hence, do not form any relationships 
on the basis of the body. However, perform all duties 
which you are required to perform at the physical and 
worldly level with earnestness. Your conduct should 
be good and your deeds should also be good. Never 
forget your mother; treasure her form in your heart. We 
come from the heart of our mother and mother should 
always be in our heart. Therefore, neither your mother 
ever leaves you nor you should leave her. Mother and 
children are united with each other for ever. 


Twameva matacha pita Twameva, 
Twameva bandhuscha sakha Twameva, 
Twameva vidya dravinam Twameva 
(you alone are the father and mother, friend 
and relation, wisdom and wealth). 

(Sanskrit verse) 


Wherever you may be, keep your heart suffused 
with the feelings of love for your mother. Once 
Narasimha Murthy came to Me and said, “My mother 
has passed away.” I asked him, “Who has passed away 
— your mother or her body?” Then I told him, “Your 
mother is here. I am your mother (/oud applause). It is 


Respect, Honour And Make Your Mother Happy 71 


the body that dies. Body is like a water bubble. Bodies 
come and go. Therefore, you should have no worry about 
the death of the body of your mother. I am here with 
you. Ask Me whatever you wanted from your mother, 
I will give (loud applause). Hence, you should not feel 
sad at all.” From then onwards, Narasimha Murthy is 
with Me. I give him whatever he wants. Mother, father 
and other relations are temporary — coming and going, 
coming and going. But God is not coming and going. 
He is always present. Therefore, it is only God who 
is present at all times. The entire world is ephemeral 
and transitory. How many people have taken birth in 
this world? Are they all here now? Death can occur 
in any manner; it has no sign or symptom. Death is 
death. Even if some symptoms of death are visible, we 
should not worry at all. 


Never ever show disrespect to your mother. Never 
make her shed a tear by your conduct. Keep her 
always happy. Her happiness will bring you all good 
things in life. But we should not worry at the death 
of our parents. Recently also I told in My discourse 
in Bangalore that both My mother and father appeared 
before Me. They smiled on seeing Me; I also smiled 
on seeing them. We should be happy when our parents 
smile. Small children smile at everyone. We also start 
smiling when they smile. The parents are also like small 
children. Mother always loves her children. Therefore, 
whatever high position we may attain in our life, we 
should never disrespect or look down upon our parents. 


72 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


Always consider them as God. Mother is God, father is 
God. That is why it is said, Matru devo bhava, Pitru 
devo bhava, Acharya devo bhava, Atithi devo bhava 
(revere your mother, father, preceptor and guest as God). 


Parents Be Made Happy At All Cost 


Mother gives you your body. Father provides the 
means of nourishment and growth of the body. Acharya 
gives you education and God gives you everything. 
Therefore, you should never forget these four and 
treasure them in your heart. Mother and father have 
their place in the heart of man. He should not forget 
them even if he is in great difficulty or upset over 
something. One who forgets his or her parents cannot 
be a human being. How can you exist without your 
parents? They are the seeds of your life; the very sourse 
of your life on earth. Therefore, parents should have 
prime importance in our life. Even if you are old or 
in great difficulty, you should make efforts to make 
your parents happy as far as it is possible for you. You 
should feed them even if you have to resort to begging. 
Bear all hardships to look after them. Fulfil all their 
desires. This will result in the fulfilment of your own 
desires. Everything in this world is reaction, reflection 
and resound. None can escape from these. If you cause 
difficulties to your parents today, your children will 
cause difficulties for you tomorrow. You will get back 
the result of your actions without much delay. You may 
love anyone you like, but do not forget your parents. 


Respect, Honour And Make Your Mother Happy 73 


When your parents have not forgotten you, you should 
not forget your parents. 


Mata nasti, pita nasti, nasti bandu 
sahodaraha, artham nasti, griham nasti, 
tasmat jagrata jagratah. 


(The relationships like mother, father, brothers, 
sisters and friends are not real. House and 
wealth are also illusory. Beware of this truth.) 

(Sanskrit verse) 


You should remember your parents at all times. 
You should never forget them. If is for this reason that I 
have come here straight from Brindavan. Earlier, people 
thought that Easwaramma Day might be celebrated 
at Kodaikanal. But I decided that I should be here at 
Puttaparthi on 6th May and a grand function should be 
held here and poor people should be made happy by 
distributing clothes and serving them sumptuous food. 
Wherever I am, I perform this function in the same 
grand manner. You should never ignore poor people. 
We should always remember them and help them. 


But some people out of their distress and anger 
abuse and ridicule them. This is a great mistake. If 
you ridicule them now, it will come back to you in 
future. You may be thinking that you are ridiculing 
them, but, truly speaking, you are ridiculing yourself. 
Never ridicule or insult them. Always love them. If you 
insult them before others, you will also be insulted by 


74 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


others. You cannot escape from the reaction, reflection 
and resound. 


Shun Gambling, Lust and Anger 


Difficulties come and go. Even the mighty Rama 
had to cry like an ordinary man on account of his 
separation from His wife Sita. Even the valorous 
Pandavas had to live in forest eating leaves and tubers. 
How much power and valour they had! Yet they had 
to live in forest and bear all difficulties. What for? 
They were defeated in gambling. Similar will be the 
fate of all those who take to this bad path. Gambling 
is not good at all. Similarly, drinking of liquor is also 
not good. Addiction to drinking leads to loss of control 
over oneself. Under the influence of liquor, a drunken 
man may speak anything. Later on, he will repent after 
coming back to his normal senses. Lust and anger 
are the two demonic qualities. Never allow them to 
come near you. In a fit of anger, we may say anything 
without considering its consequences. But after a few 
minutes, when we come to our normal mood, we will 
feel sorry, “Alas! Why did I abuse like this?” Therefore, 
first and foremost, kill the anger. Rama killed many 
demons and demonesses in the forest because of their 
evil qualities of lust and anger. Whoever one may be, 
whether a male or a female, if he or she has the evil 
qualities of lust and anger, they should be punished. 
Anger and lust are very bad for man. 


Love God. Adore Him and worship Him. He is your 


Respect, Honour And Make Your Mother Happy 75 


father, mother and everything. Have relationship only 
with God. God will never leave you. He is omnipresent. 
All the worldly people whom you love are like passing 
clouds. They come and go. But God comes and grows. 
Therefore, love God and have faith in Him. One who 
has love for God only is a true human being. (Here 
Swami called a boy from Iran, who is a student of Sri 
Sathya Sai Primary School and asked him to chant 
Vedic mantras.) See how beautifully this boy from Iran 
has chanted the Vedic mantras! He is a Mohammedan 
boy. In their country, people are not allowed even to 
utter the name of Rama in public. When you ask him 
his name, he will tell, “My name is Sathya.” (Here 
Swami asked this boy — “What is your name?” What 
is your parents name? Chant the Vedic mantras nicely 
and learn all Vedic mantras. Do you know Rig Veda?” 
The boy then recited Rudram and Sri Suktam with 
perfect intonation and pronunciation to the applause 
of the entire gathering.) 


Everything is there in the Vedas. The essence of 
all the religions like Hindu, Islam and Christianity is 
there in the Vedas. Even Christians sing the glory of 
God in the same manner. Even the Mohammedans 
extol the five elements and worship the god for wealth. 
Hence, God is one for all religions. God is one. There 
is difference only in names. Mohammedans offer prayers 
to God five times a day. Hindus also pray to God in the 
morning and evening. We should never say that the Veda 
is only for Hindus. Veda is for all. That which is one 


76 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


and universal is the Veda. Veda can alleviate all types 
of suffering of man. Hence, it is good for everyone to 
learn the Veda. Many people from America also come 
here and learn the Vedas. Many people in Russia and 
Germany also recite the Vedic mantras both in the 
morning and evening. Since, Hindus do not recite the 
Vedic mantras, they are forgetting them. Therefore, 
nobody should forget the Vedas. Veda and Vedanta are 
like your parents. We should always remember them 
and never forget them. Therefore, students, whatever 
you may study, you should never forget God. Only then 
can you attain peace. People say, “I want peace.” There 
can be no peace without bhajan. (Here Bhagawan sang 
the bhajan, “Hari Bhajana Bina ...” and continued His 
discourse.) 


Many people perform Yajnas and Yagas for the 
sake of peace. Where can you get peace from? It is 
within you only. It does not come from outside. What 
come from outside are only pieces, pieces, pieces! Peace 
comes from our heart only. You should do bhajans to 
attain peace. Only bhajan can give you peace. 


Easwaramma Day, 
Prasanthi Nilayam, 6-5-2008. 


7 


Namasmarana Is The Highest 
Spiritual Practice 


Embodiments of Divine Atma! 


ROM time immemorial, the Bharativas have 

been performing various spiritual practices like 
yajna, japa, tapa, dhyana, etc., to attain God. It has 
been their faith that one could attain God by undertaking 
such spiritual practices. But nobody knows about the 
sankalpa (will) of God who is omnipresent. 


God Is The Indweller In The Heart Of Man 


Sarvatah panipadam tat sarvathokshi siromukham, 
Sarvatah sruthimalloke sarvamavruthya tishthati (with 
hands, feet, eyes, head, mouth and ears pervading 
everything, God permeates the entire universe). God 
has innumerable mouths, ears, eyes, hands and feet. 
Wherever you look, God is present there. Such a Cosmic 
Being cannot be attained merely by undertaking spiritual 


78 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


practices by man. Nobody can say that God is this 
or that. Then, what is the nature of God? He is most 
subtle and universally present. Whomsoever you salute 
or ridicule, it reaches God. Ordinary mortals cannot 
understand such a subtle divine principle because of 
their own weakness. They seek satisfaction in earthly 
and worldly pleasures and have no yearning for ethical 
and spiritual attainments. All of them, from the most 
ordinary to the highly evolved individuals, undertake 
all types of rituals like Yajna or yaga merely for their 
satisfaction. But God can be attained only by ethical and 
spiritual endeavours. Desire to amass more and more 
money is increasing in all fields, more particularly in 
politics today. But this is sheer ignorance. So long as 
man is in the grip of this ignorance he cannot understand 
the principle of divinity. As long as your heart is filled 
with the feelings of ‘I’(pride) and ‘mine’ (attachment), 
you cannot realise God. Therefore, what is the first and 
foremost requirement to know God? Elimination of the 
feelings of ‘I’ and ‘mine’. 


Many people offer worship and perform yajnas to 
have the direct vision of God. But this is not possible 
for anyone by such means. Then, how can it be 
possible? All objects in Creation are bound to perish 
one day or the other. The mountains can sink in water 
and rivers can dry up. Human body is also perishable. 
Nothing in this Creation is permanent. Only God is 
eternal, immortal, infinite and imperceptible. How is 
it possible for anyone to understand such a Cosmic 


Namasmarana Is The Highest Spiritual Practice 79 


Being? Some people imagine that they had the vision 
of God in meditation or in the yajna fire. But this is 
merely their illusion; such a vision is not everlasting. 
But where does God dwell? He dwells in the heart of 
all in the form of Atmic principle. He has to be attained 
only by the principle of the Self. It is not proper to 
attribute various names and forms to Him. 


Divine Name Has Infinite Power 


When Rama reached the seashore to go to Lanka 
and bring Sita back after killing Ravana, many people 
felt that it was an impossible task because they thought 
Ravana was very wicked, fierce and powerful. Moreover, 
there was a vast sea to be crossed which was not 
possible. Rama suggested that a bridge across the sea be 
built. Hanuman, Jambavan and other monkeys asserted 
that the bridge could be constructed in no time. Agreeing 
to their suggestion, Rama commanded them to start 
constructing the bridge. The monkeys then brought big 
boulders and parts of mountains from various quarters 
and started throwing them into the sea, but they all 
sank in sea water. How could the bridge be made in 
this way? It could not be made unless the rocks and 
boulders settled at one place. So, what could be done 
for that? Perceiving the difficult situation, Lakshmana 
said to Rama, “Dear elder brother, everything in this 
world is perishable and bound to sink. But there is 
one thing that does not perish or sink. And that is 
Your Name. Your Name is everlasting, ever true and 
ever abiding. It is indestructible. The bridge should be 


80 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


constructed on the foundation of Your Name.” Rama 
commended Lakshmana by patting his back and said, 
“Lakshmana,you have suggested the correct method.” 
Hearing this, Hanuman said to Rama, “Swami, I can 
do this work.” 


Now the monkeys started bringing the rocks and 
Hanuman told them to write the word ‘Rama’ on each 
boulder. The boulders with the Name ‘Rama’ written on 
them did not sink in water, but started drifting away. 
Then Hanuman told them that they should write the letter 
‘Ra’ on one boulder and ‘ma’ on the other. The monkeys 
did as commanded and threw the two boulders together 
in to the sea with devotion and steadfast faith. The 
waves of the ocean brought the two boulders together 
to make the word ‘Rama’. In this way, the bridge was 
constructed. No rock did ever sink and such a long 
bridge was constructed in a short time. What was the 
foundation of the rocks and boulders? It was Rama’s 
Name. Since all of them bore the two letters ‘Ra’ and 
‘ma’ which constituted the Name Rama, they floated on 
water. As soon as the bridge was constructed, Rama, 
Lakshmana, Hanuman and the entire army crossed over 
and reached Lanka in no time. Vibhishana also said, 
“Oh Rama! Everything can be achieved by the power of 
Your Name. Your Name of just two letters has enabled 
the monkeys to build such a long bridge.” The war with 
Ravana resulted in his death and the release of Sita 
from his prison. Thus, it is the Name of Rama that is 
most powerful and eternal. The form will sink at any 


Namasmarana Is The Highest Spiritual Practice 81 


time, at any place and under any condition. But the 
Name will not sink and will save you wherever you 
are. In this way, Rama taught that the Name is ever 
true and eternal. None can ever damage or destroy it, 
nor can anyone take it away from you. 


The war with Ravana could be won on the strength 
and power of the Name. It is, therefore, enough if you 
chant Rama’s Name. Then you will be victorious in all 
your endeavours. Like the Name of Rama, the Names 
of Krishna, Siva, Hari and Hara are also constituted by 
two letters. Make any Name of God as the basis of your 
life, then you can achieve everything. Name is eternal 
but form is ephemeral; the form has old age and death. 
Therefore, it is the Name that is most important. This 
is what Rama has taught mankind. Therefore, chant 
the Name of God constantly. Other spiritual practices 
like charity, yajna, worship, etc., are of little use if 
you do not chant the Divine Name. The Bharatiyas 
have been practising nine modes of worship of God, 
namely, listening, singing, contemplating on Vishnu, 
serving His Lotus Feet, salutation, worship, servitude, 
friendship and self-surrender. 


The last and highest step in these modes of worship 
is self-surrender. Surrender does not mean offering your 
body to God. Real surrender is the chanting of the 
Divine Name and making it the basis of your life. It 
is for the same reason that Guru Nanak, the first Guru 
of the Sikhs, started community singing. He told his 
followers that they should seek fulfilment in life by 


82 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


chanting the Divine Name. Therefore, all Sikhs give 
highest priority to chanting of the Divine Name in their 
life. In the Golden Temple at Amritsar, the holy place 
of the Sikhs, the Divine Name is chanted constantly. 
Therefore, consider the chanting of the Name of God 
as the most important spiritual practice. 


You may spend any amount of money in charity 
and in doing acts of service, but these practices will 
give you only temporary mental satisfaction if not 
associated with the chanting of the Divine Name. 
You see how people give useless advertisements in 
newspapers with the desire to earn money. Money 
comes and goes, morality comes and grows. Therefore, 
develop morality. This gives you purity of mind. You do 
Laksharchana or Kotyarchana (reciting one lakh or one 
crore times the Name of God), and wait for the fruit of 
this spiritual practice. But this turns out to be a futile 
wait; you never get the expected result because you 
perform that as a mere ritual. What you get is temporary 
satisfaction. There are many rich people who spend 
any amount of money in the performance of yajnas 
and yagas, but when a beggar comes to their door for 
alms, they withdraw their hand. This is not correct. God 
cannot be attained by money. It is God who has given 
you all your money. Then why do you give it back to 
Him? Utilise your money on your worldly and spiritual 
pursuits. Also use it to help poor people. However, you 
can attain Me only through Namasmarana. Therefore, 
chant the Divine Name and attain the Divine. It is 


Namasmarana Is The Highest Spiritual Practice 83 


only by chanting the Divine Name that you can easily 
attain God. When Draupadi was being humiliated in 
the Kaurava court, she prayed to Krishna to protect 
her and called out His many names like Dwarakavasi, 
Brindavana Sanchari (dweller of Dwaraka, rambler of 
Brindavan, etc. Krishna did not come. Then she called 
out describing His attributes like Dayamaya, Kripamaya 
(embodiment of kindness, embodiment of compassion), 
etc. Still Krishna did not come to her rescue. But when 
she addressed Him as Hridayavasi (in dweller in her 
heart), He manifested before her that very moment. 
Where does God live? He lives in your heart. 
Therefore, there is no use calling Him 
with the feeling that He dwells somewhere outside. 


Form Is Perishable But Name Is Eternal 


It is possible for you to acquire any number of 
worldly and material things but you are not able to attain 
God who is right within you. See God who is immanent 
in you. Look inside, don’t look outside. Close your eyes 
and pray to God who dwells in you. Then only will 
God manifest before you and grant you everything. It is 
only by chanting the Divine Name that you can receive 
God’s grace and His direct vision. Nagar sankirtan has 
been devised to spread Namasmarana (chanting of the 
Divine Name) among people more and more. While 
chanting the name of God in Nagar sankirtan, do not 
extol on the attributes of God. There is no use extolling 
the attributes of God any number of times. God is the 
embodiment of the Atma. The Atma is attributeless. The 
names such as Krishna, Rama or Sai Baba, etc., are the 


84 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


names of the bodies of the avatars. The avatars were 
not born with these names. Names were given to them 
by others. It is the body that has birth, not the Atma. 
Death can come to the body at any time. When you 
ask God His name, He will reply, “Aham Brahmasmi 
(I am Brahman).” He will not say, “I am this or that 
form.” Aham (1) has no particular form; it connotes 
the Atma. We give many names to the Atma and seek 
satisfaction by calling out these names. Not only that, 
we clamour so much for this temporary satisfaction. 
This satisfaction is not permanent; it is ephemeral and 
lasts only for a short time. It is only the Atma that is 
ever true, everlasting and eternal. 


Rama incarnated thousands of years ago. But 
His Name lives even today. Even now, when we are 
faced with any difficulty, we say, “Ayyo Rama!” It is 
the Name that is eternal and not the form. Therefore, 
contemplate on the Name of God, have His direct 
realisation, install Him in your heart and merge with 
Him. Many rivers like Cauveri, Ganga, Yamuna and 
Saraswati flow in India. When there is an earthquake, 
thousands of houses are destroyed. When the rivers are 
in flood, several villages are washed away and many 
lives are lost. Hence, forms are not permanent; forms 
are ephemeral and perishable. But formless Ganga and 
Yamuna are flowing within you in the form of Soham 
‘So’ in the right nerve channel and ‘Hum’ in the left, 
both joining the central nerve channel Sushumna. By 
activating this subtle channel Sushumna, you should 


Namasmarana Is The Highest Spiritual Practice 85 


reach your spiritual heart. Many of you know, when 
people go to a temple, they close their eyes and offer 
their salutations to the idol of the deity installed there. 
Don’t you go there to have the Darshan of the deity? 
Then, why do you close your eyes on reaching there? 
You do not look at the idol of the deity in the temple, 
while you keep chanting ‘Rama, Rama, Rama’ within 
you. 


Perform All Actions To Please God 


Similarly, when you go to Tirupati, you stand 
before the idol and chant ‘Venkateswara, Venkateswara, 
Venkateswara’. You pay a fee to enter the temple and 
have the Darshan of the deity. In spite of that, you 
close your eyes when you are in front of the idol. 
Develop this inner vision if you want to have the grace 
of God. Do you know why has God given you eyes? 
Not to see anything and everything, but to see the Lord 
of Kailasa. Why has God given you hands? Has God 
given you hands only to take food into your mouth? 
No, no. God has given you hands to serve mankind. 
Similarly, God has given you tongue to chant the name 
of God. Do you know why has God given you feet? 
Not to roam about in all the countries of the world, 
but to go round the temple of God. That is how you 
should sanctify the organs of the body given to you 
by God. You say, you do Seva (service). But do you 
know the meaning of Seva? Is it to massage the feet of 
somebody with your hands? No, no. When you serve 
anyone, develop the feeling ‘I am serving Rama’, ‘I 


86 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


am serving Krishna’, ‘I am serving my deity’. Develop 
such feelings in your heart more and more. Whatever 
you eat, whatever you do, everything should be done 
with the feeling of offering it to God. Perform all tasks 
to please God. Whatever work you do, consider it as 
the work of God. When you develop this feeling with 
total dedication, then God will manifest before you. 


Fill your mind with the name of God. If you fill 
your mind with the name of God, you will experience 
immense bliss. Bhajans have been devised to fill your 
mind with Divine Name. “Hari bhajan bina sukha 
santi nahin ...”’ (There can be no happiness and peace 
without chanting the name of God). It is enough if you 
adhere to Divine Name. Then you do not need to offer 
any other material like flowers, food, etc., to God. God 
does not need your flowers which if you offer in the 
morning will dry up in the evening. You offer food 
to God. You place it before the deity and then eat it 
yourself! Why do you do this drama of offering food to 
God? Instead, offer your love to God. That is the food 
of God. It is love that is most important. Love has no 
form. Sathya, Dharma, Santi, Prema and Ahimsa are 
the gifts of God to man. Sathya has no form. The name 
‘Sathya’ has been given to this body, but Sathya (truth) 
is formless. Truth is eternal. It does not undergo any 
change in the three periods of time past, present and 
future. Sathyannasti paro Dharma (there is no Dharma 
greater than adherence to truth). Dharma originates from 
Sathya only. Where there is truth, there is Dharma. 


Namasmarana Is The Highest Spiritual Practice 87 


Where there is no truth, Dharma also does not abide 
there. When there is Sathya in your heart, you would 
be endowed with Dharma. When you have Sathya 
and Dharma, peace will descend on you and you will 
experience supreme peace. You say, you try to attain 
peace and pray for it. Where is peace available? Is it 
available in a shop or in a marketplace? No, no. It has 
to come to you from you only. It is, in fact, present 
in you. When you have peace, love will shine in you. 
The evil qualities of anger, hatred, jealousy, hypocrisy 
and ostentation cannot even come near a person who 
is endowed with love. 


Speak Truth Under All Circumstances 


Love has no form of its own. Whatever you 
desire, you start loving it. Have love and give love to 
all. Do not hate anyone. Where jealousy and hatred 
are not there, conflicts cannot exist. The students sing 
the song: Sathya Dharmamu, Santi, Premalato Nee 
Nitya Jivana Yatra Saginchu (perform the journey of 
your life with truth, righteousness, peace and love as 
your companions). Therefore, first and foremost, you 
should develop truth. You should speak truth under all 
circumstances. Do not tell a lie to escape from blame. 
You can escape from blame temporarily by telling a lie, 
but your heart will be devoid of peace forever. When 
you do not have truth, how can you get righteousness? 
Therefore, first of all protect truth. Truth is God. There 
are no two truths; truth is only one. God is truth. 
Therefore, always protect truth. Whatever you do, tell it 


88 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


truthfully. If you give room to evil qualities like anger, 
hypocrisy, jealousy, etc., then you are bound to ruin 
yourself. When your heart is bereft of truth, you cannot 
do anything good. When you truthfully tell someone, “I 
have bought this article for three rupees and will give 
you for five rupees,” you earn a profit of two rupees. 
But if you demand ten rupees for the same article by 
telling a lie just to earn more profit, you will be inviting 
many more untruths.This is the main reason why man 
today has become the victim of so many miseries. Do 
not tell lies. Do not burden yourself with the load of 
sins by telling lies. Do not tell lies to earn more profit. 
You will have to undergo so much suffering due to this. 
Lead your life with love. Whomsoever you address, 
speak to him with love. When you thus lead your life 
with love, you will attain everything. 


Embodiments of Love! 


There is love in everyone of you. But you do not 
make proper use of it. Rather, you put your love to 
misuse. How far can a person go if he walks on his 
head instead of his feet? God has given you feet for 
walking. Similarly, God has given you tongue to speak 
truth. Speaking untruth is like walking on your head. 
How long can you go like that? God has given you head 
to make proper use of it and think: “What is good and 
what is bad? What is truth and what is untruth?” While 
saying or doing anything, first think whether what you 
are saying is true or untrue, and what you are doing is 


Namasmarana Is The Highest Spiritual Practice 89 


right or wrong. After due consideration, take only to 
the path of truth. Conduct yourself in accordance with 
God’s command. Speak only that which is truthful. Truth 
is the other name of God. Constantly chant the name 
of God. There is no use spending money aimlessly on 
rituals and worship. Instead, give food to the hungry 
and clothes to the needy. Do as much as you can. But 
never do anything by forsaking the name of God. If you 
give alms to a beggar, chant the name of Rama while 
giving alms. Chant silently in your mind; there is no 
need to chant loudly. Mind is the foundation of your life. 
Manah eva manushyanam karanam bandhamokshayo 
(mind is the cause of bondage and liberation of man). 
Whatever your mind may forget, it should not forget 
the name of God. 


Give Up All Demonic Qualities 


It is by the power of His Name that Rama crossed 
the ocean and reached Lanka. Hence, we should cross 
the ocean of our difficulties and troubles by using the 
power of the divine name. Only Name is enough to 
root out all our anxieties, troubles, sorrows, miseries, 
worries and maladies. Lust, anger, jealousy, envy and 
hypocrisy were the qualities of the demons who lived 
in Lanka. Do not give room to these demonic qualities 
in your heart. If you allow the demon of anger to abide 
in you, that itself is enough to turn everything bad in 
your life. No work of an angry man becomes fruitful. 
Anger distances even your relatives and friends from 


90 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


you. Therefore, do not allow anger to come near you. 
Lead your life, chanting within you constantly the name 
of God who is the embodiment of peace and love. 


When all individuals develop peace in them, then 
the entire country will become good and peaceful. Those 
who aspire for the welfare of the country should live 
always in love. Lead your life without causing any harm 
to anybody. We sing this prayer after the conclusion of 
Bhajans: Loka samasta sukhino bhavantu (may all the 
people of the world be happy!). Remember God with 
love. The entire world will be good by the power of 
love. Devotees should never do away with love. Even 
if others criticise, abuse or beat you, you should lead 
your life with love. Live in love. Love lives by giving 
and forgiving, self lives by getting and forgetting 
(loud applause). Fill your life with love. Even if 
someone beats you, do not abuse him. Think that it is 
God only who has punished you like this. Everything 
happens according to what God wills. It is God who 
gives you troubles and joys; it is He who protects you 
and punishes you in many ways. Everything is God. 
Therefore, offer everything to Him. Whatever you 
get in your life, consider it as the gift of God. Do all 
actions to please God. When you think like this, then 
you will attain great blessedness. If He could make 
boulders to float on water, can He not make your 
mind float in the ocean of Samsara? Cross the ocean 
of Samsara by converting the mind into a bridge. Use 
it to cross that vast ocean and kill the demons of lust 


Namasmarana Is The Highest Spiritual Practice 91 


and anger. For this, you must do Bhajan and sing the 
glories of God. Bhajan is very necessary to realise the 
glory of the divine name. When so many people do 
Bhajan together, the prayer from the heart of at least 
one or two will reach God. Won’t even one person 
among so many have a sacred heart? Hence, there is 
a great possibility of your melting the heart of God by 
community singing. Bhajan is very necessary to melt 
the heart of God. When you do Nagar sankirtan early 
in the morning, everybody will get up and listen to 
the Divine Name. Hearing the name of God as soon 
as they wake up will fill them with great bliss and 
enthusiasm. Therefore, constantly remember the name 
of God; never forget it. This is the most noble path. 
This is true spiritual practice. When you do this, you 
will be immensely blessed. 


Divine Discourse, Brindavan, 24-5-2008. 


People talk about Swami’ vibhuti (sacred 
ash) and Swami’s miracles. But the real miracle 
is Swami’ boundless love. It is this love which is 


inspiring countless devotees to engage themselves 
in selfless service. 


Sri Sathya Sai Baba 





92 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


Students must have challenging attitude 
towards things; they must honour physical labour. 
They should be eager to be of service to those who 
need it on account of their disabilities. Honour 
also your elders and do not miss any chance of 
serving, honouring or pleasing them. 


Whatever gives you health, joy, welcome it; 
but do not lower yourself by indulging in vulgar 
pastimes. Do not wander aimlessly in the streets 
or frequent cinema-halls and mix with undesirable 
company, or cultivate bad habits just for sake of 


fun. 


This country has to be raised to great heights 
through you, not through its present leaders, 
remember...You boys must say to yourselves, “ 
We shall not belie our words in our actions. We 
will act together in harmony and love.” If you 
develop such virtues, the nation will prosper; if 
not, it will be ruined. Have this warning always 
ringing in your ears. 


Sri Sathya Sai Baba 





8 


Seeing Unity In Diversity Is True 
Spirituality 


All names and forms are the manifestations 
of the Supreme Being who is the embodiment 
of peace and auspiciousness. He is Existence, 
Knowledge, Bliss Absolute and non-dual. He is 
Sathyam, Sivam, Sundaram (Truth, Goodness, 
Beauty). 

(Sanskrit verse) 


Embodiments of Divine Atma! 


EOPLE today acquire many types of education 

in this world but they lack the knowledge of 
humanness. They see diversity in unity but cannot see 
unity in diversity. Embodiments of love! It is very easy 
to see diversity in unity; anyone can do that. But it 
requires a lot of effort to recognise unity underlying 
the entire diversity that exists in this world. 


94 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


Recognise The Divine Principle Present In All 


Man today should try to acquire the knowledge 
of the Atmic principle that is uniformly present in 
all. One who knows the principle of the Atma knows 
everything. Consider all human beings in this world as 
one and recognise the oneness of the entire mankind. 


Religions are many but goal is one. 
Clothes are many but yarn is one. 
Jewels are many but gold is one. 
Cows are many but milk is one. 


There is unity in the entire creation of God, but 
man causes many divisions in it. Unity of the entire 
mankind is the need of the hour. When you develop 
unity, there will be purity in your heart. Where there 
is purity, there is divinity. Unity, purity, divinity 
are closely interlinked and interdependent. But man 
today is drifting away from unity. I have been telling, 
“Religions are many, but goal is one.” So many people 
have gathered in this hall. Though they took different 
routes to come here, the destination for all of them was 
the same. In the same way, all have to reach one God. 
Divinity is immanent in every human being. Human 
life is not possible without divinity. Daivam manusha 
rupena (God is in the form of a human being). Who 
is a human being? Without understanding the meaning 
of this term, people consider someone as a human 
being who is endowed with human form, with hands, 
feet, ears, eyes, etc., like a human being. But it is not 


Seeing Unity In Diversity Is True Spirituality 95 


so. In fact, man is not different from God. He is not 
a separate entity. One who realises his oneness with 
God is a true human being. There may be differences 
in physical forms of human beings, but the same divine 
principle is present in all. However, some people cause 
differences between man and man by various ways. 
This is the cause of all types of conflicts, sorrows and 
miseries in the world today. When man understands 
the truth that the same divine principle is present in 
all, there will be no room for differences and troubles. 
Therefore, we should always focus on the divinity of 
man. All our difficulties arise when we multiply our 
differences, forgetting our divinity. Therefore, we should 
firmly install the divine principle in our heart which is 
the same in everyone. 


You Can Accomplish Everything By Chanting 
The Divine Name 


I told you a few days ago, how Hanuman crossed 
the ocean and reached Lanka by the power of the divine 
name of Rama. Before this, all the Vanaras gathered on 
the seashore were asked the question, “Who can cross 
the ocean in one leap?” Some of them said they could 
cover a distance of 40 Yojanas (leagues); others said 
they could go up to a distance of 50 or 60 Yojanas. But 
when the same question was put to Hanuman, he said, 
“By the grace of Rama, I can cover any distance.” While 
others had a limited understanding of Rama’s divinity, 
Hanuman alone had the total perception of the reality. 
It is not the spiritual practices like japa, tapa, yoga and 
yajna that give us the direct perception of God. Many 


96 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


people have been undertaking these practices. But, 
what have they experienced and achieved? These are 
merely physical and external practices. It is the name 
of God that is most important. When you know this 
truth, you will know everything. That is why I keep on 
telling you from time to time “Hari bhajan bina sukhas 
santi nahin ...”’ (There can be no happiness and peace 
without chanting the name of God). You can accomplish 
everything by chanting the name of God alone. Hanuman 
crossed the vast ocean by constantly chanting the name 
of Rama. But other Vanaras misunderstood this truth. 


At the time of construction of the bridge over the 
ocean also, Hanuman told the Vanaras to write ‘Ra’ 
on one stone and ‘ma’ on the other and throw them in 
the ocean. Then the stones would join together to form 
the bridge. Rama, Lakshmana and the Vanaras crossed 
the ocean and reached Lanka by walking on this bridge 
constructed on the principle of unity of the divine name 
of Rama. We should treasure this truth in our heart. 
Instead of observing differences on the basis of names 
like Ramanna, Lakshmanna, Bhimanna, etc., we should 
recognise the Atmic principle in them and consider all 
as the embodiments of divinity. Spiritual practices like 
Japa, dhyana, yajna and yoga have little significance if 
divine name is absent in your heart. You have a name 
which has been given to you by your parents after 
your birth; you were not born with this name. What 
you are born with is the principle of Rama. That is the 
Atma. Call it Atma, call it Omkara, call it Rama, all 


Seeing Unity In Diversity Is True Spirituality 97 


refer to the same divine principle. Even if you come 
across your enemy, offer your salutations to him. Your 
salutations do not go to your enemy, they reach God. 
When you greet him lovingly saying “hello”, he will 
also give up hatred and become friendly with you. But 
people today out of their ego identify themselves with 
their names. They consider themselves as Ramaiah, 
Krishnaiah, etc., instead of saying Aham Brahmasmi 
(I am Brahman). This is the root cause of all our 
differences. The name that is universally present in all 
is the name of Rama. When you offer your salutations 
to others while contemplating on Rama, your salutations 
will reach Rama. Therefore, do all actions to please 
God. All our daily chores like cooking, eating, etc., are 
suffused with the principle of Rama. People undertake 
worldly, external and physical practices because they 
do not understand this subtle truth. 


Ego And Attachment Are The Cause Of Man’s 
Bondage 


All the developments in science are only at worldly 
and physical level. Scientists have developed aeroplanes 
which can fly at a high speed and cover hundreds of 
miles in a minute. But they expose man to all sorts 
of dangers. All the worldly things are bound to perish 
one day or the other. A potter makes many pots. But 
if they slip from our hand, they break into pieces. 


There is no greatness in all that we do for our 
individual benefit; whatever we do should be beneficial 


98 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


to society and community. Our welfare lies in the welfare 
of the society. But today nobody thinks about society. 
Wherever we go, we find selfishness and self-interest 
rampant. That is why there are so many conflicts and 
differences in the world. There are divisions even in 
one family. Due to the increase of differences among 
people, unity has been shattered. Therefore, we should 
strive for unity. You and your neighbour are one. There 
is difference only in your names, but divinity immanent 
in both of you is the same. There is no mistake in calling 
people by different names when the divine principle 
of unity is firmly embedded in your heart. Perform 
your grihasta dharma (duty as a householder). This is 
your worldly duty. But you must recognise your daiva 
dharma (duty as a divine being) which is universal. 
That is why I address you as ‘Divyatma Swarupulara’ 
(Embodiments of Divine Atma). When somebody wants 
to say what he is saying is absolutely true, he would 
use the term ‘Atma sakshi’ meaning Atma is his witness. 
Therefore, we should conduct ourselves recognising the 
principle of Atma. 


Unity of the world today has been destroyed due 
to the abnormal increase in the differences of people. 
Therefore, we should not observe differences on the 
basis of names and forms. We should develop faith in 
the Atmic principle. Atma is only one. It is indivisible 
and cannot be broken into pieces. Only the body dies, 
but the Atma lives forever. It is said that every human 
being undergoes the cycle of birth and death. But it is 


Seeing Unity In Diversity Is True Spirituality 99 


only the human body that takes birth, grows and dies, 
not the Atma. Therefore, know the oneness of the Atmic 
principle. Let people say anything, you should recognise 
that your Atma is your witness. Do not give up this 
divine principle under any circumstances. Whatever 
you do, do it for the sake of Atma. Whatever delicious 
items of food you eat, consider them as an offering to 
God. Whatever you do in life, do it with the feeling of 
offering it to God. Sarva karma bhagavad preetyartham 
(do all actions to please God). When you have such 
sacred feelings, you can attain liberation easily. 


One can attain moksha (liberation) only when 
one gives up moha (worldly attachment). The feeling 
of ‘I’ is the cause of ego and that of ‘mine’ is the 
basis of attachment. Ego and attachment are the cause 
of your bondage. Therefore, first and foremost you 
should try to get rid of ego and attachment. As much 
as you reduce these two, that much closer you will 
go to liberation. Less luggage more comfort makes 
travel a pleasure. Man should reduce the burden of his 
desires. But man, on the other hand, keeps on adding 
to the burden of desires as he grows. As his desires 
increase, humanness in man decreases and he loses the 
awareness of his divinity. Therefore, we should develop 
divinity in us. Everything else is bound to perish one 
day or the other. Howsoever safe and secure we may 
keep our possessions, ultimately we have to lose them. 
We may deposit all our money in a big bank, put it 
under lock and key and arrange proper security for it. 


100 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


In spite of all that, we are bound to lose it some time 
or the other. We should not have temptation for things 
which are perishable. What remains with us forever at 
all places is the principle of the Atma. 


Develop The Spirit Of Unity 


Though thousands of years have passed since Rama 
incarnated as the son of Dasaratha, all people, from a 
child to an old man, even today chant His name. People 
say, ‘Rama, Rama’ when they encounter any difficulty. 
This sacred name is whispered into the ears of a dying 
man. It is the name of Rama that you should love and 
nothing else. As He attracted everyone, He was given 
the name ‘Rama’. You may chant any name of God, 
but you should have firm faith that the Atma within 
you is the divine principle. Then you will not have 
any difficulties. We accumulate so much money. But 
for whom? Can we carry even a paisa with us when 
we depart from this world? No, no. We leave even our 
body here. The mind may waver and the intellect may 
be clouded, but the Atma remains as the eternal witness. 
That is the principle of Rama. The name Rama does 
not denote any particular form. It denotes the divine 
principle. Therefore, always chant the divine name, 
be it Rama, Krishna or any other name. Siva means 
auspiciousness. It is only the name of God which 
imparts auspiciousness to us. We may say Srinivasa, 
Venkatesa, Rama, etc. All these denote the same divine 
principle. Install this divine principle in your heart. 
People chant ‘Ram, Ram, Ram’ and perform japa. When 


Seeing Unity In Diversity Is True Spirituality 101 


the japa comes to an end, Rama is also forgotten. But 
we should never forget Rama. Whatever work we may 
be doing, we should constantly chant the divine name. 
In Kali Yuga, namasmarana is prescribed as the means 
to attain liberation. Realising this truth, Guru Nanak 
started the practice of community singing. All should 
come together and sing bhajans. The mind of some 
may go to other directions. But at least a few of them 
will focus it on God’s name. Therefore, when you do 
Bhajans in a group, the prayers of at least one or two 
may reach God which will benefit all. Do we eat all 
the fruits that ripen on a tree? No. We eat only a few 
and distribute the rest to others. We prepare payasam 
(sweet pudding) in our house. All the family members 
partake of it; one who prepares it does not consume 
the whole lot. 


When Dasaratha performed Putrakameshti Yajna 
(sacrifice for the birth of a son), an effulgent being 
emerged from the yajna fire and gave him a vessel of 
payasam for distributing it to his three wives, Kausalya, 
Sumitra and Kaikeyi. (Here Swami narrated the story of 
the birth of Rama, Lakshmana, Bharata and Satrughna 
and revealed the mystery why Lakshmana always 
followed Rama and Satrughna followed Bharata). 


There was such a strong bond of love between 
Rama and Lakshmana as well as between Bharata and 
Satrughna that they never left the company of each 


102 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


other. See, how much power this unity holds! Union 
is strength. When you don’t talk to each other and 
develop enmity, you achieve nothing. Even if some 
feelings of enmity arise in you, you should try to adjust 
with each other. Devotees should conduct themselves 
gracefully with proper understanding and adjustment. 
Even if someone criticises the deity you worship, do 
not react to that criticism. Rather, you should think that 
it is your deity only who has assumed the form of the 
critic. Praise and censure make no difference to God. 
You should always love all. When you love everyone 
in this manner, all evil qualities like hatred, anger and 
greed will leave you. When you become free from these 
evil qualities, you will attain liberation easily. You claim 
that you are a devotee, but what is the use when you 
have hatred, anger, jealousy, hypocrisy, malice, etc., 
in you? These evil qualities will ruin your life. Talk 
smilingly to others and develop the spirit of unity. 


So many people have come here. All of them 
have participated in Bhajans. But, how many have 
true devotion in their heart? Even if there are ten 
people with true devotion, it is enough. All of you 
should imbibe the spirit of unity. Whomsoever you 
come across, say, “He is my brother, she is my sister.” 
In this way, consider all as your brothers and sisters 
and conduct yourself with unity. All are the children 
of God. Therefore, if at any time feelings of hatred 
develop between you and others, remind yourself that 
you are not separate from them. Consider that all are 
one, attain unity and experience its bliss. Seeing unity 


Seeing Unity In Diversity Is True Spirituality 103 


in diversity is divinity and true spirituality. Study of 
scriptures, performing rituals, doing worship, etc., do 
not signify true spirituality. Recognising the unity of 
the Atmic principle is true spirituality. When you realise 
this unity, you will earn divine grace. You are always 
chanting, ‘Sai Ram’, ‘Sai Ram’, ‘Sai Ram’, but this 
alone will not develop devotion in you. You should 
imbibe the spirit of unity and chant the divine name 
to develop true devotion. If you have even a trace of 
true devotion in you, you should do good to others 
and live in harmony with them. Do not hate anyone. 
Love all. If you have love and faith, you will develop 
non-violence. Then only can you experience bliss. 


Unity Of Human Race Is Imminent 


What is the real purpose of telling you to develop 
truth, righteousness, peace and love? Righteousness 
emerges from truth. Sathyannasti paro Dharma (There 
is no Dharma greater than adherence to truth). Without 
truth, there can be no righteousness. Similarly, love 
cannot exist without righteousness. If you have love, you 
will not hate or disrespect anybody. Sathya, Dharma, 
Santi and Prema are the primary human qualities. Anger, 
jealousy, malice, hypocrisy, lust, hatred and 
greed are not human qualities. If you have love and 
peace, all other virtues will develop in you automatically. 


People keep on repeating, “I want peace, I want 
peace.” Can anybody get peace by this type of constant 
repetition? No, not at all. You can have peace only when 


104 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


you develop love. Peace is not a commodity that you 
can buy in the market. It comes from the heart which 
is filled with love. Where does love come from? Love 
comes from righteousness and righteousness comes 
from truth. Hence, truth is the source of righteousness, 
righteousness is the source of love and love is the 
source of peace. Where there are both peace and love, 
non-violence comes there on its own. Therefore, truth, 
righteousness, peace, love and non-violence are the 
qualities of a true human being. Consider them as your 
Pancha Pranas (five life-breaths). Man has forgotten 
today these five life-breaths of human qualities. Instead 
he is harbouring evil qualities like lust, anger, etc., 
considering them as his life-breaths. That is why he is 
enmeshed in so many difficulties. When you develop 
human qualities, you will surely attain peace. Therefore, 
man should preserve his innate human qualities like 
his five life-breaths. He should keep away from evil 
qualities like lust, anger, etc. 


Believe it or not, in the next 25 to 30 years, 
the entire human race will become one. People of all 
religions like Hindu, Muslim, Christian, etc., will be 
united. There will be complete unity in the world. It 
is from Bharat that the spirit of devotion for God will 
spread to all other parts of the world. Treasure this 
truth in your heart. People consider culture as a way of 
life. No, no, it is not so. Unity of all is culture; purity 
is culture. You will realise divinity when you burn all 
your impurities. When you develop love, all your evil 


Seeing Unity In Diversity Is True Spirituality 105 


qualities like hatred, etc., will wither away. 


People develop hatred and jealousy against those 
who excel them, saying, “How much money he has 
accumulated! What a high position he has attained!” 
They hate those who have greater achievements. 
This is not good. If someone has achieved more 
than you, you should consider that 
itis your own = incapability which is the cause of your 
lesser achievement. You should expand your love and 
broaden your heart.Then you will succeed in achieving 
more. Victory and defeat depend on the feelings of your 
heart. It is with reference to this that the Vedas declare, 
Manah eva manushyanam karanam bandhamokshayo 
(mind is the cause of bondage and liberation of man). 
Our mind is the root cause of our feelings of love or 
hatred. Whatever work we do, we should do it with the 
spirit of unity. Perform all your actions to please God. 
That will surely lead to universal good. After Bhajan, 
we all chant, Samasta Lokah Sukhino Bhavantu (May 
all the beings of all the worlds be happy!) What is the 
great achievement if you alone are happy? All should be 
happy. Your happiness lies in the happiness of all, your 
well-being lies in the well-being of all. You cannot be 
happy when others are not happy. Therefore, you should 
pray for the welfare of all, including small creatures 
and insects. This is the real meaning of unity. Only the 
heart that desires the well-being of all is dear to God. 


All that I have said today is profound truth. 
This is the essence of devotion. What does devotion 


106 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


mean? It is not a big ocean. It is an ocean of bliss. 
That is what is described as Nityanandam, Parama 
Sukhadam, Kevalam Jnanamurtim, Dwandwateetam, 
Gagana Sadrisham, Tattwamasyadi Lakshyam, Ekam, 
Nityam, Vimalam, Achalam, Sarvadhee Sakshibhutam, 
Bhavateetam, Trigunarahitam (God is the embodiment 
of eternal bliss, wisdom absolute, beyond the pair of 
opposites, expansive and pervasive like the sky, the 
goal indicated by the Mahavakya That Thou Art, one 
without a second, eternal, pure, unchanging, witness 
of all functions of the intellect, beyond all mental 
conditions and the three attributes of satwa, rajas and 
tamas). We should attain this eternal bliss. 


Divine Discourse, Brindavan, 31-5-2008, 


Do not postpone the cultivation of devotion to God. 
Start serving God through service to fellow-beings. 
Every act of service, however small, is service to 
the Divine. Demonstrate, by reverential behaviour, 


selfless service, truthfulness and integrity, that you 
are pursuing the ideals for which the Sathya Sai 
Educational institutions stand. 

Sri Sathya Sai Baba 





9 


Undertake Rama Chintana 


Embodiments of Love! 


HE Ramayana Saptaha (seven day chanting 

of the divine name ‘Rama’) has been conducted 
with great joy and devotion during the last seven days. 
You have all participated in this great event. The purohits 
(priests) who conducted the Saptaha with great devotion 
and sincerity and the speakers from different parts who 
participated in it made the event a grand success. Setty 
garu who arranged this function had made several 
conveniences for the priests and devotees and made 
every one happy. 


Group Singing Of Ramanama Is More Effective 


Constant contemplation on Ramanama and singing 
of the glory of the divine name ‘Rama’ confers bliss, 
peace and prosperity on one and all. There are two 


108 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


ways of contemplating on the divine name and singing 
its glory — the individual sadhana and the collective 
sadhana. Of the two, the collective sadhana is better. 
It was Guru Nanak who had initiated the practice 
of group singing of the glory of the divine name. In 
fact the individual chanting of the divine name is not 
enough. If thousands of people join together and sing 
the glory of the divine name in one voice, the prayers 
of atleast one or two individuals will certainly move 
Divinity. Hence, it is better to follow the collective 
method. Wherever you are, sing the glory of the divine 
name of Rama in a group. Contemplation on Ramanama 
confers peace and happiness. It is a universal sadhana. 


The name ‘Rama’ is not limited to a particular 
form. It dwells in every individual as ‘Atma Rama’. 
The atma which dwells in every individual is given the 
name ‘Rama’. Hence, right from a child to a grown 
up individual, everyone has to undertake the sadhana 
of constant contemplation of Ramanama. We often 
see even blind people contemplating on Ramanama, 
saying ‘Rama Rama’. It is only the divine name that 
can confer peace and happiness. Nothing else, not even 
wealth and property, can bring happiness and peace. 
Constant contemplation on the divine name can remove 
all worries. 


“To be born is a worry 
To live on this earth is a worry 
The world is a source of worry 


Undertake Rama Chintana 109 


Death too is a worry, 

All actions and difficulties cause worry, 
Devotion to Sri Rama is the panacea for all 
worries” (Telugu poem) 


Hence, undertake Ramachintana (contemplation on 
the divine name of Rama), whenever you find yourself 
surrounded by worries. The Ramanama has been in the 
hearts of people since aeons. 


The Story of Rama’s Birth 


In Treta Yuga, King Dasaratha of Ayodhya 
longed for sons to continue the Ikshwaku dynasty. 
He performed a yajna called ‘Puthrakameshtivaga’ 
praying that he be blessed with a son. King Dasaratha 
had three wives — Kausalya, Sumitra and Kaikeyi. 
He had one daughter named Santa through Kausalya 
earlier, whom he gave in adoption to his friend. She 
married Sage Rishyasringa. The Puthrakameshti yaga 
was conducted under the guidance of that couple. At 
the conclusion of the yaga, Agni Deva, the fire god 
emerged from the sacred homakunda with a vessel 
containing Payasam (sacred pudding). He gave it to 
Dasaratha to be distributed equally among his three 
wives. Kausalya and Kaikeyi received their share of 
the sacred pudding happily and took it to their puja 
(worship) rooms. Both were very happy that their son 
to be born would be the heir apparent to the throne of 
Ayodhya. The claims of both appeared to be genuine, 
- Kausalya’s by virtue of her being the eldest queen 


110 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


and Kaikeyi’s because of a promise her father had 
extracted, at the time of her marriage to King Dasaratha 
that the son to be born to her would be made the King 
of Ayodhya. Dasaratha cannot go back on his word, 
as per the tradition of Ikshwaku family. However, 
Sumitra had no such desire. She carried her bowl of 
pudding to the terrace and placed it on the parapet 
wall, while drying her hair in the sun. She was in a 
pensive mood thinking that it was of no use to partake 
of the pudding as her son to be born would have no 
claim to the throne like Kausalya’s or Kaikeyi’s. While 
she was thus contemplating on the future, an eagle 
swooped down and carried away the bowl containing 
the sacred pudding. She was shocked and disturbed 
fearing the reprimand she would have to face from 
her husband for being careless. She at once rushed 
downstairs and informed Kausalya and Kaikeyi about 
what had happened. They hugged Sumitra and consoled 
her, saying, “Sister why are you so much disturbed? 
We three are one and we will share our portion of the 
pudding with you”. So saying they brought their bowls 
and poured some quantity of pudding from each of 
their bowls into another bowl and offered it to Sumitra. 
Unlike present times, there used to be perfect rapport 
between the co-wives in those days. Thus, all the three 
queens got their bowls containing the sacred pudding 
ready and took them to Sage Vasishta and obtained his 
blessings. Thereafter, they offered their pranams to King 
Dasaratha and happily partook of the sacred pudding. 
All the three queens became pregnant. In due course, 


Undertake Rama Chintana 111 


Kausalya the eldest queen delivered a beautiful baby-boy 
who was named Rama. The Universal Atma embodied 
itself in the womb of Kausalya. He was named ‘Rama’, 
meaning he who makes one and all happy. Kaikeyi too 
gave birth to a son, who was named Bharatha. Sumitra, 
however gave birth to two sons named Lakshmana and 
Satrughna. Lakshmana was born out of the share of 
pudding given by Kausalya and Satrughna from that 
given by Kaikeyi. Hence, Lakshmana always followed 
Rama while Satrughna followed Bharatha. This is how 
the story unfolfed: 


Sumitra’s two sons, Lakshmana and Satrughna, 
were crying all the time, day and night without even 
taking food. Sumitra could not bear the suffering of the 
infants. She went to sage Vasishta and explained to him 
of her predicament. Sage Vasishta closed his eyes and 
meditated for sometime. His yogic vision enabled him 
to realise the truth. He explained to Sumitra: “Since 
you partook of the sacred pudding given by Kausalya, 
you gave birth to Lakshmana who is an amsa (part) of 
Rama. Similarly, Satrughna is born out of the share 
of pudding given to you by Kaikeyi. So, he is a part 
of Bharatha. Put Lakshmana by the side of Rama and 
Satrughna by the side of Bharatha. Then, they will 
rest peacefully.” As soon as Sumitra acted accordingly, 
the babies became peaceful. As years passed, the four 
brothers grew up happily together. 


Back to the story of the eagle taking away the 


112 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


bowl containing the sacred payasam kept by Sumitra 
on the parapet wall while drying her hair in the sun, it 
dropped the bowl on the ground in a mountainous region 
where Anjanadevi was meditating. She picked up the 
bowl and happily ate the sacred pudding. As a result, 
she gave birth to the great hero of Ramayana, namely, 
Hanuman. While Rama and Lakshmana were moving 
in the Rishyamuka mountain range during their search 
for Sita, Hanuman approached them on the orders of 
Sugriva, the Vanara king. After enquiring the purpose 
of their search, Hanuman took them to Sugriva and 
introduced them to him. He persuaded Rama to seek 
Sugriva’s friendship and help in their search for Sita. 
The vow of everlasting friendship was solemnised in 
the presence of a ritual fire. Sugriva then _ brought 
one bundle of jewels wrapped in a cloth which was 
thrown by Sita from the Pushpaka Vimana of Ravana 
that carried her to Lanka. Sugriva placed the bundle 
before Rama in order to identify and confirm that they 
belonged to Sita. Rama called Lakshmana to his side 
and directed him to identify the jewels. Lakshmana 
on seeing the jewels expressed his inability saying 
“Oh Rama, I seek your pardon; I do not know of any 
jewels that were worn by mother Sita. However, I can 
identify her anklets since I was prostrating at her feet 
daily to pay my obeisance to her”. 


Undue Desires Bring Untold Miseries 


During the stay of Rama and Sita in a hermitage 
built by Lakshmana in the Panchavati region, one day, 


Undertake Rama Chintana 113 


at the behest of Ravana, Maricha the demon assumed 
the form of a golden deer and began moving about in 
the vicinity of the Ashram. Sita was fascinated by the 
charming golden deer and persuaded Rama to catch it 
and bring it to her so that she could play with it. Rama 
decided to oblige her as per the divine plan. However, 
he instructed Lakshmana to stay behind and guard the 
Ashram and Sita from the wily demons, during his 
absence. As Rama went in pursuit of the golden deer, 
it went deep into the forest. Finally, Rama lifted his 
bow and released a fatal arrow on the deer. Maricha 
in the guise of the golden deer at last fell dead in his 
real form. However, before he breathed his last, he 
cried in agony, in a feigned voice of Rama, “Ha! Sita, 
Ha! Lakshmana.” The cry fell on the ears of Sita and 
Lakshmana. 


Sita, on hearing the cry implored Lakshmana to go 
in search of Rama immediately. Lakshmana counselled 
Sita that no danger could ever befall Rama and that 
this was all the plan of the wily demons. Sita was 
not convinced. She even used harsh words that hurt 
Lakshmana, while compelling him to go to the rescue 
of Rama. Of course, this too was as per the divine 
plan that would unfold itself in the future. Left with 
no other option, Lakshmana agreed to go in search of 
Rama. However, before he left the Ashram, he drew 
a line around the hermitage and asked Sita not to step 
out of that line under any circumstances till Rama 
and himself returned. As soon as Lakshmana left the 


114 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


hermitage in search of Rama, Ravana approached the 
Ashram in the guise of a rishi. He stood before the 
Ashram and asked for food saying “Bhavathi bhiksham 
dehi” (Oh Mother, give me food). Sita heard this and 
decided to provide him food. She brought the food 
from inside the Ashram and tried to give the same to 
Ravana standing behind the line drawn by Lakshmana. 
But, Ravana insisted that Sita should come closer across 
the line drawn by Lakshmana and offer the food to him. 
He pretended as though he could not bear the pangs of 
hunger anymore. Finally Sita obliged and came out of 
the line drawn by Lakshmana to give alms to Ravana. 
Just at that moment, Ravana assumed his real form, 
and abducted her in his chariot. 


Ravana took Sita to Lanka and kept her in 
confinement under a tree in the Asokavana. Sita then 
lamented for her indiscreet act of becoming crazy about 
a golden deer and the consequences that followed. She 
lamented, “Oh! Why did that sinful animal (golden 
deer) come to the vicinity of our hermitage? Why did 
I develop a fascination for that golden deer? Why did 
I request Rama to catch that deer and bring it to me?” 
Of what use is all this repentance at this stage? She 
found herself in captivity in Lanka. 


Ravana kept three ladies to guard Sita during 
her incarceration in the Asokavana. One was Sarama, 
the wife of Vibheeshana, younger brother of Ravana. 
The other two ladies were Ajata and Trijata, who were 


Undertake Rama Chintana 115 


none other than daughters of Sarama. They were very 
considerate towards Sita, keeping up her sagging morale 
all the while by their comforting words. Sita wondered 
whether such good people also existed in Lanka. In 
fact, it was due to their consoling words and protection 
that Sita could bear her ordeal courageously. Though 
Sita was imprisoned in Lanka, Ravana did not dare to 
touch her. He knew that he would be reduced to ashes 
if he touched her without her consent. He was all the 
while pleading with her to accept him. When Ravana 
stooped to the level of denigrating Rama and threatened 
her, she without even looking at his face, plucked 
out a blade of grass and threw it before him saying, 
“You are a mean fellow. You are not worth even this 
blade of grass. How dare you denigrate Rama in front 
of me, you vile and vicious wretch”. 


Sita had another name Vaidehi, meaning one who 
has no body attachment. King Janaka was her foster 
father. He lovingly brought her up and gave her in 
marriage to Rama. There are several inner and subtle 
meanings in the story of Ramayana. In fact, Sita was 
not the sister of Rama, as has been portrayed in some 
texts. If she were to be the sister of Rama, how could 
King Janaka offer her as bride to Rama? Unfortunately, 
people do not realise these inner meanings. 


The Nobility Of Hanuman 


Hanuman was a great hero in the story of 
Ramayana. He led an army of Vanaras in his holy 


116 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


mission of searching for the whereabouts of Sita, who 
was kept in captivity in Lanka by Ravana. He was a 
very intelligent and faithful servant of Rama. He was 
a person of noble qualities and great physical strength. 
In his noble qualities and might, he was unparalleled. 
In fact, one whole chapter, namely, Sundara Kanda 
was devoted to describe his qualities of head and heart, 
in the Ramayana. While he was embarking on his holy 
mission of finding out Sita in the city of Lanka, he was 
given certain identification clues about Sita. He was told 
that Sita was a woman of noble qualities and divine 
beauty and that she would not mix with the Rakshasa 
ladies. He searched for Sita in every nook and corner 
of Lanka, including the inner chambers of the palace 
where Ravana’s queens and the ladies attending on 
them stayed. During his search he came across ladies 
scantily dressed and fallen on their beds, intoxicated 
by drink and dance. But, he was totally unmoved by 
these obscene forms, keeping always in his mind the 
characteristics and excellence of Sita that Rama had 
described to him earlier. His supreme stability of mind 
in such an environment befitted his true Brahmachari 
(celibate) status. One cannot find parallels to Lord 
Rama and His noble servant Hanuman, in this world. 
They are both unique. 


The boys just sang a beautiful bhajan “Rama 
Lakshmana Janaki, Jai bolo Hanuman ki’. During their 
singing, Hanuman’s name was mentioned after a little 
pause, indicating the importance of Hanuman. It is only 


Undertake Rama Chintana 117 


when people like Hanuman are worshipped and their 
qualities emulated, one can cultivate good thoughts, 
good habits, good qualities and good behaviour. It is 
said, “The end of education is character”. It is only 
in Rama and Hanuman, such noble character is to be 
found. Hence, you constantly contemplate on Rama 
and Hanuman and their noble qualities. The different 
names like Rama, Krishna, Hanuman, Siva, Vishnu, 
etc. represent the one Divinity that is all pervading. 
God is one, the names and forms differ. 


“Gold is one; ornaments differ. 
Religions are many, Divinity is one, 
The cows are many in colours; 
but milk is the same.” 
(Telugu poem) 
You Are Brahman 


Similarly, God is one though He is referred to 
by different names and forms. Different people when 
asked to give their names, reply ‘I am Ramaiah’, ‘I 
am Lakshmaiah’, ‘I am Govindappa’, etc. But, the real 
answer should be ‘Aham Brahmasami’ (1 am Brahma). 
There can be no other names. All are embodiments 
of the Divine Self. The atma has no gunas (qualities). 
It is formless and attributeless. 


Nityanandam, Parama Sukhadam, Kevalam 
Jnanamurtim, Dwandwateetam, Gagana 
Sadrisham, Tattwamasyadi Lakshyam, Ekam, 
Nityam, Vimalam, Achalam, Sarvadhee 


118 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


Sakshibhutam, Bhavateetam, Trigunarahitam... 

(The Atma is the embodiment of eternal bliss, 
wisdom absolute, beyond the pair of opposites, 
expansive and pervasive like the sky, the goal indicated 
by the ‘Mahavakya Tat twam asi’, one without a second, 
eternal, pure, unchanging, witness of all functions of 
the intellect, beyond all mental conditions and the three 
attributes of satwa, rajas and tamas). 


(Sanskrit sloka) 


Strictly speaking, God has no name or form in spite 
of the fact it is said ‘Daivam Manusharupena’ (God 
is in human form). He has no birth and no qualities. 
He is formless and attributeless. When someone asks 
‘who are you?’, reply ‘I am God’. Names like Ramaiah, 
Lakshmaiah, etc., are only those given by your parents 
after your birth. In fact, you have no specific name. All 
are embodiments of the Divine Self. Whether you act the 
role of Ramaiah or Krishnaiah, you are essentially the 
same Divine Self. Only the roles differ. God is immanent 
in every human being, nay, every living being. He is 
the Atmaswarupa. “Ekatma Sarvabhutantaratma’. The 
one God is immanent in all human beings and all living 
beings. Names and forms may appear to be different. 
You must develop firm faith in the oneness of Divinity. 
Whomever you come across, offer your pranams to 
them. Pay your obeisance even to a beggar. He may be 
a ‘beggar’ as a physical entity, but he is ‘bigger’ as the 
embodiment of the Divine Self. Do not develop hatred 
toward any individual. Do not consider anyone as your 


Undertake Rama Chintana 119 


enemy. In fact, they are all reflections of your own 
divine self. Everyone repeats ‘I’, ‘I’. Everyone claims 
‘this is my body, my mind, my intellect and my chitta’. 
Then ‘who am I?’ That ‘I’ is Divinity, in essence. The 
same ‘I’ is referred to by several names. The symbol 
of Christianity, the cross (+) signifies cutting off of 
the individual ego (ahamkara). We say ‘I came here’; 
‘I am going’; ‘I am coming’, etc. What is this ‘I’? It 
represents the one Divine Self. You have to develop 
that ‘Ekatmabhava’ (the feeling of one divine atma 
permeating the entire Universe). That is real devotion. 
Do not differentiate between ‘I’ and ‘you’. Those who 
desire to attain self realisation must shed this difference. 
They must get rid of the feeling of ‘I?’ and ‘mine’. We 
are all one. “All are one, be alike to every one”. This 
is the essence of all philosophy. Be happy. 


Srimad Ramayana Sudha Pravachano 
Saptaham, Prasanthi Nilayam 28.6.08 


We owe a debt of gratitude to the Divine, 
which has not only endowed us with this precious 
human body, but which also sustains it. We shall 
be able to enjoy these gifts of the Divine only 
if we discharge this debt to the Divine. It is by 


rendering service to other bodies saturated with 
the same Divine, by doing righteous deeds and 
consecrating all actions in the service of society. 


Sri Sathya Sai Baba 





120 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


Now, there are many social workers ... who 
visit hospitals and do service to the patients there. 
Most of the work they do is mechanical, like 
fanning the patients, writing letters for them and 
singing bhajans, without paying heed to the actual 
requirements of the patients. Many do this work 
because it is the current mode of social service. But 
it must be work, done with the full co-operation 
of the mind, gladly, intelligently, reverentially. The 
patient should not feel disgusted at the fussiness of 
the social worker; he should be looking forward 


to the arrival of the person, of some one who is 
very near and dear. If you do not like that type 
of work, you need not engage yourselves in it. Do 


not burden your mind by the unpleasantness of 
the task. Work done mechanically is like the flame 
of an oil-less wick; the oil is mental enthusiasm; 
pour it, and the lamp will burn clear and long. 


Sri Sathya Sai Baba 





10 


Develop Faith And Self-confidence 
To Gain Self-realisation 


By what power of love the earth rotates without 

an axle, 

By what power of love the stars remain in the 

sky without falling on the ground, 

By what power of love the oceans confine to 

their limits without submerging the earth, 

By what power of love the wind god blows cool 

breeze in all the worlds, 

That mighty power of love is verily the Atmic 

power. 

That power of love is most wonderful, infinite, 

unique and all pervasive. 

The entire creation is saturated with love. 
(Telugu Poem) 


122 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


ALL it Prema (love) or Sathyam (truth) 

or Aham (1) — all are God’s different names 
only! The Vedas declare “Aham Brahmasmi!” (I am 
Brahman). If God were to reveal His name, He would 
say “Aham Brahmasmi” (I am Brahman). That is His 
true name. 


The entire creation is from Truth, 
Into Truth the entire creation merges. 
Is there a place in the Universe 
Where truth is not present? 


The whole Universe is a manifestation of pure 
CONSCIOUSNESS. 


Know this reality. (Telugu poem) 


God is the source and sustenance of all activities 
in this world. The entire Universe moves according to 
His Divine will and command. Shivraj Patil made an 
in-depth study of the Bhagavad Gita for some months 
and grasped the essence of the Gita. Finally, he wrote 
a commentary on Bhagavad Gita in English. Several 
people write several books, but the Gita commentary 
written by Shivraj Patil is a unique work. Whenever 
he had an occasion to meet Swami, he used to show 
his work to Him, to check whether the interpretations 
given in the book were correct or not. In fact, the 
essence of Bhagavad Gita is contained in this small 
book. The Gita made a deep imprint on his mind and 
he beautifully recorded those impressions in his book. 


Develop Faith And Self-confidence To Gain Self-realisation 123 


God Alone Is The Real Guru 


Today is Guru Purnima. What does it signify? 
People think that it is a day on which they offer some 
money to a guru, a mendicant or a yogi or a great 
person and obtain a mantra from him. It is not correct. 


Gurur-Brahma Gurur-Vishnu 
Gurur Devo Maheswara, 


Guru Sakshat Param Brahma 
Tasmai Sri Gurave Namaha. 


(Guru is Brahma, Guru is Vishnu, Guru is 
Maheswara. Guru is verily the supreme Brahman. So, 
salutations to the Guru.) 


Who is a guru? The sloka mentioned above states 
that a Guru is verily Brahma (the creator), Vishnu (the 
sustainer) and Maheswara (the destroyer). These are the 
different facets of God and hence Guru means God, 
verily. Purnima is the day on which the spotlessly 
clean and unblemished moon sheds his cool and steady 
light on the world. Whatever is said or taught with a 
pure heart is God’s own word. People celebrate Guru 
Purnima as a Guru puja day, the day on which they 
worship their guru and offer some money or presents 
in return for some mantra or other sacred words taught 
to them by him. In fact, one’s own heart is one’s Guru. 
Whatever comes from the depth of one’s own heart is 
the real teaching of Guru (Guru Vakya). 


124 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


You all know the story of Ekalavya. He approached 
Dronacharya and prayed to teach archery. Dronacharya 
turned down his request saying that the sacred skills 
of archery must be taught to a valiant hero and not to 
a wandering tribal youth engaged in hunting animals. 
Ekalavya, however, considered Dronacharya as his 
Guru and installed him in his heart. Even though 
Dronacharya did not give any instructions to him, he 
went and made a clay image of his Guru and started 
worshipping it daily. He learnt all the skills of archery, 
constantly contemplating on Dronacharya as his Guru. 
He became an expert archer in no time. 


The Unique Guru Bhakti Of Ekalavya 


One day, the Kaurava and Pandava boys were 
playing, near a well. Dronacharya happened to pass 
that way along with his wife and son, Aswatthama. 
Observing that the young boys were going round and 
round the well making a big noise, Dronacharya went 
near them and enquired, “My dear boys, what are you 
searching for?” The boys said that they were actually 
playing with a ball and it had fallen into the well. 
Then, Dronacharya took out an arrow from his quiver 
and shot it into the well. It went straight and stuck to 
the ball. Next, he released some more arrows one after 
the other and with the help of the chain of arrows he 
pulled the ball out. The boys were wonderstruck at the 
skill of Dronacharya and reported the matter to their 
parents. Then Dronacharya was called to the royal court 


Develop Faith And Self-confidence To Gain Self-realisation 125 


by Bhishmacharya and was made the Guru of Pandava 
and Kaurava boys to teach them archery. 


One day, the Pandavas along with their Guru 
Dronacharya were going on a hunting expedition 
in a forest. They had taken some hunting dogs also 
along with them. Meanwhile one of the dogs started 
barking. Immediately, an arrow released by someone 
from somewhere came like a bullet and stuck to the 
mouth of the dog. When they started searching for 
the person who shot that arrow, they came across 
Ekalavya who confessed to shooting that arrow. Arjuna 
then realised that Ekalvaya employed the technique of 
‘sabdabhedi’ (shooting an arrow at a target, sensing the 
direction from which the sound was coming). Arjuna 
became jealous at the extraordinary skill in archery of 
Ekalvaya, particularly his ability to use the technique of 
‘Sabdabhedi’. Ekalavya prostrated before Dronacharya, 
whom he had considered as his guru. Arjuna, seething 
with anger and jealousy looked at Dronacharya and 
said, “You had promised me that you would not teach 
this technique of ‘Sabdabhedi’ to anyone except me. I 
implicity believed your words”. Dronacharya replied, 
‘IT am not the guru of Ekalavya nor did I teach this 
technique to him. You can ascertain the fact if you 
wish, from him.” Then Ekalavya was questioned. He 
replied, “It is true that Dronacharya refused to teach 
me archery. But, constantly contemplating on him, as 
my guru, I learnt archery including the sabdabhedi 
technique”. Ekalavya’s reply fanned the flames of 


126 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


jealousy in Arjuna. He wished that there should be 
none in the world who could excel him in the skills 
of archery. He wanted to subdue Ekalavya somehow 
and make him powerless. He therefore prompted Guru 
Dronacharya to ask for guru dakshina (an offering to 
Guru made by a disciple as a token of his gratitude for 
teaching skills) from Ekalavya. Bowing to the wishes of 
Arjuna, Dronacharya enquired of Ekalavya, “What guru 
dakshina you would offer to me?” Arjuna then made 
a subtle suggestion to Dronacharya saying, “Ekalavya 
informed just now that he had learnt the skills from you, 
treating you as his guru. Hence, it must be you again 
who should frustrate his efforts to excel in archery.” 
Dronacharya then asked for an unusual ‘guru dakshina’ 
from his ‘disciple’ Ekalavya, that is, the right thumb 
of Ekalavya should be offered to him. 


Immediately, Ekalavya cut off his right thumb and 
offered it to Dronacharya as his guru dakshina. 


As he has offered his right thumb to his Guru, 
he could no longer wield a bow in his hand. 
Thus, Ekalavya’s skill of archery was contained 
and Arjuna’ ego satisfied. 


(Telugu poem) 


Arjuna felt very happy, for he knew now that there 
was none who could excel him in archery, particularly in 
the technique of “sabdabhedi’. Right from that moment, 
Ekalavya never touched his bow and arrow. He did 


Develop Faith And Self-confidence To Gain Self-realisation 127 


not at all feel sad for losing his skills in archery. On 
the other hand, he felt extremely happy that he could 
fulfil the wishes of his Guru. Thus, a great archer was 
permanently incapacitated due to the jealousy of another 
great archer. Arjuna moved about freely with puffed-up 
ego that he was invincible. 


It is possible that sometimes the subtle meanings 
of some slokas of great texts like the Bhagavad Gita 
may be revealed to one by one’s own inner voice 
coming from his heart. In fact, that is the real teaching. 
Shivraj Patil, by his deep devotion could tap that inner 
source and translate Gita into other languages. That 
is the reason why his Bhagavad Gita translation has 
turned out to be a great work. The atma tatwa can be 
realised if only one could shed the feeling of ‘I’ and 
‘Mine’. Today, many people make efforts to realise atma 
tatwa. But, their efforts do not succeed since they are 
unable to get rid of the feeling of ‘I’ and ‘Mine’. In 
fact, they are the obstacles to self-realisation. First and 
foremost, one has to remove the feeling of ‘I’ (ego). 
Then realisation will dawn on you. The religious symbol 
of Christianity (t) also denotes this cutting off of ego. 
The ego-centric assertion of ‘I’ is the root cause for 
all sorrows, unrest and difficulties. One has to realise 
this truth. The feeling of ‘mine’ has also to be shed. 
When a teacher develops a feeling “these are all my 
disciples”, ego will raise its head there also. Hence, 
the feeling of ‘I’ and ‘mine’ has to be removed. Then 
only atma tatwa can be realised. 


128 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


Faith And Self-Confidence Will Lead One To Self- 
Realisation 


Shivraj Patil has been coming to Swami since the 
last thirty years. He first had the darshan of Swami in 
the house of S.B.Chavan. Thereafter, they both used 
to visit Swami, together. Thereby, he developed intense 
devotion to Swami. In the meanwhile, Shivraj Patil 
became a Minister in the Government of Maharashtra. 
Thereafter, he moved to Delhi and became a Minister 
in the Central Government. He also held the position 
of Speaker of the Lok Sabha in Delhi. Thus, he came 
up in life with the grace of Swami and his own hard 
work and sincerity. He never aspired for any positions 
in life. Even when Swami enquired from him what he 
wanted, he used to evade a reply. He earned a very 
good name as a Minister in Government. They used 
to repose lot of confidence in him. 


One has to develop faith and self-confidence. Self- 
confidence leads to self-satisfaction and self-sacrifice 
and ultimately to self-realisation. The Bhagavad Gita 
is a very sacred text. It is verily the breath of God. 
One has to develop faith first. Even a demon worships 
God. But, his actions are demonic. One can have peace 
only when one develops faith in God and dedicates 
all his actions to God. You may study any number 
of books and sacred texts. You may even lecture on 
them. But, that is of no use. Whatever you put into 
practice, only that will become part of you. There are 
three steps to self-realisation, namely, self-confidence, 


Develop Faith And Self-confidence To Gain Self-realisation 129 


self-satisfaction and self-sacrifice. When these three 
go together, there will be purnatwa (fullness). That 
is Purnima (full-moon day) when the moon will be 
spotless, shedding cool light on the world. It is only 
when there is perfect accord between thought, word 
and deed, it becomes truth. Simply giving expression 
to one’s thoughts and lecturing on principles without 
putting them into practice will amount to an empty 
rhetoric. It will amount to falsehood. Such a person will 
not become a full individual. Shivraj Patil is not such 
a person. He experienced truth and gave expression 
to his thoughts in the form of a book. That is why his 
book earned reputation, giving him great satisfaction. 


I expect all students to relate to their teachers what 
they have learnt from them. Mere book reading is of 
no use. There must be close interaction between the 
teachers and the students. Such an interaction would be 
like the positive and negative coming together. Students 
have to develop intimate relationship with their parents. 
They must love their parents and obey their command. 
Then only they will succeed in life. 


The last sloka in the Bhagavad Gita reads 


Yathra Yogeshwara Krishno Yatra 
Partho Dhanurdharah 
Tathra Srirvijayo Bhutir Dhruva 
Neetirmathir Mama. 
(Sanskrit s/oka) 


(Where there is Krishna, the Lord of Yoga, and 


130 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


where there is Arjuna, armed with his mighty bow come 
together, there lie wealth, victory, glory and everlasting 
morality.) The essence of the Bhagavad Gita is contained 
in this one sloka. 


Today, Shivraj Patil has brought out this beautiful 
and nectarous message for the benefit of one and all 
through his Bhagavad Gita translation. It is our good 
fortune to come across such noble works. People write 
several books on several subjects; but, books like this are 
rare. We see students going to the library and reading 
books stacked there. Some of them develop interest for 
spiritual books, while some others read novels. Some 
boys keep novels in between their text books or spiritual 
books and read them with absorbing interest. This is 
nothing but cheating others as well as themselves. It 
is not good. That is the reason why we thoughtfully 
avoided stacking such books in our library. I am sure 
our boys are not interested in such trash. Their hearts 
are pure and sacred. Our boys are generally good and 
well-behaved. But, due to the age, there will be some 
distractions now and then. They are like passing clouds. 
Students should develop enough mental strength to keep 
themselves away from such distractions. 


I wish that our students should also write some 
good books on academic topics and spiritual subjects 
(Swami then called an ex-student by name Gowri 
Shankar, who is presently working as a faculty member 
in the Dept. of Physics in Sri Sathya Sai University 
and introduced him to the audience). This boy has been 


Develop Faith And Self-confidence To Gain Self-realisation 131 


invited to Hungary to present a paper in an international 
conference being held there by the Institute of Nuclear 
Science. All his expenses for travel and stay in Hungary 
will be borne by the institute. This boy is well behaved 
and highly educated. I wish that all our students get 
such opportunities of being invited by other Institutions 
/ Universities in India and abroad. I will be very happy 
to see you participating in such activities. I am sure 
your parents will also be happy. Whatever you have 
read and learnt must be shared with all. 


Today you have witnessed the release of a book 
written by Shivraj Patil containing his impressions and 
commentary on Bhagavad Gita. No doubt, his book 
will be of interest to one and all. 


Two of our students from the Anantapur campus 
secured very good marks in English and Physics, 
respectively. They have been invited to America, all 
expenses paid. Such academic excellence brings credit 
to our Institute. I am happy. 


Guru Purnima, Prasanthi Nilayam, 18-7-2008. 


Many a time, the game ends even before one 
recognises the Master. So, while life is on, one 
should devote it for some sacred activity the most 
sacred being Seva (Service). It ensures fellowship 


and kinship among all men. It discloses the unity 
inherent in all the divinity. 


Sri Sathya Sai Baba 





132 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


All religions have accepted the timelessness 
and the Omni-presence of God. So, it is strange 
that even those, who accept this truth, display such 
narrowness of mind. For, hatred between people 
professing different religions leads ultimately to the 
destruction of faith in religion itself. Those who 
are bent upon destroying religion must be utterly 
thoughtless. What has to be destroyed is religious 
bigotry, not religion itself. 


To despise other peoples religion out of love 
for one’s own religion, is like demonstrating one’s 
love for one’s mother by denigrating the mothers 
of others. One should realise that other people 
have the same regard and devotion for their faiths, 
as one has for one’s own religion. Young men of 
today should, while cultivating attachment to their 
own religion, respect the beliefs and practices of 
all others. 

Sri Sathya Sai Baba 





11 
Develop Educare And Be United 


Embodiments of Love! 


have nothing more to add to what has been told 

to you by Michael Goldstein and All India 
President of Sri Sathya Seva Organisations, Srinivasan. 
Education is not a subject on which anybody and 
everybody should talk. Today, education has become 
more outward and worldly. There are millions and 
millions of people who have pursued such worldly 
education in India. In what way the society is benefited 
by such people? Everyone is concerned with his own 
selfish interest. There is none who cares for public 
interest and welfare. No one is bothered about how 
society is and in what condition it is, or what difficulties 
people are undergoing. When they speak in public they 
are highly rhetorical about helping the poor, but when 
it comes to action, they are nowhere near. 


134 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


Shun the Feeling of I And Mine And Develop A 
Broader Outlook 


You all know in what state the world is today. 
Wherever you turn, you see sorrow and suffering. Peace 
and happiness are not to be found anywhere. Every 
country claims progress and achievement in different 
areas. These claims are hollow in nature as peace and 
happiness cannot be found anywhere. If we enquire into 
the truth, every country is steeped in difficulties and 
is in some crisis or the other. No government makes a 
sincere effort to understand the difficulties faced by poor 
people. It is very difficult to determine who is poor and 
who is rich. All are ‘poor’ in one sense. Then who are 
the rich people? Those who put into practice what they 
say. It is said, “Manasyekam vachasyekam karmanyekam 
mahatmanam”. It means that those whose thoughts, 
words and deeds are in perfect accord are “mahatmas”’ 
(great souls). Such people are very rare. In fact, countries 
which are considered to be super powers, are causing 
great harm to the poorer countries. They 
do not even regret for their mistakes. 
They are unable to realise how the people of the 
underdeveloped and developing countries are suffering. 
For example, the people in Iraq underwent 
untold suffering. But, none cared to bother about their 
suffering. No doubt, in every country there are rich and 
poor people. Strangely, it is the rich people 
who are taken care of and provided with 
help. No one comes to the rescue of the poor people 


Develop Educare And Be United 135 


or provide succour to them. Hence, first and foremost, 
the poor and the downtrodden should be protected. 


Every devotee must cultivate love and compassion. 
It is said, “Tyagenaike amrutathwamanasuh” (it is only 
by sacrifice that one can attain immortality). It is only a 
person with the quality of sacrifice who can experience 
bliss. Those with the ego-centric feeling of ‘I’ and 
‘mine’ can never be happy in life. Where there is the 
feeling of ‘I’ there comes ego. Those who cultivate the 
feeling of ‘mine’ and ‘my people’ develop attachment. 
One should never develop the feeling that only my 
country should prosper. One should develop a broader 
outlook and pray, “Lokah samastah sukhino bhavantu”’ 
(May the whole world be happy!). Those who develop 
the narrow-minded feeling of ‘I’ and ‘mine’ undergo 
a lot of suffering. This is due to the secular education 
that they have acquired. Worldly education does not go 
beyond one’s own selfish interest. We should love all 
and serve all. Today the rich have lost the qualities of 
‘papa bheeti’ and ‘daiva preeti’ (fear of sin and love 
for God). If only you cultivate these two qualities, you 
can achieve anything in life. 


We must bring down our selfish interest to a greater 
extent. One has to gradually give up selfishness. We 
have to make full use of our education and energies 
for the benefit of the society. If there are no poor 
people, you cannot even be sure of your food; for it is 
they who toil in the fields and factories to produce the 


136 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


grains and goods for the consumption of people in the 
society. While the rich enjoy the comforts of life, the 
poor sweat to keep their body and soul together. Every 
individual in a society has his own rights, the right to 
live, etc. Hence, we must take care of the poor people 
also and provide them with certain basic necessities. 
For utilising their services, we must also serve them in 
return. Today those who are highly educated and those 
who are holding positions of power are steeped in utter 
selfishness. It is only they who exhibit mean mentality. 


Human Beings Are Those Who Practise Human 
Values 


Today, everyone wishes to fulfil one’s selfish 
interests at the cost of others. No one acts with a pure 
heart and good intention to help others. A human being 
is expected to have the qualities of Sathya (truth), 
Dharma (righteousness), Santi (peace), Prema (love) 
and Ahimsa (non-violence). Devoid of these qualities, 
he is not a human being at all. How can a person with 
demonic qualities be called a human being? Hence, first 
and foremost one has to cultivate human qualities. No 
one has a right to enjoy when his fellow-human being is 
suffering. All are God’s children only. To whomsoever 
you cause suffering, it will affect you. Hence, you have 
to conduct your life with devotion to God and love 
for all human beings. All should remain united. Where 
there is unity, there shall be purity. Where there is 
purity, there is divinity. You all have to lead your lives 
keeping in view these three aspects of unity, purity and 


Develop Educare And Be United 137 


divinity. You should not remain unconcerned with others’ 
difficulties and suffering. Treat their suffering as your 
own. The one God dwells in the hearts of all people. 
“Easwarah sarvabhutanam”. God is immanent even in 
ants and mosquitoes. There should be compassion in 
your heart. But, this has become a rare quality these 
days. Instead, we find ‘come-fashion’ everywhere. How 
can then equality prevail in society? Show at least an 
iota of humanity. He who has such a human quality 
will become a person with compassionate heart in the 
real sense. Lust, anger, hatred, jealousy, pride, etc., are 
animal qualities. The real wealth of a human being is 
noble qualities like love, compassion, righteousness, 
sacrifice and truth. It is only when a person has these 
human qualities that he can be considered a human 
being. Unfortunately, today people are human only 
in form, but qualities are those of animals. What is 
important is not the form, but qualities. 


You cannot be sure when difficulties would 
confront you. Every action (karma) has its reaction, 
resound and reflection. If you hurt others, surely it will 
have its reaction. It is only when you recognise this 
truth and conduct yourself accordingly that you can 
be called a true human being. You talk to any student 
of our institutions, even primary school children will 
explain to you the human qualities very clearly. The 
human values have therefore to be cultivated right from 
childhood. The boys and girls should grow in human 
values. Even elders can learn from such students. 


138 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


Truth Originates From One’s Own Heart 


Now, about Truth. From where did Truth come? 
It has not sprouted from the earth nor has it descended 
from the sky. Its origin is not North, South, East or 
West. Truth is firmly installed in one’s own heart. If 
you develop your inner vision, you can surely recognise 
truth there. Where there is truth, there is righteousness. 
When truth and righteousness go together, love emerges 
from the heart. From love comes peace. When peace 
and love go hand in hand, non-violence reigns. We 
have to understand the inter-relationship between the 
five human values, namely, Truth, Righteousness, Peace, 
Love and Non-violence. All these human values are 
embedded in our own inner being. 


A human being is God, verily. That is the reason 
why God is portrayed in human form. If God were 
to reveal His true identity, He would declare, “I am 
Brahman”. He would not say “I am so and so”. All 
the names of individuals are only those given to the 
human body by their parents. They are not God-given. 
God has given only one gift, that is atma. That is, 
“Mamatma Sarvabhutantaratma” (the one Divine Self 
permeates all beings). You can observe the ants. They 
move in a line up and down. While doing so, they greet 
each other happily. If a cow has given birth to a calf, 
it does not join the flock leaving the young calf alone. 
The cow recognises the cry of the calf, even from a 
distance. The calf cries “Amba! Amba! And the mother 
cow responds. Such is the relationship among animals 


Develop Educare And Be United 139 


and even in birds. 


In the Ramayana story, a hunter saw two birds 
happily spending their time in each other’s company, 
perched on a tree. The hunter shot an arrow and killed 
the male bird. Unable to bear the separation from her 
beloved, the female bird also died soon thereafter. Sage 
Valmiki who witnessed this pathetic scene uttered a 
sloka, even without knowing it. It came spontaneously 
from his mouth. That soka (grief) became the inspiration 
for the great epic Ramayana. Thus, the birds and 
animals also love each other. How then can a human 
being lose such a noble quality of love? Today there are 
many things that a human being can learn from birds, 
animals and even beasts. But, the human being is least 
bothered to learn these lessons. I have been teaching 
many good things since decades, but you don’t listen. 
Even if you listen, you don’t put them into practice. If 
somebody abuses you, you feel sad. Don’t you know 
that he also feels in the same way when you abuse him? 
Praise or criticism, treat them all as part of the divine 
leela. When you develop such a sense of equanimity, 
you will come up in life. 


Today, even rich people are crazy for money. But, 
they do not show the same enthusiasm for God. People 
have lost self-confidence, totally. “Where is Atma? 
What is Atma?” People ask hundred and one questions. 
They do not at all understand that the atma they were 
questioning about is very much immanent in them. 


140 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


People say, “This is my handkerchief’. It means ‘I’ is 
separate and ‘handkerchief’ is separate. Similarly, when 
you say ‘my body’, you are different from your body. 
What is this ‘my’? You say ‘this is mine’. But, who are 
you? You do not know the truth about yourself. When 
you know yourself, it amounts to knowing everything. 
If you do not know yourself, you cannot know others. 
Hence, sit calmly and peacefully in some corner and 
try to enquire into the nature of your own self. That 
is real dhyana (meditation). Meditation does not imply 
contemplating on God. Know about yourself, in the 
first instance. God is in you, with you, around you, 
above you and below you. YOU ARE GOD. Whenever 
someone enquires “Who are you?”, say “I am God”. 
Don’t say, “I am so and so.” How happy you will feel 
when you consider yourself as God! Even those who 
listen to your reply will feel happy. 


Develop Inner Vision 


Education does not mean simply imparting 
knowledge. We learn many things from the text books. 
But, we may not be able to understand their real 
meaning. First and foremost, enquire into yourself 
“Who am I? Who am I? Who am I?” Then you will 
get the real answer. Are you the mind? Or intellect? 
Or chitta? Or ego? Or body? You are none of these. 
No doubt the body, mind, intellect, etc., are all gifts 
of God. You have, of course, to respect them and 
value them. It is not enough if you read various texts 


Develop Educare And Be United 141 


and feel happy and contented that you have gained 
vast knowledge. Yesterday, one boy came to me and 
informed, “Swami, I have completed parayana of Sri 
Shirdi Sai Satcharitra.” When I enquired whether he had 
read the book fully, he replied that he had completely 
read the book without leaving a single letter. Then I 
enquired, “How many teachings of Baba contained 
in that book are you practising?” He replied, “None, 
Swami,” Then, what for is this reading? For turning 
pages? Not at all. There should be a transformation 
in your heart. Then only your parayana (reading of 
sacred texts) will be sanctified. 


Devotees undertake several kinds of sadhana. But, 
they are not sadhana in the real sense. If you wish to 
see ‘reality’, you have to develop an inner vision. If 
you open your eyes and see the outside world, you 
will see a number of heads. On the other hand, close 
your eyes and look into yourself. Then you will see 
none but yourself. Hence, develop an inner vision. You 
enquire into yourself “Who am I?” Immediately reply 
comes from within “I am I’. That is the correct answer. 
People say “I am so and so; I am an American,” etc. 
These are not the real answers to the question “Who 
am I?” These are all outward names for identification 
in the external world. They are not important. What 
is important is self-enquiry. Then you will realise the 
Truth. 


Goldstein and Srinivasan who spoke earlier 


142 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


eulogised education. What they said related to worldly 
education. I do not agree. It should relate to you. Then 
only the concept of ‘I am I” can be realised. Tomorrow, 
I will provide answers to some of your questions that 
bother you in your daily life. I am sure very soon 
you will realise Divinity. I do not wish to speak about 
modern education. That everybody will do. Reading 
books and gaining worldly knowledge is not great. This 
is only bookish knowledge. You must gain knowledge 
of your own self (inner being). That is real knowledge. 
That is changeless and eternal. Truth is only one, not 
two. Truth is God. Righteousness is God. Peace is God. 
Love is God. Know this. “Love is God; live in love’. 
If you cultivate such selfless and divine love, you can 
achieve everything in life. “God is one; goal is one”. If 
you develop firm faith in this maxim, you can understand 
everything. Your experiences and enjoyment in this 
material world are not important. They are not true. 
Behind these momentary experiences, there are some 
eternal values to be cultivated, some human qualities 
to be developed. These values and qualities have to 
manifest from within, not in the outside world. That is 
Educare. Educare means bringing out the latent qualities 
and values from the core of our inner being. The books 
you read in the outside world relate to education. But, 
this is ‘Educare’. What is needed today is ‘Educare’. 
If people develop ‘Educare’, all will be united. 


Take it from Me — in about 25 to 30 years’ time 


Develop Educare And Be United 143 


the entire world will become one. There will be only 
one caste, one religion, and one God. What is needed 
is such unity. Today, there are several differences 
between individuals on the basis of caste, creed, religion, 
language, nation, etc. Such differences should disappear 
and unity should prevail. The Veda has emphasised this 
unity in the declaration “Ekam Sath viprah bahudha 
vadanti” (Truth is one, the wise say it in different 
ways). That is the real world we are visualising. 


Today, I have spoken at length taking a lot of 
time. Tomorrow I will clarify all your doubts leisurely. 


Sri Sathya Sai World Education Conference, 
Prasanthi Nilayam.20-7-2008 


Henceforth, develop universal love and 
dedicate yourself to the service of society. Life 
is constantly ebbing away. To utilise all your 
resources for the good of others is the way to 
experience real bliss. Whatever may have been your 
lapses in the past, begin a new life of dedication 


and devotion from today. Make the best use of the 
sacred atmosphere prevailing in the Ashram and 
engage yourself in sadhana (spiritual practices) 
and service to the people around you. 

Sri Sathya Sai Baba 





144 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


Even if you cannot love others, do not 
hate them or feel envy towards them. Do not 
misunderstand their motives and scandalise them; 
if you only knew, their motives might be as noble 
as yours or their action might be due to ignorance, 
rather than wickedness or mischief. Pardon the 
other man 8 faults but deal harshly with your own. 


The holy culture of this ancient land has 
been spoilt by just one impurity; intolerance of 
another's success, prosperity or progress. If you 
cannot help another, at least avoid doing him harm 
or causing him pain. That itself is a great service. 
What right have you to find fault with another or 
to talk evil of him? When you say that nothing 
can ever happen on earth without His Will, why 
get annoyed or angry? Your duty is to cleanse 
yourself and engage in your own inner purification. 
That endeavour will bring you the co-operation of 
all good men and you will find strength and joy 
welling up within you. 


Sri Sathya Sai Baba 





12 
Ideal Parents Have Ideal Children 


Modern education leads only to argumentation, 
not to total wisdom. What is the use of 
acquiring education which cannot lead you to 
immortality? Acquire the knowledge that will 
make you immortal. 


(Telugu Poem) 


In spite of his education and intelligence, a 
foolish man will not know his true Self and a 
mean-minded person will not give up his evil 
qualities. 

(Telugu poem) 


OU may acquire as high an education as you 
can, but if you do not put it into practice, 
it is of no use. You may earn any number of degrees 
or titles, but they do not make you a truly learned 


146 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


person. All your learning is flawed if what you practise 
is different from what you have learnt. Therefore, put 
into practice what you learn. 


A Teacher Should Be A Role Model In Human Values 

A mean-minded person does not give up his evil 
qualities in spite of his high education. These so- 
called highly educated persons are, in fact, much more 
ignorant than those who are illiterate. Unfortunately, 
children today imitate and follow such ‘highly educated’ 
persons. (After this, Bhagawan answered the questions 
of the delegates to Sri Sathya Sai World 
Education Conference 2008.) 


The first question: What type of relationship should 
students have with God? 


God is not separate from you. He is not outside. 
He is very much within you. Therefore, you should 
develop a relationship of love and oneness with God. If 
God were separate from you, you could form a mundane 
relationship with Him. But He is not separate from you. 
He is with you, in you, around you and behind you 
(loud applause). You cannot have worldly relationship 
with God who is all-pervasive. You should strengthen 
the feeling ‘God is in me’ and develop oneness with 
Him. This is the answer to the first question. 


The second question: What are the signs of spiritual 
transformation? 


You should examine yourself whether you 
are leading your life with worldly feelings or with 


Ideal Parents Have Ideal Children 147 


wholehearted faith in God. You should have the firm 
conviction that you are equal-minded in both pleasure 
and pain. There are no special signs of spiritual 
transformation. But, at times, you may have certain 
spiritual dreams and visions. You should enquire 
yourself whether you are progressing or declining in 
your devotion. Everything depends upon your faith. 
Other than this, there are no special signs. 


The third question: What should be the qualities 
of a teacher in the Sai System of Education? 


The teacher should not give too much freedom 
to the students. He should exercise control over them 
with loving and convincing words. He should not allow 
them to act in an arbitrary way just because they are his 
students. He should give them freedom in a measured 
manner, but in between he should apply brakes. He 
should also punish them whenever it is necessary. He 
should not punish just for the sake of punishment. He 
should use punishment only as a deterrent. 


The fourth question: How should a teacher conduct 
himself in this system of education and what sort of 
discipline should he observe? What efforts should a 
teacher make to become a role model in human values? 


This is another question that has been asked. This 
is a very important subject. A teacher should conduct 
himself like a teacher. Similarly, a student should behave 
like a student. The teacher should take care that proper 
learning environment is provided in the classroom and 


148 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


the students are happy and satisfied. 


When the teacher behaves with the students in 
an ideal manner, the students will also follow him. 
What you want your students to do, you should show 
them by your own example. Not only that, the teacher 
should eat the same food that he advises the students 
to eat. If the teacher asks the students not to eat fish 
and meat and himself eats all these things, it is very 
bad. Whatever you tell your students, you should first 
practise yourself. Whatever you want your students to 
become, first you should become yourself. You should 
not act in an arbitrary way with the pride that you are 
a teacher. You should be humble, caring and full of 
love when you are dealing with your students. 


The next question is: How should teachers behave 
with girl students? 


If there are only boys in the classroom, it is 
okay. But if there are girl students also, the teacher 
should behave in a much more refined and disciplined 
manner. Consider all the girl students as your sisters. 
Make them happy and treat them with respect as you 
do with your own sister. Only then can you inculcate 
virtues in them. In this way, you should lead an ideal 
life and become a role model for others. 


Children Should Make Their Parents Happy 


How should the parents impart human values to 
their children and how can we involve the parents in 
the education of their children? 


Ideal Parents Have Ideal Children 149 


Parents should never discuss family matters in 
the presence of their children. They may be having 
financial and other problems, but they should not let 
their children know about them. They should deal with 
their problems themselves, try to keep the children as 
happy as they can and work for their progress. 


First and foremost, the parents should put the 
human values into practice in their own life and then 
encourage their children to develop these values. The 
parents should guide their children on the right path 
by their own example. At the same time, the children 
should not cause any trouble to their parents. Their 
parents bring them up with great expectations. The 
children should develop the understanding that they 
have made progress in life only due to the sacrifice of 
their parents and hence should show gratitude to them. 
Howsoever great may be the difficulties that the parents 
have to undergo, they hide them from their children 
in order to make them happy. In such a situation, if 
the children cause even a little trouble to their parents, 
they will be totally dejected. 


Set your life on a course that gives happiness to 
your parents. Even if you have your own family, see 
to it that your parents do not suffer in any way. You 
should not ignore your parents, thinking, “My family 
should be happy, why bother about the parents?” This 
is not good. Only an illiterate fool will behave like that; 
no educated person will act in this manner. From time 
to time, you should go to your parents, serve them, 


150 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


make them happy and try to fulfil their needs. Giving 
happiness to parents is the main duty of the children. 


But some children associate themselves with bad 
company and acquire evil qualities. Man is known by 
the company he keeps. That is why it is said, “Tell me 
your company I shall tell you what you are”. Therefore, 
never associate with bad company. You should look 
after the needs of your parents carefully. Those who 
do not look after their parents should be condemned. 
Differences between parents and children are on the 
rise in today’s world. The tastes of the children are 
different from the expectations of the parents. If you 
merely pursue your own tastes, then what about your 
parents? You have every right to satisfy your tastes 
provided you fulfil the needs of your parents. It is sheer 
selfishness to work merely for your own satisfaction 
and cause grief to your parents. Children should not 
resort to this type of behaviour. You have your mother- 
in-law and father-in-law after your marriage. But from 
your very birth, you have lived with your parents. 
Therefore, it is your duty to make your parents happy. 
The children should always pray for the welfare of 
their parents and discharge their duty towards them. 
Moreover, you should not interfere in the affairs of 
others unnecessarily. Before enquiring about others, 
you should enquire about your parents and try to know 
their wishes. Parents should also educate their children 
in this regard. If you pay all your attention to your in- 
laws and forget the parents with whom you had a long 


Ideal Parents Have Ideal Children 151 


association, that amounts to selfishness and deception. 
It is due to the rise of selfishness that there is a lack 
of happy and cordial relationship between parents and 
children today. However, such selfish children are in 
minority. Hence, there is no need to worry too much 
about it. 


Parents Should Inculcate Human Values In Children 


Whatever the parents tell their children to follow, 
they should themselves adhere to it. Then only will their 
children become good. Due to the effect of modern 
times, some children try to keep distance from their 
parents thereby causing them to develop tension and 
bad temper. But you should control your temper. It is a 
great mistake if you show your temper to your parents 
who always wish for your welfare. You should show 
gratitude to your parents, to God and to all those who 
have helped you. You should never do anything due to 
which your parents may shed tears. When you make 
your parents happy, you will also be happy. 


Bal Vikas is very necessary for children because 
the children learn human values in the Bal Vikas class. 
But, first of all, parents should themselves develop 
human values. Then only will they have the right to 
teach human values to their children. When you do 
not practise yourself and merely tell the children to 
follow, then how would they listen? Whatever you 
tell the children, you should demonstrate by your own 
example. But you say, you don’t have time and you 


152 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


are busy with your office work. When you pay all your 
attention to your office work, who will look after the 
children? I have written a poem in this regard. 


When husband and wife go out to office, who 
will do the household work? 


If women go out to teach others’ children in 
schools, who will teach their own children? 


If women also go to work just like men, who 
will cook food in the kitchen? 


Earning money may solve some financial 
problems, but how will it resolve domestic 
problems? 


Women can work and earn money but they 
cannot lead a happy life if they neglect their 
home. 

(Telugu poem) 


Educated women want to take up jobs. But if 
women go for jobs, who will do the household work? 
When both husband and wife go to office for work, then 
who will look after the children? Some people employ 
an ayah (female servant) to look after their children. 
But can an ayah look after the children with love like 
a mother? No, it cannot be so. Therefore, mothers 
should themselves look after their children even at 
the cost of their jobs. If women also go to office like 
men, then who will cook food in the house? Here is 
a small example. Both husband and wife phone from 
their office to their cook that they would come home 


Ideal Parents Have Ideal Children 153 


at 5 o’clock and therefore he should keep tea ready. 
But, have they provided the required articles for the 
preparation of tea? No. For the preparation of tea, milk, 
sugar and tea leaves are required. Without these articles, 
how can anybody prepare tea? Besides that, cups and 
saucers are also required. In the absence of all these, 
if you ask the cook to prepare tea, how can he do so? 
In this way, you will lose respect before the invited 
guests. First of all, you should set right your house, 
then only should you pay attention to the outside work. 


There is nothing wrong if both husband and wife 
go to work. But they should make sure that the children 
are not put to any inconvenience in the house. If you 
leave your children to the care of the ayah and the 
cook and go to work just to earn more money, then 
what is the use? It is of no use because you will have 
to pay salary to both the ayah and the cook. Not only 
that, you will lose so many articles in the house. Then, 
what is left with you out of your earning? When you 
yourself look after the children, you save that much 
money. But the parents do not give importance to this. 
Sometimes, even cups are not available in the house for 
drinking coffee. In such a situation, what is the use of 
women taking up jobs outside? Nowadays people are 
crazy for jobs but they do not care whether necessary 
comforts and conveniences are there in the house or 
not. As soon as the husband and wife return from 
office, they engage themselves in reading newspapers, 
listening to radio and seeing TV programmes. There 


154 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


are some who do not come home but straightaway 
go from office to clubs where they play some cheap 
games. How can such people bring up their children 
in an ideal manner? If the children are not doing well 
in studies, it is not their fault; it is the fault of their 
parents. Therefore, women should remain at home and 
look after their children in a proper way. That is your 
real income. If you lose that real income and strive to 
earn some money by working outside, spoiling your 
children in the process, you will be termed as selfish 
parents. When your children take to bad ways, you 
will have to undergo a lot of suffering. It is the main 
responsibility of parents to look after their children 


properly. 


You should practise human values in your 
profession and at your workplace. Human values are 
not separate from day-to-day life. You may be a police 
officer or a nurse or a doctor or in any other profession. 
You should perform your duty sincerely. Then everything 
will become good. But, unfortunately, people do not 
perform their duty honestly. Consequently, children 
have to suffer entirely due to the fault of elders. You 
should engage yourself in good and honest work. Only 
then can your children attain progress and happiness. 


Parents Should Keep A Watch On Their Children 


Sai schools can have a corpus fund for their 
maintenance. They can take the help of parents in 
running the school. Such mutual cooperation between 


Ideal Parents Have Ideal Children 155 


the school and parents should be developed. Discipline, 
devotion and duty should be given utmost importance 
in these schools. Teaching of human values should find 
a prominent place in the school curriculum. Put the 
children on the spiritual path so that they develop love 
for God. If they want to put on an improper dress, they 
should not be allowed to do so. You should observe 
moderation in everything. Only then can the children 
be kept in check. It is the responsibility of parents to 
keep a check on their children. Parents should be made 
aware of the Sai System of Education. Some of the 
parents may not be aware of this system. The children 
can also explain the various aspects of this system to 
their parents. Only then will the parents understand it 
clearly. Otherwise, they may have some doubts regarding 
what is being taught in the school to their children. 


Sometimes, the children out of fear may not tell 
their parents everything correctly. Therefore, the parents 
should go to the school at least once a week and check 
whether what the child is telling is correct or not. The 
parents should go to school without the knowledge of 
their children and try to know the facts personally. 
They should also try to enquire about the studies and 
behaviour of their children. Some children may tell 
their parents that they have secured 50 marks, when 
actually they got only 20 marks. Some parents blindly 
believe what their child tells them and they do not go 
to the school to check the correctness of the child’s 
statement. I am not saying anything about schools in 


156 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


other countries, but this is a common practice in India. 
Only in villages we find the parents taking proper 
care of their children to inculcate necessary discipline 
in them. Whenever it is necessary, they punish their 
children and put them on the right path. But in towns 
and cities, the parents, particularly those in the higher 
strata of society, do not pay much attention to their 
children. In fact, it is only they who are supposed to 
be more vigilant. 


When children have time, they should sit quietly 
and study. But many of them roam in the bazaars. This 
is not good. Students should not loiter in the streets at 
all. Only stupids roam in the streets. They behave like 
street dogs. The students who want to maintain their 
honour and dignity should sit calmly in the house and 
engage themselves in studies. The parents should check 
their children to see that they do not spend money in 
an arbitrary manner. They should tell them what is 
right and what is wrong and make them understand that 
spending money lavishly is not good. In this manner, the 
parents should teach them what is good and put them 
on the right path. There should be harmony between 
the parents and children at home. What is the use if 
there is no harmony at home? The parents do not pay 
heed to their children and the children do not listen 
to their parents. This should not happen. They should 
discuss among themselves what is right and what is 
wrong and maintain harmony in the house. 


More importantly, the parents should be vigilant 


Ideal Parents Have Ideal Children 157 


with regard to the studies of their children. They should 
know about the types of books they are reading. Some 
children keep cheap novels in their textbooks and read 
them. When we see from a distance, we think they are 
reading their textbooks. But it is not a textbook but a 
novel of bad taste! Only when we keep a watch on the 
children will they come up in life. We should throw 
such books away as soon as we see them. There is 
not even one such book in our library (loud applause). 
If somebody brings such books, they are immediately 
destroyed. If you follow this practice in your home 
also, then your children will become good. We should 
look after the children carefully and strive for their 
progress in this manner. 


Observe Ceiling On Your Desires 


Don’t waste money, Don’t waste energy, Don’t 
waste food and Don’t waste time. This is what is 
meant by ceiling on desires. It is only when we ourselves 
practise ceiling on desires can we keep our children 
in check. But today neither the elders nor the children 
observe ceiling on desires. Many of the elders do not 
even know what is meant by ceiling on desires. Only 
in India, we find some people practising this. But in 
other countries like America, people do not practise 
this. In fact, they waste a lot of food and money. They 
spend so many dollars even on one dinner party. They 
should observe certain limits. They should feed those 
who are in need. Ceiling on desires is very important 
as it can help man to progress in life. Misuse of money 


158 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


is evil. Waste of food is bad. If you waste money, you 
may have to face many difficulties. Do not throw away 
the food which is left after you have eaten. Better you 
give it to someone who is hungry. Unfortunately, people 
throw away the food instead of giving it to those who 
are hungry. Ceiling is necessary in every aspect of life. 
Even in talking, we should observe ceiling and should 
not talk too much. Then, we will experience immense 
happiness. If you make someone happy by giving food 
to him, your happiness will also become double. 


Nobody should waste anything. Time waste is 
life waste. By wasting time, we waste our life. We 
should also not waste money. What is the use of 
wasting money? Misuse of money is evil. Therefore, 
never misuse money. Spend only when it is necessary. 
Is it proper for you to spend money unnecessarily only 
because your pocket is full? Is it not a mistake? In this 
manner, many people waste money. Those who get fat 
salaries spend money in an arbitrary way. When you 
lead your life in such a lavish manner, low income 
people like sweeper and milkman will also try to imitate 
you and ask for more salary. We should not set a bad 
ideal to others. We should follow the path which is 
beneficial to all. When you have too much money, you 
don’t mind wasting it. But do not spend money like 
that. You should think before spending, whether you 
are making proper or improper use of money. 


Ideal Parents Have Ideal Children 159 


With this, all your questions are answered. Lead 
your life very carefully. Even a small mistake can be 
blown up by others in society. Therefore, do not make 
even a small mistake. Conduct yourself in this careful 
manner. 


— Sri Sathya Sai World Education Conference, 
Prasanthi Nilayam, 21-7-2008. 


If you are good for the world, then the Lord 
of worlds will shower Love on you. Become a 
blossom, exude the fragrance of seva (selfless 
service) and prema (love); then I shall gladly wear 
the garland composed of all of you. 


Take the name of the Lord and repeat it 
always. I was listening to the bhajan you did here 
yesterday and today. Your voices were low; they 
could scarce be heard outside this Hall... 


Do bhajan with faith and enthusiasm. Let the 
whole city shake with the devotion you put into 
every Name that you sing. The Name promotes 
comradeship and establishes concord; it stills all 
storms and grants peace. 


Sri Sathya Sai Baba 





160 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


Wear the glasses of prema and all will appear 
loveable and good. Reference was made here to 
Dharidhra-narayana-seva (Service of the poor); the 
eye of prema will see all as Narayana; not only 
the poor, but the rich also. The rich too have to 
be sympathised with. You must pity the rich, for 
they have so few chances of developing the attitude 
of renunciation! See all as Narayanaswaruupa 
(embodiments of Lord Narayana) and worship all 
with the flower of prema. 


Even My nature can be understood by you 
only when you wear the glasses of holiness; holy 
things can be cognised only by the holy seeker. 
You get what you search for; you see what your 
eyes crave for. The doctor is found where patients 
gather; the surgeon stays in the operation ward. 
So too, the Lord is ever with the suffering and 
the struggling. Whenever people cry out in agony: 
“Oh God,” there, God will be. 


Sri Sathya Sai Baba 





13 


Love Is Truth; Truth Is Love. 
Live In Love 


All the names and forms are but the 
manifestations of the Supreme Being who is 
Existence-Knowledge-Bliss Absolute and non- 
dual. He is the embodiment of Sathyam, Sivam, 
Sundaram (Truth, Goodness, Beauty). 


(Sanskrit verse) 
Embodiments of Love! 


URING the last two days, you attended the 

conference and listened to the speakers sitting 
here in this Hall, undergoing all inconveniences. It is 
really your good fortune that you could come here from 
far off countries and participate in this conference. You 
have come here spending a lot of money and undergoing 
great strain. This in itself is a testimony to the purity 
of your heart. There are millions of people in this 


162 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


world. There are lakhs of schools and colleges. But 
only a few of you are blessed with the opportunity of 
coming here. You can imagine how fortunate you are! 


The Educated Must Manifest Human Values 


Having come here and participated in this 
conference, what is it that you are supposed to learn? 
First of all, you must understand the nature of your 
own heart and manifest human values, namely, truth, 
righteousness, peace, love and non-violence. Only then 
can you be called educated in the true sense of the 
term. There are many lawyers in this world who study 
voluminous books. In spite of their learning, we find 
many ‘liars’ among them. There are many doctors. But 
what is the use? They are getting bogged down with 
professional rivalry. We cannot find unity anywhere. 
First and foremost, we have to develop unity. 


All of us are the children of God. We are all 
brothers and sisters. We should preserve this truth in our 
heart. At times, there may be some differences among 
brothers and sisters. Therefore, we must learn to adjust 
with each other. Not only that, we must understand each 
other in the first instance. Adjustment becomes easy 
when we have proper understanding. There cannot be 
any adjustment without proper understanding. Firstly, 
you must understand that whatever Swami teaches is 
only out of His love for you. 


Love Is Truth; Truth Is Love. Live In Love 163 


There is great progress in the field of science 
today. All the inventions of the scientists are within the 
purview of senses. In fact, many scientists are acting in 
a senseless manner and committing mistakes. Scientists 
themselves are not sure of what they are saying and 
doing. They say they are helping society but in fact 
they are doing just the opposite. Help never, hurt ever 
— this seems to be their motto. As a result, man today 
is leading his life with fear and anxiety. When you 
board an aeroplane, you are not sure whether you will 
reach the destination safely. People are in the grip of 
fear. They are afraid of even rats! 


We should never be afraid of anything. Don’t fear. 
Fear is the root cause of anxiety and delusion. People 
today are afraid to eat even fruits and vegetables because 
they are grown with the help of chemicals which are 
harmful to health. The food we eat, the water we drink, 
the air we breathe are all polluted. How can we lead a 
healthy life in such a polluted environment? We should 
therefore make our lives pollution free. We have to 
do it ourselves. Merely for the sake of satisfying our 
taste buds, we should not eat junk food and spoil our 
health. When you take proper care of your health, the 
children born to you will also be healthy. 


Always speak the truth. Apart from speaking truth, 
you should remain calm and composed in the face of 
criticism. Only then can there be peace. Our ancient 
rishis used to observe silence as part of their spiritual 


164 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


sadhana. Observance of silence helps you to progress 
on the spiritual path. When you practise silence, you 
can easily experience peace of mind. Love manifests 
from peace. When you are filled with love, you will 
have no enemies. Therefore, lead your life with love. 
Only through love can we establish peace in the world. 


Today people talk of peace but we find only pieces 
everywhere. Even the country is being divided into 
pieces! What I mean to say is people are keeping the 
interests of their regions above the national interest. 
We should stand united as a country. When someone 
asks you, ‘Where do you come from?” you should 
proudly say that you belong to India. Do not say you 
belong to Puttaparthi, Anantapur district, etc. Only those 
with a narrow mind will give such an answer. “I come 
from India,” this should be your answer. Similarly, one 
should not say that he comes from California, which is 
only a small part of America. One should say that he 
comes from America. Always be broadminded in your 
thinking. It is your good fortune to be endowed with 
such a broad mind. When you develop broadmindedness, 
your children also will be broadminded. 


Parents Should Lead An Exemplary Life 


Parents should enrol their children in Bal Vikas 
classes and impart sacred teachings to them. As are the 
parents, so are the children. Therefore, parents should 
tread the right path and set an ideal so that their children 
can emulate them. The fault lies in the parents if the 


Love Is Truth; Truth Is Love. Live In Love 165 


children do not behave properly. Hence, parents should 
take utmost care in bringing up their children. After 
a certain age, children do not obey their parents. The 
reason being parents themselves do not follow the right 
path. Parents should lead an exemplary life if they want 
their children to be good and come up in life. There 
should be no difference of opinion between the father 
and the mother. They should be united in whatever they 
tell their children. In some families, mother says one 
thing and father says something else. Such lack of unity 
and understanding between the parents is not a good 
sign. Both of them must stand on one word and teach 
their children the right path. First of all, they should 
teach their children to adhere to truth. It is enough if 
we follow the path of truth, because truth is the basis 
of everything. 


Sathyannasti paro Dharma (There is no Dharma 
greater than adherence to truth). Peace originates from 
righteousness and love manifests from peace. Where 
there is love, there is non- violence and everyone can 
lead a peaceful life. If the nation has to attain peace 
and prosperity, we should follow the path of truth. What 
is truth? “Manasyekam vachasyekam karmanyekam 
mahatmanam” (He is a noble soul whose thoughts, 
words and deeds are in harmony). If your thought, 
word and deed are at variance, it amounts to falsehood. 
Before we teach our children to adhere to truth, we 
should practise truth in our daily life. Only then can 
the children emulate us and become ideal. 


166 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


We should lead a ‘heartful life’, not an artificial 
life. Today, right from the system of education, 
everything has become artificial. People read a number 
of sacred texts, chant mantras and undertake meditation. 
But all this is done in an artificial manner. Whatever 
may be the spiritual practice we undertake, we should 
do it whole- heartedly. In the name of meditation, 
people close their eyes and sit cross- legged, but they 
have no control over their mind. Their mind goes 
everywhere as per its whims and fancies. Therefore, we 
should control our mind in the first instance. Manah 
eva manushyanam karanam bandhamokshayo (mind is 
the cause of bondage and liberation of man). As is the 
thought, so is the action. Hence, we should entertain 
only good thoughts, which lead to good actions and 
ultimately yield good results. Do not follow the vagaries 
of the mind. Do not be under the control of the mind. 
The mind should be under your control. Mind is like a 
mad monkey. It goes everywhere without any restraint. 
But it becomes quiet and subdued when it is turned 
towards God. When the sun rises, our shadow is very 
long. If we start walking towards the sun, our shadow 
will fall behind us. On the other hand if we walk in 
the opposite direction with our back towards the sun, 
we have to follow our shadow which falls ahead of 
us. When the sun is right on our head, the shadow 
will fall under our feet. Maya (delusion) is like our 
shadow. In order to conquer Maya, you have to turn 
your mind towards God. When your mind is directly 


Love Is Truth; Truth Is Love. Live In Love 167 


focused on God, maya will be totally subdued like the 
shadow under your feet. 


Keep Your Mind Focused On God 


There are three hands in the clock indicating 
seconds, minutes and hours. The second hand is the 
longest and moves quicker than the other two. When 
the second hand completes sixty digits, the minute 
hand moves forward by one digit. Similarly, when 
the minute hand crosses sixty digits, the hour hand 
crosses one digit. However, it is the hour hand that is 
most important. Thinking of God once in a while and 
spending the rest of the time in worldly pursuits is 
like the second hand which has little significance. But 
constant contemplation of God at all times is like the 
hour hand which is most important. 


You should not act as per the vagaries of your 
mind. As I have mentioned earlier, mind can cause 
liberation or bondage. Therefore, you have to exercise 
control over your mind and turn it in the right direction, 
i.e., towards truth and love. Then it becomes steady 
and attains the power of concentration. Love is truth 
and truth is love. Live in love. This is not physical 
and worldly love. We should preserve spiritual love 
in our heart. Only then can we develop steadiness of 
mind. Worldly love will only make our mind fickle and 
unsteady. Therefore, keep your mind always focused 
on God. Only then can you experience peace. People 


168 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


think it is very difficult, but let Me tell you that there 
is no sadhana easier than this. 


When we develop love for God, mind can be 
controlled very easily. On the other hand, if the mind 
is not turned towards God, it can never be controlled. 
Whatever you do, consider it as God’s work. Everything 
happens as per the Will of God. Do not be under the 
delusion that your will alone can make things move. If 
that be the case, why are you not able to exercise any 
control over certain events that take place in your life? 
Understand that everything moves as per the Divine 
Will. If something good happens to you, consider it 
as the will of God. If something bad were to happen, 
accept that also as the will of God. There is certainly 
some purpose behind whatever He does which you 
cannot comprehend. Whatever He does is for your own 
good. Hence, leave everything to His will. Sukhadukhe 
samekruthwa labhalabhau jayajayau (one should remain 
equal-minded in happiness and sorrow, gain and loss, 
victory and defeat). Whatever may happen, consider it 
as an act of divine love and welcome it wholeheartedly. 


When you get immersed in the divine love, you 
will be successful in all your endeavours. But today 
people are getting immersed in worldly love only. One 
who develops worldly love is a liar! Only divine love 
can be termed as true love. Divine love will never 
betray you. Let people think what they like, let them 
criticise you in any manner, but you should always 


Love Is Truth; Truth Is Love. Live In Love 169 


remain firmly established in divine love. Under any 
circumstances, do not deviate from the path of divine 
love. When you preserve divine love in your heart, 
your future as well as the future of your children will 
be safe and secure. 


When someone asks you, “Who are you?”, you 
are unable to give correct reply. You identify yourself 
with the physical body. But in fact, physical body is 
like a leather bag which contains various entities such 
as the mind, intellect, chitta, etc. Once the life principle 
ebbs away from the body, it becomes an ‘empty bag’ 
which is of no use to us. Hence, we put it in fire and 
reduce it to ashes. Before the body becomes an ‘empty 
bag’ and is burnt to ashes, you should offer to God all 
that is contained in it and redeem your life. 


Eliminate The Bad In You And Establish Direct 
Contact With God 


First of all, you should give up the bad qualities 
such as kama, krodha, lobha, moha, mada, matsarya 
(Lust, anger, greed, infatuation, pride, jealousy). They 
can cause you only misery, not happiness. You can see 
for yourself how blissful you become when you get 
rid of these evil qualities. In order to experience such 
eternal bliss, offer to God all that is in you. You have 
a number of desires. But is it possible to get all your 
desires fulfilled? No. Never cause harm to others in 
the process of fulfilment of your desires. If you desire 
something, pray to God and ask Him directly. Establish 


170 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


direct contact with Him. If you follow ‘indirect’ 
methods, you will be put to untold misery. But today 
people are trying to harm others in order to satisfy 
their own greed. Such people are bound to reap the 
consequences of their evil deeds. Long ago during the 
independence movement, I composed a song picturising 
a scene where an infant was crying and his mother was 
consoling him with an assurance that everything will 
be alright and there is nothing to worry about the fate 
of the country. I sang it on the stage, placing a rubber 
doll in a cradle and rocking it gently. 


Do not cry, my child, do not cry. 


If you cry, you will not be called a valiant son 
of Bharat. 


Go to sleep, my child, go to sleep. 


Did you get scared because the terrible Hitler 
has invaded the invincible Russia? 


Go to sleep, my child, go to sleep. 
Do not cry my child, do not cry. 
For the Red Army is marching under Stalin. 
They will put an end to Hitler. 
Then what else is the reason for your crying? 
Is it because the countrymen lack unity? 
All the countrymen will unite and fight to win 
freedom; 
Go to sleep, my child, go to sleep. 

(Telugu song) 


Love Is Truth; Truth Is Love. Live In Love 171 


Maintain A Noble Character Suffused With Love 


Today you have gathered here in such large 
numbers. Have we sent any invitation letter to any of 
you? No, no. It is only love that has brought you here 
(applause). It is only love that can unite everybody, not 
hatred. When your love and My love come together, 
any task can be achieved. Hence, develop love. With 
the power of love, you can win over anybody, even 
a mighty rakshasa can be subdued. When Ravana 
abducted Sita, Hanuman went to Lanka in search of 
her. He found her in Asoka grove, sitting under a tree 
and chanting the name of Rama. She had firm faith 
that only Rama could protect her from the clutches of 
the rakshasas. In spite of all his learning, valour and 
wealth, Ravana was as insignificant as a blade of grass 
when compared to Rama, because he lacked character. 
Rama was one of noble character. If one is endowed 
with noble character, one can achieve any mighty 
task. That is why I often tell our students that the end 
of education is character. What is the use of all your 
education if you lack character? Some of the lawyers 
keep reading a number of books day and night. But, 
when they go to the court, they speak only untruth. 
Greatness does not lie in reading books. The truth that 
the books teach should be preserved in our heart. We 
must develop good character. Then we will certainly 
achieve success in all that we do. 


Once you go back home, remember all that 
Swami has taught you and develop good character 


172 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


among your children. Develop a spirit of sacrifice and 
sanctify your life with noble deeds. What is the use of 
merely amassing wealth? Alexander, the great emperor, 
conquered different parts of the world and came to 
India with a desire to conquer this country too. On 
his return journey, he suffered a grave illness. Sensing 
that his end had approached, he called all his ministers 
and generals and told them that he was not going to 
live any more. He instructed them to take his body 
to his country after his death. He further told them to 
expose his hands out of the bier with his palms turned 
upwards and take the funeral procession to all the 
streets of the city. This was to tell the people of the 
world that in spite of his great conquests in the world 
and a great name and fame, Alexander left the world 
empty-handed. This is true to all of us. Whatever we 
may accumulate, we have to go empty-handed only. 
In the ultimate analysis, all the worldly possessions 
are useless. Our bank balance will not follow us when 
we leave this world. Therefore, utilise your wealth for 
the benefit of the poor and the needy with a spirit of 
sacrifice. When you spend your life in such a sacred 
manner, you will certainly be redeemed. 


Valedictory Address, 
Sri Sathya Sai World Education Conference, 
22-7-2008, Prasanthi Nilayam. 


14 


Educare Leads To Unity Of 
Thought, Word And Deed 


This land of Bharat is the motherland for 
great people who acquired name and fame in 
different continents; 

This land of Bharat is the battlefield where the 
warriors of foreign countries were driven out 
and freedom from foreign rule obtained; 

The sweetest feeling of this land of Bharat is 
the feeling of motherhood. 

Consigning to flames the moral fabric of our 
country that ordains self-respect as more 
valuable than one’s own life, 

The dagger of unrestrained freedom has been 
given to the people today imitating the western 
countries; 

Just as an elephant that is unable to realise its 


174 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


own strength, 
So are the Bharatiyas today. 
(Telugu poem) 


HE elephant, not knowing its own inherent 

strength, meekly submits itself to the mahout 
and obeys his commands. Similarly, man, unable to 
realise his own divine nature, submits himself to the 
world and its attractions and in the process encounters 
several difficulties. He is unable to bear even a little 
inconvenience. When someone is transferred to a new 
place, he feels diffident to take up the new assignment. 
If his son or daughter falls sick, he is filled with anxiety. 
He is living in the grip of fear. He is unable to realise 
his own strength. 


Education Is For Life Not For A Living 


The reason for this fear complex is modern 
education. It does not develop self-confidence and 
self-reliance. Modern education teaches you how to 
make a living in the outside world. You may earn 
money and make a comfortable living by providing all 
sorts of conveniences to the ephemeral physical body, 
with the help of modern education. But, you cannot 
have peace of mind. You may enjoy worldly pleasures 
with money, but spiritual bliss cannot be attained with 
wealth. Hence, — one should never forget spirituality 
under any circumstances. It is only spiritual life that 
can confer peace and happiness. It is said “Bhajana 
bina sukha santi nahi.....” Peace and happiness can 
be attained only by singing the glory of the Divine and 


Educare Leads To Unity Of Thought, Word And Deed 175 


not by wealth or worldly possessions. Worldly education 
aims at providing physical comforts only. 


In spite of his education and intelligence, a 
foolish man will not know his true Self and a 
mean-minded person will not give up his evil 
qualities. (Telugu poem) 


Modern education leads only to argumentation, 
not to total wisdom. What is the use of 
acquiring education which cannot lead you to 
immortality? Acquire that knowledge which 
will make you immortal. 


(Telugu poem) 


What is the use of pursuing such type of education? 
A human being needs to cultivate the five human values, 
namely, Sathya (Truth), Dharma (Righteousness), Santi 
(Peace), Prema (Love) and Ahimsa (Non-Violence). 
Kama (lust), Krodha (anger), lobha (greed), moha 
(delusion) etc. are qualities of animals. Unfortunately 
today man is developing animal qualities. He does not 
make effort to cultivate human qualities. That is the 
reason why he has no peace of mind or happiness in 
spite of accumulating a lot of wealth. 


It is in this context that much emphasis is laid 
on ‘Educare’ instead of Education. What is ‘Educare’? 
Educare is manifesting one’s own innate divine nature. 
One can experience bliss by doing so. There are several 


176 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


colleges and universities in different parts of the world 
today. There are innumerable professors and Ph.Ds too. 
But, could their high academic degrees confer peace and 
happiness on them? Why did the world not experience 
peace and happiness in spite of producing so many 
educated people? The reason being, all their education 
is meant to make a comfortable living. Education is 
for life, not for a mere living. One has to pursue 
Educare along with education. Education is related to 
the outside world, whereas Educare concerns itself with 
one’s inner being. It relates to the atma (soul). Where 
is atma? It is everywhere. It is omnipresent. The Vedas 
declare Aham Brahmasmi (I am Brahman). This dictum 
denotes the universal existence of God. A human being 
is the embodiment of the divine Self, verily. He is not 
merely a human being. Since he identifies himself with 
the physical body, he considers himself a mere mortal. 


There are five human values. The first one is 
Sathya (Truth). What is its form? It has no form. It 
is beyond description. Similarly, Santi (Peace) cannot 
be perceived by the naked eye. So also the other 
human values like Dharma (Righteousness), Prema 
(Love) and Ahimsa (Non-Violence) have no form. 
Prema is one quality that is present in all human 
beings, but it is invisible. It can be recognised only 
when it is showered on another human being. Where 
there is love, there cannot be hatred. Where there is 
no hatred, there cannot be violence. That is ahimsa 
(non-violence). Strangely, the term human value has 


Educare Leads To Unity Of Thought, Word And Deed 177 


acquired a new meaning these days. It is mistaken for 
accumulating wealth and maintaining bank balance. 
People think this is the purpose of education. This is 
not true. The real human values are Sathya (Truth), 
Dharma (Righteousness), Santi (Peace), Prema (Love) 
and Ahimsa (Non-Violence). Anything contrary to these 
values is animalistic in nature. Hence, whenever you 
are confronted with such animal thoughts you remind 
yourself “I am not an animal, I am not an animal, I 
am a human being, I am a human being”. You are a 
human being, not an animal. However, you can be 
considered a human being only when you manifest 
human qualities, not otherwise. You may be highly 
educated and well-read, but if you do not have human 
qualities, you cannot be called a human being. It is 
only that person who manifests the five human values 
that could be called a real human being. 


You may be an Emperor with lot of wealth and 
man-power to support you, but you may not be happy. 
Real peace and happiness come from an inner feeling 
of peace and tranquility. Worldly positions and power 
cannot confer peace and happiness. You all know the 
story of Alexander. He went round the world on a 
conquest. He crossed the river Sindhu and came to 
India. Meanwhile he had a heart attack. There were a 
good number of doctors around him, who examined him 
and declared that he might not live long and die very 
soon. Alexander then called his ministers and generals 
and told them “After I leave this body, wrap my dead 


178 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


body with a white cloth keeping my both hands in a 
raised position so that all people can see my empty 
hands. Then you take my body in procession through 
all the streets of our village. Whoever sees my body 
thus will enquire why my hands are kept in such 
raised position. You tell them that Emperor Alexander 
conquered all the countries and accumulated a lot of 
wealth. However, at the time of his death, none, even 
the mighty army or the doctors present could save him. 
He left the world empty-handed leaving behind all his 
empire and great wealth.”. 


Similarly, one may be a billionaire or a millionaire; 
yet one has to leave this world with empty hands. You 
may store your wealth in bank lockers; but you cannot 
take even a handful of earth along with you at the time 
of leaving this world. Not even a dust particle. 


That Which Manifests One’s Innate Divinity Is Real 
Education 


All education that we pursue today is secular. No 
doubt that is also necessary, but the real education is 
that which helps you to manifest your innate divinity. 
You may read a number of texts, you can teach them 
to others, too. They cannot make your life exemplary. 
Hence, what sort of education should a man pursue? 
‘Educare’. What is Educare? Educare is manifesting 
one’s innate human qualities in the outside world. No 
text books need be read for this purpose. However, 
since you came into this world with a physical body, 


Educare Leads To Unity Of Thought, Word And Deed 179 


you have to acquire education and earn money to 
sustain that body. Secular education is for sustaining 
the physical body. The chanting of the Gayatri Mantra 
starts with AUM. Then the mantra proper reads “Bhur 
Bhuva Suvah Tat Savitur Varenyam Bhargo Devasya 
Dheemahi Dhiyo Yo Nah Prachodayat”. The chanting 
of AUM itself will confer all the benefits that accrue 
by chanting of the mantra. There is a great necessity 
today to explain the significance and inner meanings of 
such mantras to students. That is why we have recruited 
teachers who can explain these spiritual aspects along 
with secular education. 


The first Vice Chancellor of our University, V. K. 
Gokak, was one such great teacher who could impart 
secular education with spiritual background. I knew him 
even before we started our colleges. He learnt several 
aspects from Me. He always used to chant the divine 
name of Swami. He and his wife had single minded 
devotion. Whenever I visited their house, first of all, 
they would take Me to their Puja room. Gokak’s heart 
was very pure. Such a noble person became the first 
Vice Chancellor of our university. The students today 
are enjoying the fruits of all the hard work done by 
him. He used to obey My command in letter and spirit. 
He used to approach Me to clarify even a small doubt. 
Today, his eldest son Anil Gokak is laying down the 
office of the Vice Chancellor of our university after 
completing his tenure of three years. Anil is a worthy 
son of a worthy father. Having completed his tenure, 


180 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


he is leaving the university, but I know that his mind 
is always with Swami. 


Both Anil Gokak and his wife are ardent devotees 
of Swami. Do not think that they are going away from 
us, nor are we sending them away. Sri Sathya Sai 
University is imprinted in their hearts. Their thoughts 
are always focused on Swami. Their hearts are always 
tuned to Swami. Swami is always with them. Do not 
think that we are giving them a send-off today. No, no. 
We do not give send-off to any one, we always welcome, 
welcome, welcome. I also told them that wherever 
they were, they should come here and have Swami’s 
darshan. The Gokak family has always remained a 
homogeneous unit. Wherever they are, Swami is firmly 
installed in their heart. Anil Gokak is Mine and I am 
his. I told him, ‘I and you are one’. Not only Anil, all 
of you are part of Me though outwardly you appear to 
be different from Me. Easwara sarva bhutanam (God 
is immanent in every living being). Easavasyamidam 
jagat (The entire universe is permeated by God). Even 
ants and insects are different forms of God. There is 
nothing in the universe which is not divine. That is 
the truth. 


The creation emerges from truth and merges 

into truth, 

Is there a place in the cosmos where truth does 

not exist? 

Visualise this pure and unsullied truth. 
(Telugu poem) 


Educare Leads To Unity Of Thought, Word And Deed 181 


Develop The Feeling That God Is Always With Us 


Everything is God. It is God that protects or 
punishes. You should not be under the impression that 
someone is punishing you. It is God’s Will that works 
through him. Whoever hurts you or causes suffering 
to you, you should always think that he belongs to 
you. You should never entertain an ill-feeling against 
that person. All are one, be alike to every one. The 
bodies may be different and the thoughts may be 
different. But, the atma tatwa in all is only one. No 
one can separate the atma as belonging to this person 
or that person. Wherever you go, whether it is America 
or Japan or Germany or Pakistan or India, only one 
sun illuminates the entire world. It is day time for us 
now, whereas it is night in America. Does it mean that 
there is no sun in America? No. The sun is here, there 
and everywhere, illumining the entire world. Since the 
Earth rotates round the Sun, it is night in America at 
this point of time. Similarly, God is everywhere. He 
is omnipresent. We need not search for Him in some 
comer. He is immanent in us. We should develop a 
feeling that God is always with us, in us, above us and 
below us. One should develop such firm faith. Then 
one can see Him at any place of one’s choice. You 
may contemplate upon Rama or Krishna. While doing 
so, keep the form of your chosen deity before your 
mind’s eye and contemplate on Him. Surely you will 
visualise that form. You should therefore not entertain 
the feeling that God has forsaken you. If God were 


182 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


to forsake you, how can you exist in the world? God 
and you are one. Lord Easwara is also referred to as 
Arthanareeswara, signifying the unity between the male 
and female aspects of Divinity. 


In fact, all our troubles are due to our attachment 
to Prakriti (material world). Do not entertain the 
feeling that you are separate from God, that you are 
only a devotee, etc. Do not think that He is God and 
you are only a Dasa (servant of God). You are not 
merely a devotee. You are God verily. Constantly 
remind yourself “I am God, I am God, I am God”. 
All the names that are given to individuals are for the 
purpose of identification. They are not eternal. In fact, 
all names and forms are meant to be shed at one time 
or other. But the atma is eternal and changeless. If ‘I’ 
and ‘Mine’ are removed, what remains is God only. 
You say this is my body, my mind, my intellect, etc. 
You are not the body, you are not the mind, you are 
not the intellect. You are separate from all these things. 
You are God, verily. Fill water in thousand vessels and 
keep them in the sun. The sun reflects in all thousand 
vessels. But there is only one sun. Just as the one 
sun reflects in thousand vessels, so also the one God 
illumines the entire universe. God is one and the goal 
is one. You have to develop the feeling that everything 
good or bad, profit or loss, is God. Of course, secular 
education and ideas are necessary to a certain extent. 


Educare Leads To Unity Of Thought, Word And Deed 183 


Today Viswanath Pandit is taking charge as the new 
Vice Chancellor. He has also toured several countries 
of the world as an academician. He is ‘Viswanatha’. 
He is a very good person. In the past also, several 
Vice Chancellors worked in this university and left 
after completing their tenure. They may not be present 
here in their physical bodies. But, their atmas are 
always with Me. In fact, I am their atma. Hence, no 
one should feel that someone has left and some other 
person has come in his place. You perform your duty. 
This duty strengthens your relationship with God. Duty 
is God. Anil Gokak performed his duties very well. 
Even a small matter, he used to bring to the notice 
of Swami for clarification. I need such people. Right 
from the first Vice Chancellor, the senior Gokak, to 
the junior Gokak, all Vice Chancellors are My people 
only. Even the future Vice Chancellors belong to Me 
only. I am utilising the services of all these persons 
for the development of students. 


Students Must Develop Equal-Mindedness 


The students are also good. College students in 
the outside world these days are problematic. But, 
our students cannot be compared to those boys. Our 
students are unique. They do not join unsuitable 
company in the outside world. They maintain good 
behaviour at all times. Everywhere they are distinct 
and distinguishable, but that does not mean that they 
are separate or misfits in any society. Wherever they 
are, they act in harmony with their local community 


184 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


and always conduct themselves with dignity, obeying 
Swami’s command. 


Spirituality is like the head of a physical body. It is 
only when the head functions well, that all other limbs 
in the body function smoothly. All our students should 
therefore treat spirituality as their head. Each lecturer 
teaches a particular subject in the class room. The 
students should imprint their teachings in their hearts. 
They should not differentiate between the lecturers 
saying so and so is a great lecturer and others are not. 
If you conduct yourself as good boys with sterling 
character and leadership qualities, you can even rule 
this country in the years to come. Hence, develop a 
sense of equal-mindedness, treat all lecturers as good 
and take their lessons to your heart. This is what I wish 
to emphasise today as My advice to all the students of 
our Institute. Let there be unity between your thoughts, 
words and deeds. That is ‘7rikarana Suddhi’ What you 
think, you should speak; what you speak, you must 
put into practice. That is real humanness. Unity does 
not mean gathering of all people at one place. What is 
needed is perfect harmony between thoughts, words and 
deeds. That is real Educare. The Educare is very much 
immanent in you. You need not refer to any text books 
to find Educare. Our heart itself is a text book. Follow 
its teachings. Then you will become good students and 
good people. The good people are God’s own people. 
Don’t consider yourself as just students. You are not 
merely students. Only your body is a student. In your 


Educare Leads To Unity Of Thought, Word And Deed 185 


heart, you are verily divine. 


Anil Gokak is leaving today. He will come 
back. Wherever he and his family reside, they belong 
to Me. I belong to them too. This is our relationship. 
I wish that all of you should conduct yourself as good 
students and welcome the incoming Vice Chancellor 
Viswanath Pandit with love and respect. Be happy. 


Divine Discourse, Prasanthi Nilayam.6-8-2008, 


The ego is most easily destroyed by bhakti, 
by dwelling on the magnificence of the Lord and 
by rendering service to others as children of the 
Lord. You can call on the Lord by any name, for 
all names are His; select the Name and Form that 
appeals to you most. That is why Sahasranamas are 
composed for the various forms of God; you have 


the freedom and the right to select any one of the 
thousand. The Guru will give you the Name and 


Form suited to your temperament and samskaras 
(meritorious acts)... 


You have to do the sadhana in an atmosphere 
of joy and contentment. 


Sri Sathya Sai Baba 





186 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


Physical health is a prerequisite for mental 
health and mental health ensures physical health! 
An attitude of generosity, of fortitude in the 
presence of sorrow and loss, a spirit of enthusiasm 
to do good, to be of service to the best of ones 
capacity these build up the mind as well as the 
body. The very joy derived from service reacts on 
the body and makes you free from disease. The 
body and the mind are closely interrelated... 


The village is the backbone of the whole 
country. The child becomes man, the village grows 
into a town; only, we should see that the innocent, 
simple, sincere child does not grow into a cruel, 
hard-hearted man. Similarly, we have to see that 
the quiet, God-fearing simple village does not grow 
into a noisy negative town. Tomorrow’: leaders 
are being bred in this and other villages all over 
the land. If you have virtue, the towns will have 
virtue tomorrow. If you have strength, towns will 
be strong. If you are quarrelsome, the towns will 
be affected by it. Learn to live and work in amity. 
Make the joyful experience of today a permanent 
feature of your life. 


Sri Sathya Sai Baba 





15 


Develop Self-confidence To Achieve 
God-realisation 


This land of Bharat gave birth to great people 
who earned name and fame in different 
continents; 
This land of Bharat is the battlefield from 
where the foreign rulers were driven out and 
freedom won; 
This land of Bharat had earned great reputation 
for erudite scholarship; 
This land of Bharat is a divine land which 
produced great intellectuals in the fields of art, 
music, literature and sciences; 
Having been born in such a great land, oh Boys 
and girls the responsibility to uphold the glory 
of this country is yours. 

(Telugu poem) 


188 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


HARAT is no ordinary country. It is so 

pleasing to God that He incarnated several times 
in this great land. The people of this country developed 
great love and devotion to God (Bhagavadrati). This land 
gave birth to great warriors, scholars and intellectuals. 
But, such a great country is in a sad plight. However, 
we need not be disheartened. No doubt, in the modern 
world science has progressed by leaps and bounds . 
But, it has failed to realise Divinity. 


Only Spirituality Can Ensure Self-Confidence And 
Morality 


Devoid of self-confidence, any amount of 
education, scientific knowledge and experiments are 
absolutely of no use. Not only are they useless, but a 
waste of time too. This is not the way to God-realisation. 
God-realisation is possible only through the control 
of senses and mind and by developing faith in God. 
Self-confidence is the key to God-realisation. Hence, 
dear students, develop self-confidence. Then you can 
achieve anything in life. 


People now are crazy about science; but it is only 
illusory. Science teaches about transitory, impermanent 
and unreal things only. It fails to teach true Atma 
Tatwa. Scientists are still engaged in unravelling the 
mysteries of the universe without concentrating on 
the realisation of the Atma Tatwa. These experiments 
are an exercise in futility. Science may explore a few 
mysteries in the physical world and contribute to a 


Develop Self-confidence To Achieve God-realisation 189 


better living. It may make some inventions that would 
help amass great wealth, but would miserably fail in 
developing noble qualities. What is the use of acquiring 
wealth, ignoring morality? Money comes and goes, 
but morality comes and grows. Morality is possible 
only through spirituality. There has been a_ galaxy of 
scientists who made great inventions. But, they failed 
to control their body and mind. Why should people 
pursue such scientific knowledge that would spoil their 
brains? Instead, one should develop his brain, cultivate 
a positive outlook and engage himself in service to the 
country and society. The education you pursue must 
contribute to the welfare of the society. Then only can 
you earn name and fame and develop morality and 
integrity. 


Develop morality. It is only then that you can 
realise Truth. Strive to uphold truth. Truth is the father 
and mother to the world. When truth and righteousness 
join together, peace is born. From peace, comes love. 
Where there is love, there is no scope for hatred. There 
will be no place at all for evil qualities like anger and 
jealousy. It is only because people have lost the noble 
quality of love that even brothers and sisters hate one 
another these days. Hence, first and foremost develop 
love. There is nothing in this world that you cannot 
achieve by love. Love is God, live in love. Love is 
your life. Even an ant cannot live without love. It 
makes friendship with other ants while moving about. 
The insects too love one another. Only human being 


190 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


has lost this noble quality of love today. No doubt, he 
has love inherently, but he is showing it for wealth and 
to certain individuals only. There is no use developing 
such individualised love. One has to develop love 
for the society as a whole. It is only when there is 
society that an individual can exist. One can live as a 
member of the society. By living in the society, one 
can contribute to the welfare of the society. No other 
method would work. 


The Onam Story 


Emperor Bali was a great renunciant. He earned 
great name and fame for his noble quality of charity. He 
used to readily give away whatever was asked by others. 
The people of Kerala are most fortunate to have had 
Bali as their emperor. Once he was performing a yajna. 
Several scholars attended that yajna. The Vamanavatar 
too came to see that yajna. While He was approaching 
the yajna vedika, people started wondering, “This boy is 
too young! What has He to do with the yajna? This is 
an occasion on which great Vedic scholars are expected 
to participate. How dare this young lad venture into 
this yajna!” But, the daughter of Emperor Bali did not 
take Him so lightly. She was attracted and charmed by 
His captivating beauty and scholarly look. Emperor Bali 
received the great Vamana and enquired, “Swami, what 
brought you here? What can I do for you?” Vamana 
replied that he did not need anything like money or 
grains and that he would be content to have just three 
footstep length of land. Bali was surprised at Vamana’s 


Develop Self-confidence To Achieve God-realisation 191 


request, since even to bury a dead body six feet length 
of land was required. He therefore requested Vamana 
to ask for something more. But Vamana replied, “If 
you give Me three steps length of land, that would be 
enough.” Emperor Bali immediately promised to give 
Him three steps of land as requested. In fact, Vamana’ 
request has to be understood from the spiritual angle. 
It may appear to be a trivial request from the worldly 
point of view. Vamana then covered the entire Earth 
with one foot. Similarly, He occupied the entire sky with 
the second step. Now, there was no space available to 
set the third footstep. He enquired from Emperor Bali 
as to where He could set His third step, so that He 
might leave the place immediately. Emperor Bali was 
nonplussed at the developments and offered his head 
saying, “Swami, I have now only my head. Kindly 
keep your foot on my head.” So saying, he removed 
the crown and offered his head. Lord Vamana then kept 
His foot on Emperor Bali’s head and pushed him down 
to the nether world. Vamana did so only with a view 
to crush the ego of Emperor Bali. In fact, Emperor 
Bali was a man of righteousness and great charitable 
disposition. He was proud of these qualities and had 
developed ego. Vamana therefore decided to crush his 
ego. Emperor Bali’s subjects were greatly distressed 
that they had lost a great emperor. However, Emperor 
Bali promised to visit their land once in a year. This 
festival of Onam is held every year to commemorate 
that great day. 


192 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


On this day, the people of Kerala take a good 
head bath, cook a variety of tasty dishes and feast on 
them. Notable among the dishes is the banana pudding. 
Before partaking of this pudding, they light a sacred 
lamp in their shrines and offer it to God with prayers. 
The people of Kerala firmly believe that Emperor Bali 
would visit them on Onam day and give his darshan. 
They, therefore, offer their prayers with a pure and 
sacred heart. This tradition is being continued in Kerala 
till this day. In fact, they eagerly wait for this great 
festival. When the king loves his subjects so intensely, 
so will his subjects too. It is said, Yatha raja thatha 
praja (as is the king, so are the subjects). The people 
of Kerala loved Emperor Bali and he too loved them 
intensely. The festival of Onam reflects the bond of 
intimate love between Emperor Bali and his subjects. 
What does the name Bali signify? It signifies the great 
quality of total sacrifice. When Vamana asked for three 
feet land, he kept up his promise and offered himself 
in the end, in total surrender to the Lord. That is why 
he has become immortal. It is said, Na karmana na 
prajaya dhanena tvagenaike amrutatthwamanasuh 
(immortality is not attained through action, progeny or 
wealth; it is attained only by sacrifice). 


What do the three foot steps indicate? Surrender 
at the Lotus Feet of the Lord physically, mentally and 
spiritually. Emperor Bali in total surrender to the Lord 
offered his head to Vamana so that He might keep His 
foot on it. Once Vamana kept His foot over Bali’s head, 


Develop Self-confidence To Achieve God-realisation 193 


he was sanctified and liberated. In order that people may 
remember this great sacrifice and surrender, Emperor 
Bali would visit their land once in a year on this day. 
The people too have not forgotten their emperor till 
this day. Kerala is a land of plenty. There is no dearth 
of food grains. There is no dearth of water. In fact, 
the monsoon rains begin in Kerala. Kerala is a sacred 
land. It is a land of righteousness and sacrifice. The 
noble quality of charity had its origin in Kerala. People 
outside are also full of praise for Kerala. Prayers to 
God began in Kerala. Kerala gave birth to several great 
scholars. It is only because the land is so sacred that 
Lord Vamana incarnated in that place. He was three 
feet tall and He asked for three foot steps of land 
from Emperor Bali. He covered the entire Earth and 
sky with His two feet. Such was the magnificence of 
His power. God is described as Anoraneeyan mahato 
maheeyan (Brahman is subtler than the subtlest and 
vaster than the vastest). The Vamanavatar had come 
only for granting liberation to Emperor Bali. Among the 
Avatars of Vishnu, the Vamanavatar is the first in human 
form. While the Vamanavatar dressed in the traditional 
attire of a dhoti was entering the Yajnasala, the gaze of 
all the people there was fixed on Him. Everyone was 
captivated by the beauty and grace of the resplendent 
young boy. He took Emperor Bali along with Him to 
His divine abode. That was the great merit earned by 
Emperor Bali. The Onam festival is the day on which 
the Vamanavatar granted liberation to Emperor Bali. 


194 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


The people of Kerala celebrate Onam on a grand 
scale, with single-minded devotion. All of them unite 
to celebrate this festival irrespective of caste, creed and 
religion. It is their good fortune to come over here in 
large numbers and celebrate Onam festival in the divine 
presence of Swami. The devotees of Kerala whenever 
they come here pray, “Swami, you please visit Kerala.” 
I tell them, “I will come, I will come.” I never said 
no to them. Not only to them, I say yes to all those 
who invite Me. Surely, I will visit them one day and 
show them the glory and power of Divinity. There are 
great scholars in Kerala. Kerala is no ordinary State. It 
is a land where God had incarnated as Vamanavatar. 
The people of Kerala are most fortunate, for their 
hearts are filled with love and devotion to God. There 
is none among them who does not contemplate on 
God. They may not express their devotion outwardly, 
but in their heart of hearts they are greatly devoted. 
People from outside refer to Kerala as a communist 
state. No, no; it is not communist ... ‘come you next’. 
There are very young children participating in the 
Bal Vikas programmes. How beautiful are their faces 
radiating bliss and devotion! Their love towards Swami 
is overflowing. They are full of love! Their hearts are 
pure and will become mature in due course. 


The Power Of Chastity 


Today, the Bal Vikas children of Kerala are going 
to stage a playlet on Savitri. Who is Savitri? People 
generally remember her as the wife of Sathyavantha. 


Develop Self-confidence To Achieve God-realisation 195 


She was a chaste woman who took a firm resolve to 
bring her dead husband back to life. She relentlessly 
pursued her resolve with Lord Yama. Lord Yama offered 
to grant any request put forward by her, but she refused. 
Her firm reply was, “I do not want anything. Give me 
my husband back with life.” Unable to withstand her 
pressure, Lord Yama acceded to her request and brought 
her husband back to life. For six days, Sathyavantha’s 
dead body was lying. At last, he came back to life as 
a result of the boon granted by Lord Yama to Savitri. 
Thus, Savitri proved herself to be a great woman of 
chastity who brought her dead husband back to life with 
her noble qualities. Thus, women possess great power 
of persuasion. Their power can work wonders; even 
bring the dead back to life. Can you find parallels to 
Savitri in any other country? Only in Bharat do such 
wonders take place, since it is a land of chaste women. 


This land of Bharat has given birth to many 
noble women like Savitri who brought her 
dead husband back to life; Chandramati who 
extinguished wild fire with the power of truth; 
Sita who proved her chastity by coming out 
of blazing fire unscathed and Damayanti who 
reduced an evil-minded hunter to ashes with 
the power of her chastity. (Telugu poem) 


In the Ramayana also when Sri Rama put Sita to 
the test of fire after vanquishing Ravana, the God of 
Fire returned Sita to Rama testifying to her character 


196 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


thus: “Sita is a noble woman of chastity. Do not trouble 
her like this.” Thus, the land of Bharat is the birthplace 
of several women of chastity. People of other countries 
referred to this country by several names. When Indians 
go abroad, they introduce themselves saying, “I am 
from Delhi; I am from Kolkata; I am from Bengaluru”, 
etc., instead of saying “I am from Bharat.” Those are 
actually cities and regions which form part of India. 
Hence, it would be appropriate to say that you are from 
India. Wherever you go, you must be proud to refer to 
yourself as Bharatiyas. The name ‘Bharata’ has great 
significance. ‘Bha’ refers to Divinity and ‘rata’ refers 
to one who loves God. Thus, Bharatiyas are people 
who love God. The country of Bharath has acquired 
its name on account of such people inhabiting it. The 
present generation does not realise the significance of 
Bharat. They very casually mention that they belong 
to Puttaparthi in the Anantapur District of Andhra 
Pradesh State in India. Where is Puttaparthi? Where is 
Anantapur? All these are parts in the country of Bharat 
only. The Bharatiyas are most fortunate people. It is 
the people of Kerala who imbibed the true spirit of 
Bharat. They are blessed. Today, they are putting up the 
play of Savitri. We have to learn a lot from this play. 


You have seen how the devotees of Kerala staged 
beautiful dramas during the last two days. Yesterday, 
they enacted the ‘Sita Rama Kalyana’ (the celestial 
wedding of Sri Rama and Sita) in all its glory and 
splendour. The day before they put up a beautiful show 


Develop Self-confidence To Achieve God-realisation 197 


of Krishna Leelas. The music, action and dialogues 
are wonderful. Their dresses are also good. The lady 
devotees of Sri Sathya Sai Organisation in Kerala did 
great service in putting up this show. It is only because 
of their hard work and enthusiasm that these playlets 
appeared so natural and captivating. Whatever they do, 
the men and women of Sri Sathya Sai Organisation 
of Kerala conduct on a grand scale. I wish and bless 
that the devotees of Kerala must keep up this spirit in 
all their service activities in future also. I am happy 
that you all realised the importance and significance 
of the festival of Onam. Now you go ahead with your 
programme of staging the playlet of Savitri. 


Onam, Prasanthi Nilayam.12-9-2008, 


The path of Love and Service is not smooth: 
it abounds in struggle and disappointments. Life 
itself is a pendulum between sighs and smiles. But 
every obstacle is an invitation to your intelligence. 
“Life is a challenge; meet it! Life is a dream; 
realise it.” 


Mankind is terrified by a crowd of problems at 
the present time scientific, technological, economic 
and moral. These cannot be solved by material 
means alone. Mental transformation, too, must 
happen. 


Sri Sathya Sai Baba 





198 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


Sacrifice is the highest virtue. Some people 
are building hospitals and educational institutions 
with business motive, spending crores of rupees. If 
they invest 50 crores on a hospital, they expect a 
profit of 100 crores. Similarly, with the investment 
of 50 crores on an educational institution, they 
want to make 200 crores. This sort of business is 
an unhealthy practice. Whatever you do, do it for 
the benefit of others. 


When you stepped into this world, you did 
not bring anything with you, nor can you take 
anything with you when you leave. No benefit 
accrues to you from having palatial buildings and 
huge bank balances if you cannot use them for the 
service of the society. Spend your money for the 
welfare of society. Only then you can win divine 
grace. Serve the needy by providing comforts and 
conveniences. 


Sri Sathya Sai Baba 





16 


All Are One, Be Alike To 
Everyone 


Karma is responsible for the birth, existence 
and death of man. It holds sway over all stages 
of his life as the very deity of human existence. 
It is responsible for the joy and sorrow of man. 


(Telugu poem) 


EOPLE experience pleasure and pain, sorrow 

and difficulties in this world. But, when they 
experience pleasure, they would say it is due to their 
prapti (deservedness). On the other hand, when they 
undergo difficulties, they attribute it to their destiny. 
Really speaking, both pleasure and pain are the result 
of one’s own actions (karma). Yad bhavam tad bhavathi 
(as are the feelings, so is the result). As are the karmas 
(actions), so will be the result. As is the food, so will 
be the belch. Similarly, the entire world is based on 


200 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


karma. Hence, the karmas performed by people should 
be sacred. 


The Three Facets Of The Divine Female Principle 


It is now Dasara festival time. What is Dasara? 
The celebration of Dasara festival is meant to purify 
the actions performed by the dasendriyas (5 senses 
of action plus 5 senses of perception). Every human 
being in this world has to perform some kind of karma. 
The presiding deity or the driving force behind these 
actions is Devi, who is the personification of energy. 
She is the bestower of all kinds of energy to perform 
various kinds of karma by the human beings. Goddess 
Lakshmi bestows various kinds of wealth like money, 
food grains, gold, different kinds of objects, vehicles for 
movement, etc., to human beings so that they can lead 
a happy life in this world. The third facet of the divine 
female principle is Saraswati, the goddess of learning 
and intellect. Thus, the Trinity of Durga (goddess of 
energy), Lakshmi (goddess of wealth) and Saraswati 
(goddess of learning and intellect) are worshipped 
during this festival of Dasara. This is the underlying 
principle of worshipping this Trinity of Durga, Lakshmi 
and Saraswati during this Navaratri (9 day) festival. 
It is essential that man worships all these three facets 
of the Divine Principle. 


Tridalam Trigunakaram 
Trinetram Cha Triyayudham; 


All Are One, Be Alike To Everyone 201 


Trijanma Papa Samharam 
Eka Bilvam Sivarpanam. 


(One Bilva leaf with three petals is offered to 
the three-eyed Lord Siva who is the embodiment of 
the three Gunas (attributes), who holds the trident in 
his hand and who destroys the sins accumulated over 
three births.) 


Human Intellect Is To Be Used For Righteous Actions 


Everyone performs Devi Puja (worshipping goddess 
Devi) during the Navaratri festival, which confers energy 
on the individual. The worship of Lakshmi brings all 
kinds of wealth and that of Saraswathi, learning and 
good intellect. Hence, the worship of all the three aspects 
of goddess is very important during the Navaratri 
festival. In all this worship, Dharma (righteousness) is 
of utmost importance. One should enquire into oneself 
what result would accrue on account of a particular 
action and then get into it. This reasoning faculty is 
in the domain of the intellect (buddhi), which is all- 
pervading in the human body. Just as the electric current 
passes through the wire, intellect enters and influences 
all senses of a human being. Hence, every human being 
should make proper use of his intellect and undertake 
only righteous actions at all times. No doubt, one is 
bound by the result of one’s own actions — good or 
bad. And, no result is possible without performing an 
action. The Pandavas experienced the result of their 
karmas. So did Sita in Ramayana. Hence, we should 


202 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


undertake good and sacred karmas beneficial to the 
society, thereby sanctifying our lives. 


The left side of the chest of Lord Mahavishnu is 
the abode of Goddess Lakshmi. Seated in that sacred 
abode, she showers her grace on one and all. Lord 
Vishnu is also known as Narayana. Lord Narayana in 
this context does not refer to Lakshminarayana, but to 
Sathyanarayana. 


This Unique Avatar Is The Embodiment Of Truth 
And Righteousness 


This Sathyanarayana moves among people, 
cuts jokes, talks to them and makes them happy. 
The Lakshmi-narayana reclines on Adisesha, the 
serpent. This Sathyanarayana too was rocked under 
the bed, by a serpent when he was just a newborn 
baby. Sathyanarayana looks like any other ordinary 
human being. But, He possesses extraordinary and 
superhuman powers. They are indescribable. He looks 
very innocent. Yet, sathya (truth) is the most important 
quality He looks for in the people. Wherever He 
goes, He teaches truth (sathya) only; for, from truth 
emerges righteousness (dharma). Sathyannasti paro 
Dharma (There is no Dharma greater than adherence 
to truth). In fact, Sathyanarayana is the embodiment 
of Truth and Righteousness (Sathya and Dharma)! 
It is for propagating these two human values that 
Lord Sathyanarayana has incarnated in human form 
as Sathyanarayana Raju. Sathyanarayana is an unique 


All Are One, Be Alike To Everyone 203 


Avatar, though He appears to be an ordinary human 
being. People often commit the mistake of taking Him 
to be an ordinary human, since He very closely interacts 
with them at the human level. Whatever He speaks is 
truth, truth and nothing but truth! Truth is often times 
construed as giving expression to one’s own thoughts. 
It is not as simple as that, it is much more — putting 
them into action. Truth is one with perfect accord 
between one’s thought, word and deed. 


People do not follow My words properly. They 
take My words lightly thinking them to be just a joke 
or fun. Whatever I speak, even if it is a joke or for 
fun, it is Truth, Truth and Truth only! Unfortunately, 
people do not recognise this truth, even those who 
move very closely with Swami. They therefore take it 
lightly. They just listen and forget about it. But, surely 
the result of their apathy would be apparent sooner 
than later. Only those who are unable to visualise the 
future will be taking my words lightly. Though Swami is 
moving in front of them, giving them darshan, talking 
to them now and then and performing several gigantic 
tasks right in front of their eyes, people are unable to 
recognise His true nature and get convinced by His 
words. How strange it is! It is nearing 83 years since 
this body was born. I have not forgotten a single incident 
in this earthly sojourn. But people say, “Swami forgets 
things”. No, there is no truth at all in this statement. 
Forgetfulness is not in My dictionary. 


204 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


The principle of Sathya Sai is the principle of 
Soham Mantra, which never comes under the 
veil of forgetfulness in the waking, dream and 
deep sleep states. 

(Telugu song) 


It is human nature to misunderstand Truth, which 
is beyond the three periods of time (past, present and 
future) and three states of human life (jagrit, swapna 
and sushupti). | am now revealing that truth. I have 
never tried to reveal this so far. Since the time has 
come to reveal it, | am doing so. People have to realise 
this. Truth does not make any kind of distinction. It 
has neither friends nor foes. It has no hatred or dislike 
against anyone. All are the children of Sathyam (Truth)! 
Hence, all are equal to Me. I do not make any distinction 
between people. You may think that I am giving more 
attention to some people or favouring some. You may 
also think that I am ignoring some people. No, this is 
not true. You all know and you must have also seen 
Me. I do not at all get angry against anybody, even 
though some talk ill of Me. I will always be smiling. 
Even the apparent anger that I display sometimes is 
just to correct an individual. The students vouchsafe 
for this attitude of Mine. They wonder how Swami is 
able to put up such a smiling countenance in the midst 
of great criticism and how could Swami muster such 
great patience! 


One Atmanarayana Immanent In All 


All Are One, Be Alike To Everyone 205 


For Me, all are one even though individuals appear 
to be different in form and qualities, there is only one 
divine force working through them. That is atma sakti 
(the power of atma). There is only one Atmanarayana 
immanent in all human beings, nay, all living beings. 
Every human being must try to realise this Atma Tatwa. 


There are so many bulbs illuminating this hall. 
However, the electric current flowing in all these bulbs 
is the same. The bulbs may appear to be different, but 
current is the same. Similarly, even though the names 
and forms of the living beings in God’s creation appear 
to be different, the atmic consciousness permeating 
them is only one. All these lights go off and darkness 
envelops if the main switch is switched off. Thus, 
God illumines the entire universe as the atma tatwa 
immanent in all the living beings and objects. Even 
though God may appear to be involved in so many 
activities in this world, it is only for the pleasure of 
His devotees. He has no desires of His own. He has 
only one desire — Samasta Lokah Sukhino Bhavantu 
(May all the beings in all the worlds be happy!). 
Human beings, however, will be experiencing the 
results of their own actions. It is not possible for all 
to be happy always in this ephemeral world. One may 
experience happiness, while another may be suffering 
at the same time. This is the nature of the world. The 
sorrows and difficulties or pleasure and pain bring 
different experiences to different people, the atma tatwa 
present in all the human beings is only one. Electric 


206 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


bulbs may be of different colours and sizes. But, the 
electric current passing through them is the same. Only 
the wattage of the bulbs is different. Depending upon 
the wattage, some bulbs may be bright while others 
are dim. The brightness or dimness is only due to the 
wattage of the bulbs and it has nothing to do with the 
current. Similarly, the sorrows and difficulties, pleasure 
and pain experienced by different individuals are only 
their own making and God has nothing to do with it. 


Lord Sathyanarayana is also called Vishnu. Lord 
Vishnu has incarnated as Sathyanarayana in this world. 
Hence, Sathyanarayana is verily Lord Vishnu. This 
has been explained in the Vishnu Purana. You must 
understand His Zatwa (true nature) well. I have not 
given any discourse during the last ten days. What 
is the reason? People attributed different reasons for 
this, according to their imagination. But, one thing 
is true. I am sitting before the microphone today to 
reveal the truth. My love is supreme and pure. I love 
those who love Me. I love even those who develop 
hatred towards Me. I am also extending My love to 
those who are demonic and who try to put Me to great 
inconvenience. There is no one in this world whom 
I do not love. Unfortunately, people do not realise 
this truth. People think, “Swami is not talking to us; 
perhaps Swami is angry with us.” Let Me assure you 
that I have no anger at all. I have only one thing — 
‘hunger’; ‘hunger’ for devotees! It is only due to this 
hunger I am drawing devotees in large numbers to 


All Are One, Be Alike To Everyone 207 


Me. Be assured that God is the embodiment of Love. 
He has no hatred towards anybody. It is to teach this 
principle of love that the Navaratri celebrations have 
been started. Different people worship God and sing 
His glory in different ways. I have no difference at all! 
I wish that all should live as embodiments of love and 
like brothers and sisters. Men are more valuable than 
all the wealth of the world. 


All are God’s children. God is the only father of 
all. Hence, we must love all. Others may or may not 
love us, but, we must love all and serve all. People keep 
distance from us, so long as they do not understand the 
power of love. Once they understand and experience 
love, they become one with us. I am waiting for such 
a transformation in the hearts of people. Thousands 
of people have heard My discourses over a period of 
time. Thousands and lakhs of people witnessed My 
divine powers on various occasions. In spite of all that, 
people are unable to understand the true nature of My 
Divinity. People talk of so many things according to 
their perceptions and understanding. It is not their fault. 
There are very few people who could realise Truth and 
conduct themselves accordingly. Those who realise 
the path of Truth only will be able to follow it. When 
people develop anger or hatred against Truth, they keep 
themselves away from it. Irrespective of their love 
or hatred, we should always love them. People keep 
distance from one another due to differences of opinion. 
In fact, you are not different from others. Today they 


208 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


may appear to be different, but tomorrow they may 
come close to you. All are brothers and sisters! Hence, 
all should live like brothers and sisters with love and 
unity. “All are one; be alike to everyone.” This is My 
special Message on this holy occasion of Navaratri. 


You will be able to realise Truth sooner or later. 
When a tree bears fruit, not all the fruits in a bunch 
will be ripened at the same time. Similarly, when a 
plant bears flowers, not all the flowers blossom at the 
same time. Some will be in the process of blossoming, 
some are fully blossomed, yet others will be in the bud 
stage only. It is only the fully blossomed flower that 
spreads its fragrance. Similarly, men will also be in 
different stages of evolution — some are like the bud, 
some at the blossoming stage and some others like the 
fully blossomed flower, spreading their fragrance. We 
have to patiently wait till the fragrance stage comes. 
This is My important message. 


Today is the Poornahuti day of the Veda Purusha 
Saptaha Jnana Yajnam. What is meant by Poornahuti? 
It means total sacrifice. My life has always been one 
of sacrifice! 


Poornamada poornamidam, 
Poornat poornamudachyate, 
Poornasya poornamadaya, 
Poornamevavashishyate. 


(That is full, this is full. When the full is taken 
out of the full, what remains again is the full.) 


All Are One, Be Alike To Everyone 209 


(Sanskrit sloka) 


Those who understand the truth will be able to 
know. Students are still in the budding stage. It will 
take some time for them to understand the true spirit 
of Swami’s words. Hence, you keep patience till then. 


Students Must Avoid The Use Of Cell Phone 


One more thing I wish to mention in this context. 
I see several boys keeping cell phones in their pockets. 
They think that they are keeping cell phones for their 
convenience and easy communication. They do not 
realise the ill-effects of these instruments. The cell 
phones are often misused for undesirable purposes 
like establishing contacts between boys and girls. They 
develop bad thoughts and bad connections between 
them. In order that bad thoughts should not enter our 
minds, we should avoid such connections altogether. 
It is said, Manah eva manushyanam karanam 
bandhamokshayo (mind is the cause of bondage and 
liberation of man). It is common practice that we give 
our telephone numbers to all and sundry. What happens 
thereafter? Bad contacts develop. All unnecessary calls 
are made to verify whether we respond to them or 
not. Thus, boys and girls develop unnecessary contacts 
and establish undesirable relationships between them. 
Hence, I would strongly advise you not to make use 
of cell phones. It may be convenient in the beginning, 
but gradually it will lead to bad ways. 


210 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


I will be approaching 83 years of age shortly. I 
have not made use of a telephone till now. Several 
people want to make calls to Me expressing their 
sorrow and seeking solace. Come what may; I do not 
use the phone. Hence, I have a right to guide you and 
warn you. You must be very careful. You are still in the 
budding stage. Conduct yourself carefully, keeping your 
age in mind. If you don’t take proper care of yourself, 
even the world will look down upon you. You will be 
branded as a careless youngster. Respect and disrespect 
in the world depends on the way you conduct yourself. 
You may think that your conduct is alright, but it is for 
others to judge. Always conduct yourself in such a way 
that you do not give scope for any misunderstanding 
by others. The elders may exercise discretion and try 
to understand you in proper spirit, but children of your 
age cannot do so. Once misunderstanding sets in, you 
will miss the finer things in life and become doomed. 
Hence, I wish that you all be very careful in your 
contacts and relations with others. If possible, dump 
your cell phones in a well. You will be happy and 
peaceful. Better you don’t acquire them at all! Even if 
you acquire one, establish contact and connection with 
only those with whom it is desirable. 


Do not develop unnecessary and undesirable 
contacts with others. By developing such contacts, 
you gather news from all and sundry and pass it on to 
others. Ultimately, you will end up as Narada poking 


All Are One, Be Alike To Everyone 211 


your nose in all sorts of things. You will not only spoil 
your mind with unwanted things, but also spoil the 
minds of others. Why all this unpleasantness? Is it not 
because of your unwanted and undesirable telephonic 
contacts? Hence, be careful and earn a good name for 
yourself, your parents and the institution in which you 
are studying. 


Vijayadasami, 9-10-2008, 
Prasanthi Nilayam. 


Develop the spirit of mutual help. Villagers 
have been ruined because one person cannot 
tolerate the prosperity of another... 


Jealousy is the cause of ruin. It is born of the 
undue importance attached to the body, the senses 
and the accumulation of objects that cater to the 


senses. See things in their proper perspective, give 
them their worth but no more. There are greater 
things that grant joy and peace. Try to get hold 
of them; every one of you has a right to possess 
them. None can keep them away from your grasp. 


Sri Sathya Sai Baba 





212 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


In India, people have clubbed together in 
the name of seva, or service, as Lions Club, 
Rotary Club, Cosmopolitan Club, etc. Their 
ideals are really sacred and the projects too are 
commendable. They revere all men as a single 
family. Many worthy persons perform devoted 
service as members of these Clubs. It is indeed 
a fortunate chance for them, for there can be no 
good work, higher than this. 


They say, “Money makes many things,” but 
it is more correct to say, “Money makes many 
wrongs.” Not all, of course, are ruined by affluence. 
They can help such organisations to do more and 
better service. They can supply medicines to those 
who render health service to the poor. They can 
visit slums and offer help in various ways to the 
dwellers. These are all laudable. But collecting 
money and paying others to do the service is 
not enough; we must assess what services we 
ourselves are offering directly. And we must not 
be content the doctors, lawyers, the rich, the 
educated with spurts of service, off and on. It must 
be a continuous process, according to a settled 
time-table undertaken every week. 


Sri Sathya Sai Baba 





17 
Love Is God, Live In Love 


This land of Bharat is the motherland for 
great people, who acquired name and fame in 
different continents. The land of Bharat is the 
battlefield wherefrom the warriors of foreign 
countries were driven out and freedom from 
foreign rule was acquired. This land of Bharat 
has acquired great name and fame for erudite 
scholarship. This land of Bharat is a divine 
land which has produced great intellectuals in 
the fields of music, art, literature and various 
sciences. Having been born in such a great 
land, Oh Boys and Girls, the responsibility to 
protect and uphold the righteousness of this 
country is yours. 


(Telugu poem) 


214 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


HE fame and fortune of Bharat is truly great 

letter. While several countries of the world had 
faced calamities of various kinds Bharat has remained 
stable. It is a country richly endowed with a variety 
of wealth. 


Forbearance is the real beauty in this sacred 
land of Bharat. Of all the rituals, adherence 
to truth is the greatest penance. The nectarous 
feeling in this country is the feeling of love 
towards one s mother. Character is valued far 
higher than the very life itself. People have 
forgotten the basic principles of this great 
culture and are imitating Western culture. Alas! 
The Bharativas are not aware of the greatness 
of their cultural heritage just as a mighty 
elephant is not aware of its own strength. 
(Telugu poem) 


Throughout history Bharat has been pre-eminent 
in material and intellectual plenty. It was ruled by great 
kings and righteous rulers. Several women famed for 
their chastity were born in this country. Savitri could 
bring back her dead husband Sathyavantha to life by 
the power of her chastity. Can you find parallels to 
such noble and chaste women elsewhere in the world? 


This land of Bharat has given birth to many 
noble women like Savitri who brought her 
dead husband back to life; Chandramati who 


Love Is God, Live In Love 215 


extinguished wild fire with the power of truth, 
Sita who proved her chastity by coming out of 
the blazing fire unscathed and Damayanti who 
reduced an evil-minded hunter to ashes with 
the power of her chastity. This land of piety 
and nobility attained plenty and prosperity 
and became the teacher of all the nations of 
the world because of such women of chastity. 
(Telugu poem) 


Bharatiyas Have Forgotten Their Greatness And 
Values 


Sadly, however. today, many persons born in this 
great land of Bharat are succumbing to and are tempted 
by trivial things. Their perception is bad, they listen 
to bad things, and even their behaviour is bad. What a 
great fall! The Bharatiyas today are like the elephant 
which is unaware of its own strength. With a swish 
of its tail an elephant can knock a man off his feet 
and throw him yards away. Such a powerful elephant 
will meekly obey the commands of the mahout. It just 
acts according to the wishes of the mahout. Similarly, 
the Bharatiyas today are surrendering to the dictates 
of outsiders and are becoming their slaves. The way 
of life of the Bharatiyas is conditioned by truth and 
righteousness, in accordance with the Vedic injunctions, 
“Sathyam vada (speak truth) and Dharmam chara 
(follow righteousness).” In fact, truth and righteousness 
are the very treasure of Bharatiyas. Unfortunately, 


216 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


today the Bharativas have forgotton these great values 
and, therefore, become slaves in their own country. 
Their lifestyle itself has undergone a change where 
truth and righteousness have no place. Truly speaking, 
there is none in this world who can conquer Bharat. 
The Bharatiyas are born with the great human values, 
namely, Sathya (truth), Dharma (righteousness), Santi 
(peace) and Prema (love). 


Every individual has to enquire into his or her 
true nature, “who am I?” The reply that comes from 
within is “I am a human being”. Along with this reply, 
one has to assure oneself “I am not an animal”. That 
is your true nature. When you consider yourself to 
be a human being, you must display human qualities. 
What are they? First and foremost, Sathyam (truth). 
From truth comes righteousness (dharma). It is said 
“Sathyaannasti paro dharmah” (There is no greater 
dharma than adhering to truth). Sathya and Dharma 
together bring Santi (peace) and Prema (love). Where 
there is love, there cannot be hatred and jealously. 
Unfortunately, today people have lost the great quality 
of love. Even a dog loves its puppy. Even the birds 
love their offspring. But, a human being does not love 
a fellow human being. Lack of unity among the people 
is the root cause for the present state of affairs in 
Bharat. There is no unity in the family, in the society 
and in the country. Where there is unity, there will be 
purity, where there is purity, there divinity shall be. 
What is required today is unity, purity and divinity. The 


Love Is God, Live In Love 217 


scientists today are inventing several things. A double- 
decker aeroplane is being flown in the sky. However, 
along with the great advances made in science and 
technology, loss of the quality of human life is also on 
a large scale. This was not the case in earlier times. 
Several people used to live together under one roof, 
with peace and happiness. There was no fear complex 
at all. But, today, the fear complex is all pervading. 
Wherefrom did this fear come? It is due to lack of 
self-confidence. Man has no faith in his inner self. It 
is said “Naayamatma balaheenena labhyah” (the atmic 
consciousness is not for the weak minded). 


Man has developed faith in everything in this 
world, but not in his own self. Where there is self- 
confidence, there will be self-satisfaction; where there 
is self-satisfaction, there will be self-sacrifice; where 
there is self-sacrifice, there will be self-realisation. It is 
common knowledge that where the foundation is strong, 
the walls will be safe; where the walls are safe, the 
roof will be secure. It is only in such a house can one 
live safely. Today, the foundation itself is not strong. 
How then can the walls remain safe? Self-confidence 
is the foundation for a human being, self-satisfaction 
represents the walls, self-sacrifice is the roof and 
self-realisation is life. Hence, there should be perfect 
coordination between these four. 


Due to indiscriminate use of technology the air, 
water, food and everything is polluted and poisoned 
all over the world. Fortunately, the country of Bharat 


218 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


is spared from this widespread pollution. We should 
not run after science and technology. Science without 
humanness is fraught with great danger to the very 
existence of humanity. There is no greater power than 
human power. Some people question “Where is God?” 
The answer is very simple. Man himself is God, 
you are God, verily. The Vedas declare, “Chandrama 
manaso jaathah,; chaksho surya ajaayata”’ (the moon 
was born out of the mind and the sun out of the eyes 
of the Supreme Being). The real strength comes from 
our own inner self. This strength is unparalleled. 


In spite of his education and intelligence, a 
foolish man will not know his true Self and a 
mean-minded person will not give up his evil 
qualities. 

(Telugu poem) 


Modern education leads only to argumentation, 
not to total wisdom. What is the use of 
acquiring education which cannot lead you to 
immortality? Acquire the knowledge that will 
make you immortal. 


(Telugu poem) 
The Spiritual Health Of Bharat Is Unique 
Today’s education does not provide real knowledge 
that matures in to wisdom. They just help one to earn 
a livelihood. They promote acquisition and misuse 
of wealth. With the money people acquire through 
various means, people send young boys to foreign 


Love Is God, Live In Love 219 


countries for higher education. They spend lakhs of 
rupees for that purpose. By the time they return to 
their homeland, the children are spoiled totally. Here 
is a small incident that had happened sometime ago. 
The Indian parents took their son to a temple before 
his departure to a foreign country for his studies and 
advised him, “Dear son, this deity is the mother to one 
and all. She is the Mother of the Universe. You should 
never forget the Mother. Constantly contemplate on Her, 
wherever you are”. They, in fact, extracted a promise 
from him to that effect. The boy then left for U.S.A. 
Once he set his foot in America, he totally forgot about 
the Mother, fully immersed in that new environment. 
After a lapse of three years, he returned to his native 
country, Bharat, fully accustomed to the American way 
of life. The parents took that boy to the same temple 
straight from the Airport, for a darshan of the Divine 
Mother. As soon as he entered the temple, the boy, 
instead of offering his namaskar to the deity, greeted 
Her in English, “How are you Madam?” The parents 
scolded the boy for his impertinence and not paying 
his obeisance to the Divine Mother. They regretted 
very much that their son, brought up in a traditional 
family, did not even care to offer his pranams to the 
Divine Mother and all the lakhs of rupees spent on his 
foreign education had gone waste. They finally decided 
to advise all those parents who wished to send their 
children abroad for higher education, against it. 


220 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


It is indisputably true that higher studies abroad 
are resulting in people acquiring bad thoughts, habits 
and behaviour. One need not be crazy about foreign 
education. The wealth of education and culture available 
in this country is not to be found in other countries. We 
must be proud of our birth in this great land of Bharat. 
It is a great privilege to be referred to as Bharatiyas. 
We must, therefore, develop self-confidence. We must 
develop interest in leading a moral, virtuous and spiritual 
life. Unfortunately, today there is no morality in people. 
How then can you lead a happy and peaceful life? The 
great spiritual wealth available in this country of Bharat 
is not to be found in any other country. People from 
several countries are inviting Me to visit their places, 
offering Me even special aircraft. But, I am consistently 
turning down their requests. I am always happy here 
in India. I don’t need these aeroplanes and such other 
comforts. I want only devotion. 


Visualise The Same Atma Tatwa In All 


I did not come across anyone who hate Me, 
and till now I have no enemies at all. All people 
love Me, since I love one and all. However, people 
do not understand My love properly. Because of My 
universal love, even people from far-off lands come 
to Me. Why then should I go abroad? Some people 
misunderstand and misinterpret My love. Some even 
develop aversion towards Me on the ground that I did 
not oblige them by granting their requests on some 
occasions. In fact, will they progress in the spiritual 


Love Is God, Live In Love 221 


path if I grant all their requests? No, not at all. On the 
other hand, they will get spoiled. That is the reason 
why I wish to keep the boys and girls in proper limits 
right from their childhood. You can observe that no 
one in our educational institutions ever hates Me in the 
least. All students gather round Me lovingly calling 
“Swami! Swami!”. When I come out after paying a 
visit to their campuses, they take leave of Me with 
tears in their eyes. Do you find the same situation 
prevalent in educational institutions elsewhere? Do the 
colleges and universities outside function as temples of 
learning? Even the parents visiting their wards in those 
educational institutions are not treated with due respect. 


Parents are sacred. The Bharatiya culture exhorts 
people “Matrudevobhava! Pitrudevobhava!” father 
is God; mother is God. Every human being is an 
embodiment of God. In fact, the entire creation is 
God. Unable to realise this great Truth, we say, “This 
person is my enemy, he ill-treated me” and develop 
hatred against that person. As you think, so it will 
be, (vad bhavam tad bhavati) love begets love and 
hatred begets hatred. It is common to help those who 
help you. But, it is only Sai who is gracious enough 
to help those that try to cause harm to Him, ignoring 
their own faults. You must love even those who harm 
you. That is real humanness. You must develop such 
a human quality. Whomever you come across treat 
him as an embodiment of Divinity. It is said, “Daivam 
manusha rupena” (God is in human form). You may 


222 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


observe the picture of any form of God, there God is 
portrayed in the human form. Rama, Krishna or any 
other deity — all are in human forms only. You may 
relate to God in different forms and names; but all are 
embodiments of Divine Self. The atma tatwa is the same 
in all human beings, irrespective of names and forms. 
It is said “Ekatma sarva bhutantaratma” (one atma 
resides as the indweller in all living beings). One has 
to cultivate such noble feelings right from childhood. 
You may think it is a difficult task. No, there is nothing 
easier than this feeling of equality. Supposing a person 
whom you consider as an enemy is approaching you; 
you offer your pranams to him and enquire, “Hello, 
How are you brother?” Immediately the other man will 
respond saying “How are you brother?” He will not 
get angry. Why? Since you called him brother, he will 
also treat you in the same way. It is in your language 
that either love and faith or enmity and distrust in the 
other person is displayed. 


You must rise to a level where you will be able 
to visualise the same atma tatwa in all. Then you will 
truly become “Divyatma Swarupa” (embodiment of 
the Divine Self). You must consider “I am a Divyatma 
Swarupa. All these different forms of human beings are 
only my reflections. I am able to see myself in these 
bodies, which are like mirrors”. It is only when you are 
able to reach that stage that you will enjoy real peace. 
You will not experience peace by merely doing japa 
(constant repetition of the Lord’s name), tapa (penance), 
yoga or sacrificial rites like yajna and yaga. 


Love Is God, Live In Love 223 


People crave for peace and undertake several 
spiritual practices for the purpose. But, they don’t 
find peace anywhere. Wherever you see, there are 
only pieces in the outside world. But, once they direct 
their vision inward they will be able to find peace 
there. The peace within is manifesting outside. Such a 
person with inner vision can only be called a human 
being in the real sense. Animals, however, have no 
such inner vision and discriminatory intellect. They 
therefore display cruelty. You are not an animal. You 
are a human being. Hence, lead a life befitting that of 
a human being. You say that you are a human being, 
but, you live the life of a cruel animal. How then can 
you be called a human being? 


Cultivate Love Give Up Hatred 


Live like a real human being. Get rid of animal 
qualities like kama (desire), krodha (anger), lobha 
(greed), moha (delusion), mada (pride) and matsarya 
(hatred and envy). You should not hate anybody. I 
have no anger against anyone till date. That is why all 
people love Me. I have only one quality that is love 
towards all. Hence, even if I go to a forest, people 
will follow Me to that place. It is only My love that 
draws all people to Me. Yet, some people develop 
antipathy towards Me. It is not My fault, but their own 
imagination. People wonder how Swami is so divinely 
peaceful and is able to interact with so many people 
day in and day out. In fact, peace is natural to Me. I 
always smile and put up a serene countenance. I can 


224 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


never put up a castor oil face. I am always happy and 
smiling. I exhort you also to be so. When you all are 
happy, I am happy. Your happiness is My happiness. 


What could be the reason for millions of people 
loving Me? What brought you here in such large 
numbers? Did I send any invitation to you all? It is only 
your love that brought you here. Can the invitations 
draw crowds? Even when there is no invitation, people 
rush towards Me if they come to know that I am 
passing through a particular place. What could be the 
reason for this? Only love. Love is God; live in love. 
That is what you have to learn and cultivate. Love is 
the foremost quality that you should cultivate. Take a 
pledge accordingly on this sacred day. 


Become Embodiments Of Divine Love 


Very soon, the entire world will be united. In fact, 
after 28 years the world itself will become “Bharat”. 
Everyone will call himself a Bharatiya (one imbued 
with godliness — Bhagavat ratas). No one will refer to 
himself or herself as belonging to this state or that state, 
this region or that region. You may go to any country, 
but you refer to yourself as belonging to the country 
of Bharat. For example, there may be Karnataka State 
or Tamil Nadu State, etc., but, they are all parts of a 
larger country called Bharat. Without the country, the 
States cannot exist. You are all Bharatiyas first and 
last. Hence, you say that you came from Bharat. The 


Love Is God, Live In Love 225 


different states might have been created certain linguistic 
or geographical considerations. But, they are all parts 
of one country that is Bharat. 


We all belong to only one party — the party of 
love. Love, love and only love. Keeping love as your 
guiding force, you go to any country, people will respect 
you, consider you as their own brothers and sisters and 
extend all necessary help to you. Love is selflessness. A 
human being should never have selfishness. However, 
people of their own accord develop evil qualities like 
selfishness, hatred, anger, etc. These are traits cultivated 
by human beings themselves; they are not God-given. 
God has bestowed only one noble quality on all human 
beings, that is love. Love is eternal. Physical strength, 
courage or valour can never be a match to the power 
of love. When Sita was kept in confinement in Lanka 
under the guard of rakshasas, it was her love for Rama 
that gave her courage and confidence to boldly face 
all difficult situations. She constantly contemplated on 
the divine name of Rama during the period. Finally, 
Rama’s love saved her. During that ten month period, 
none could touch her. If only you cultivate such divine 
love, it will confer everything on you. You all should 
become the embodiments of love. Pray “Samastalokah 
sukhino bhavantu’ constantly, that is the only prayer 
you all have to do. Then, all people in all countries 
will be happy and peaceful. I am loving you all. I have 
no enemies. No one hates Me. Sometimes I do speak 
harshly in a raised voice. But, that is only outwardly. 


226 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


I do not bear ill-will towards anyone. Hence, if you 
follow the ideal set by Swami and love all, your life will 
be sanctified. Your parents, brothers, sisters, relatives 
and friends will feel happy. 


27th Convocation of Sri Sathya Sai University, 
22-11-2008, Prasanthi Nilayam. 


Whoever loves and serves all, him, the Lord 
loves and honours... 


You must start with the first step, the cleansing 
of the mind and the cultivation of virtue. Even if 
you do not start with that step, at least do not 
laugh at those who do, and discourage them. Do 
at least this much! 


Then, do not depend upon others for doing 


your work, like attending to your personal wants. 
Do them yourself; that is real freedom. Again, 
never accept anything ‘free’ from others, pay it 
back, in service or work. 


That will make you self-respecting individuals. 
Receiving a favour means getting bound to the 
giver. Grow with self-respect and dignity. That is 
the best service you can do to yourself. 


Sri Sathya Sai Baba 





18 


Lead A Happy Life With A Feeling 
Of Camaraderie And Fraternity 


All the names and forms are but the 
manifestations of the Supreme Being who 
is ExistenceKnowledgeBliss Absolute and 
nondual. He is the embodiment of Sathyam, 
Sivam, Sundaram (Truth, Goodness, Beauty). 


(Sanskrit verse) 
Embodiments of Love! 


HE country of Bharat is most sacred. In this 

sacred land of Bharat, tolerance is the noble 
quality that we should cultivate. Just as an elephant 
is unable to realise its innate strength, so are the 
Bharatiyas today. The elephant meekly submits itself to 
the commands of a mahout who is ignorant and illiterate. 
In spite of its great strength, it cannot demonstrate its 
strength. Similarly, the Bharatiyas today are unable to 


228 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


demonstrate their strength in spite of possessing a rich 
culture, righteousness and justice on their side. The Vedas 
declare, Na karmana na prajaya dhanena _ tyagenaike 
amrutatthwamanasuh (immortality is not attained 
through action, progeny or wealth, it is attained only 
by sacrifice). The greatest drawback in this country is 
lack of unity among people. We have everything in 
this country. We have noble qualities. We are righteous. 
But, there is no unity among people. With the result, 
all other positive factors become ineffectual. Hence, we 
have to cultivate unity among people. We all belong to 
one species, that is of human beings. Being humans, 
we are, unfortunately, exhibiting inhuman and animal 
qualities. Hence, first and foremost we have to recognise 
our innate human nature today. We have to treat others’ 
suffering as our own. We have to treat others’ difficulties 
as our own. We have to be amicable with one and all. 
We must develop faith in the maxim Ekatmaswarupas 
(embodiments of one Divine self). We must develop a 
sense of discrimination between good and bad and take 
good only, leaving the bad in all human beings. The 
same principle has to be followed in society also. We 
have to do good even to those who harm us: 


There is nothing great in helping those who 
have helped you. He is a noble one who helps 
even those who have harmed him. 

(Telugu poem) 


We must always entertain good thoughts about 


Lead A Happy Life With A Feeling Of Camaraderie And Fraternity 229 


people. “See good, do good and be good — that is the 
way to God”. “Yad bhavam tad bhavati” (as is the 
feeling, so is the result). If our thoughts are good, 
we will always engage ourselves in satkarmas (good 
deeds). If you eat a mango, can you get the belch 
of a cucumber? No. Similarly, if you entertain good 
thoughts always, you will see good only everywhere. 
When you indulge in bad thoughts, you will see bad 
only everywhere. 


Secular Education Is Useless Without A Spiritual 
Base 


There is a Sathya Sai college in Muddenahalli 
near Bangalore. Several boys coming from poor 
families in the villages around are studying in this 
college. A number of philanthropists extended help to 
the college in different ways — some built classrooms, 
others a Bhajan hall, etc. However, this institution is 
not affiliated to any University. Once the boys finish 
their education here, they have to go to places like 
Bangalore to pursue a degree course. When I thought 
of their plight, I got a good idea. Here in Puttaparthi, 
our college and University are housed in spacious and 
beautiful buildings. Supposing we establish a campus 
in Muddenahalli, the boys there will also be happy. Is 
it not? Hence, I decided to establish a college campus 
of Sri Sathya Sai University in Muddenahalli too. Mine 
is Divine Will that is irrevocable and immutable. Now 
that I have decided, I will initiate the process from 
tomorrow. Since the boys studying in Muddenahalli 


230 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


college come from rural background and are very 
poor, they are unable to go for higher education in 
cities and towns. They therefore discontinue their 
studies and take to farming activity. Of course, that 
is also necessary. Secular education helps to make a 
comfortable living. Hence, education is of top priority. 
Once they finish their education, they can get into any 
occupation including agriculture. I have therefore 
decided to provide University education to the boys 
in Muddenahalli. I am of the view that, side by side 
with the academic subjects, there must be provision for 
teaching epics and sacred texts like the Ramayana, the 
Bhagavata and the Bhagavad Gita as well. The boys 
must be given good training and be allowed to spread 
the message of these epics in the villages around. All 
secular education is useless without a spiritual base. 


There are millions of educated people in the world. 
But, what is their contribution to society? Nothing. 
They don’t even care for society. They are crazy about 
the luxurious life in towns and cities. They indulge in 
bad practices like gambling and club life. The children 
too are taking to bad ways, observing their parents. 
Hence, it is My view that the children should be taught 
to tread the right path. The elders will follow them 
later on observing them. Keeping this in My mind, 
I have decided to establish a University campus in 
Muddenahalli. Perhaps it will cost about two to three 
crores of rupees. I do not mind this expenditure. It is 
My resolve that this is needed. 


Lead A Happy Life With A Feeling Of Camaraderie And Fraternity 231 


The boys in Prasanthi Nilayam are excellent. 
They are pure gold. It is possible that one or two may 
stray from the right path, but, very soon they adjust 
themselves to the academic environment and follow 
the mainstream. Yesterday, the boys staged a play. It 
conveys a great message. The theme of the play was 
two brothers quarrelling for their share of property 
in a small village. They are counselled saying, “Dear 
brothers, if you quarrel with each other like this, how 
can our village prosper? You must be united and must 
lead an amicable life”, and, finally, they are corrected. 
The boys should therefore be encouraged to take up 
such village development programmes. 


Students, no doubt, are good today. But, the elders 
spoil them by their bad behaviour. It is the elders 
who divert them to bad ways. However, the students 
quickly realise their mistakes and retrace their steps. 
I know of boys who advise their parents addicted to 
alcohol to desist from such bad ways saying, “Dear 
father, you should not indulge in these bad habits. 
By doing so, you will only be encouraging us also to 
take to drinking. This is not good.” If elders take to 
drinking, smoking and gambling, the children follow 
suit. They get spoiled. Hence, if the children must 
lead a virtuous life, the elders must lead an ideal life 
first. I have therefore decided to establish a University 
campus in Muddenahalli to teach boys to lead an ideal 
life with clean habits. The boys there cannot afford to 
go to a city for University education. Nor can their 


232 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


parents afford the expenditure. Hence, I have decided to 
establish a University campus with all the equipments 
and facilities like classrooms for all the courses and a 
good hostel. It will be ready for opening within a year. 
It is My Divine will. 


All That I Have For You Is A Thousand Mothers’ 
Love 


A number of people like Anil Kumar, Ajit Popat, 
etc., have spoken a lot extolling Me. I am not happy about 
such praises. I have no desire that people should extol 
Me. I am neither elated nor depressed by such acts. I 
am beyond praise or ridicule, respect or disrespect, anger 
or happiness. I have only one attribute throughout — My 
love. I love even those who hate Me. I love even those 
who indulge in bad propaganda against Me. I do not 
consider anyone as enemy. All are Mine. I am looking 
after you all, like a mother. Mine is not one mother’s 
love. It is the love of a thousand mothers. Sai’s love 
is a thousand mothers’ love. It is only due to that love, 
I ignore all your faults and move forward. Whenever 
someone commits a mistake, I call him and correct 
him in a raised voice. But, I don’t show anger against 
him. I have no anger against anybody. In fact, I have 
no anger at all. People who are unable to understand 
My true nature think otherwise. Whatever people may 
think and say, I have only one attribute, that is love. 
Mine is a right royal road, not shortcuts. People do not 
understand Me properly. Once they recognise My true 
nature, they themselves will repent. That repentance is 


Lead A Happy Life With A Feeling Of Camaraderie And Fraternity 233 


expiation for their misunderstanding. However, there is 
no change in my attitude towards them. 


What I wish is “Samastalokah sukhino bhavantu” 
(May all the beings of all the worlds be happy!). 
All should be hale and healthy and lead happy and 
prosperous lives with mutual love and understanding. 
You must acquire wealth, but you should not misuse 
wealth. Then only I will be happy. I will extend any 
help to such people. I have not stretched My hand 
before anyone till date for any kind of help. If there 
is anyone in this vast concourse of devotees in this 
hall whom I had approached for money, he or she 
may rise and point out to Me. There is none, surely. 
Whatever I need in My avataric mission comes from 
within only. “Money comes and goes, morality comes 
and grows”. It is My endeavour that morality should 
be developed. All villages must be developed. For this 
purpose, education in rural areas is an important tool. 
Simultaneously, faith in God must also be developed. 
People with self-confidence can achieve anything. 


Those Who Denigrate Will Repent 


Bhakta Ramadas wanted to build a magnificent 
temple for Rama in Bhadrachalam. He, therefore 
utilised all the tax money collected from people for the 
purpose. As a result, he was imprisoned by Emperor 
Tanisha on charges of misuse of state money and was 
put to great torture. Unable to bear the physical torture, 
he prayed to his dear Lord Rama and even used harsh 
words thus: 


234 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


That crest jewel which adorns You cost me ten 
thousand gold coins. Unmindful of my travails, 
You are flaunting the jewellery as if it is Your 
ancestral property! 

(Telugu song) 


The very next moment he realised his folly and 
repented and begged Rama for pardon. Similarly, several 
people may think and talk in several ways about Swami. 
But, very soon they will realise and repent for their 
indiscreet acts. “Loko bhinna ruchihi” (Different people 
have different opinions). People indulge in loose talk 
out of their delusion. But, I have no illusions. Whatever 
people may say, I talk to them and greet them with 
love. I don’t punish them for their indiscreet talk or 
behaviour. They themselves must realise their fault 
and repent for it. If they denigrate Me now, they will 
themselves face trouble later. Hence, people must think 
twice before indulging in any loose talk. Unfortunately, 
none has been able to realise My true nature. They 
pretend to have understood My mind, but none could 
comprehend it in the least. They look to the outward 
manifestations only. They talk of My programmes and 
activities in the outside world only. They are unable 
to realise My divine love at all, which flows from the 
depths of My heart. However, I am confident that people 
will realise it one day. I always wish and work for the 
welfare of the entire world. All should live in peace. 
Even if we don’t have any other property, we can lead 


Lead A Happy Life With A Feeling Of Camaraderie And Fraternity 235 


a happy life if only the property of love is with us. 
And, that love should be supported by self-confidence. 


Discard The Feeling Of ‘1? And ‘Mine’ 


God is the only source and sustenance for the entire 
universe. Everything else is an illusion. Sorrows and 
difficulties, loss and gain, diseases and sickness — treat 
them all as the Divine will. Then everything will turn 
out to be good for you. You say, “This is my body”. 
But, who are you? You say, “My body”, but you are 
not the “body”. Similarly, you say, “My mind”, but 
you are not saying, “I am the mind”. Thus, “you” are 
different from your body, mind, etc. When someone 
enquires your name, do not say, “I am Rama” or “I 
am Krishna’; say, “I am I’. Whatever name you say, 
it is only the name given to you by your parents. It is 
not your real name. In fact, nothing belongs to you in 
this world. “I” is your only property. That is the reason 
why we say “TI”, “I, “I” for everything. 


You are God verily, if only you get rid of “I” 
the ego and “Mine”, the attachment. Then, you are 
really yourself (your real SELF)! When you say, “My 
house, my people” etc., attachment grows. This body 
attachment breeds ego. Hence, once you rise above “T” 
and ‘mine’ and lead a contented life, you will derive 
great happiness. May you all lead a happy, loving and 
long life! May you all be united! 


Let us all move together, let us all grow together, 
Let us all stay united and grow in intelligence 


236 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


together, 


Let us live together with friendship and 
harmony. (Telugu poem) 


Strive For Unity 


We cannot do any work with one finger. When 
all the five fingers of the hand join together, we can 
do any work. Similarly, if people are divided, no work 
can be executed. A small story: Once the five fingers 
of a hand argued among themselves as to which finger 
was great. The middle finger argued with ego, “I am 
taller than all of you. There are two ‘body guards’ 
on either side of me. Hence, I am great.” The index 
finger said, “You can do any work if only I show 
you to do that work. Otherwise, you cannot. Hence, I 
only am great.” The small finger intervened and said, 
“Though I am small in size, I stand in the front as the 
commander-in-chief to punish any individual or teach 
him a lesson. Therefore, I am great.” Thereupon, the 
ring finger laughed and said, “People wear diamond 
and gem-studded rings on the ring finger only. Hence, 
I am the monarch of all.” Finally, after hearing all 
these arguments, the thumb laughed aloud and wound 
up the discussion with the suggestion, “None of you 
can undertake any work without me. Therefore, let us 
all get together to work.” 


Let all the astikas, nastikas, astika — nastikas 
and nastika — astikas come together. That is what we 


Lead A Happy Life With A Feeling Of Camaraderie And Fraternity 237 


need today. What Bharat needs today is unity. We have 
everything - love, truth, righteousness and justice, but 
not unity. It is only due to lack of unity that we are 
leading a life of diversity and divergent ideas. All should 
be united and should lead a happy life with a feeling 
of camaraderie and fraternity. Unfortunately, today there 
is a feeling of difference even between a father and a 
son in the house. The wife and husband, the brothers 
and sisters, all quarrel among themselves. How can 
there be peace and happiness in the family? There may 
be differences of opinion, but they should not last for 
long. They just come and go like the passing clouds. 
Why then should people fight among themselves? You 
should not mind these differences. 


Always Keep The Welfare Of Others Before Your 
Eyes 


I have not approached anyone for anything, though 
I am undertaking huge social service projects. I had 
undertaken a project for supplying drinking water to a 
crore of people living in Chennai. Every house has been 
provided with drinking water. Not only that, water has 
been arranged for irrigation purposes also. The people 
living in the upland areas of East and West Godavari 
districts in Andhra Pradesh were suffering for want 
of safe drinking water. I arranged for execution of 
a drinking water supply project for the benefit of all 
those people. Along with the supply of drinking water, 
arrangements were also made to provide water purifying 
systems en route. Thus, I always wish to do some 


238 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


good to every individual. Now, I propose to establish 
a University campus in Muddenahalli for the benefit 
of students studying in Sri Sathya Sai College there. 
I had watched with My own eyes the difficulties the 
students were undergoing there due to lack of facilities 
for higher education, and I was moved. I assured them 
that I would provide the necessary facilities. Is anyone 
here from Muddenahalli? (Swami invited Sri Narayana 
Rao to the stage and introduced him to the audience). 
“This person is the Principal of the Sri Sathya Sai 
Higher Secondary School, Muddenahalli. He is highly 
educated and is running the school well. Whenever I visit 
Muddenahalli he would pray, “Swami when will You 
shower Your grace on us?” (with the kind permission 
of Swami, Sri Narayana Rao spoke for a few minutes 
offering his grateful thanks to Swami.) Thereafter, Swami 
concluded His divine discourse saying, “Share the joy 
that I gave you today with all! Be happy! 


83rd Birthday, Prasanthi Nilayam.23-11-2008, 


Love is God, God is Love. Where there is 
Love, there God is certainly evident. Love more and 
more people, love them more and more intensely; 
transform the love into service, transform the 


service into worship; that is the highest sadhana. 
Sri Sathya Sai Baba 





19 


Contemplate On God, 
The Real Hero, For Victory 


Bharat is the motherland of many noble 
souls who earned great name and fame in 
all the continents of the world. This is the 
land of valorous people who vanquished the 
foreign rulers in the battlefield and attained 
independence. This is the land which excelled 
in music, literature and other fine arts. Having 
been born in this great land of Bharat, oh boys 
and girls, it is your sacred duty to protect its 
rich cultural heritage. 

(Telugu poem) 


Embodiments of Love! 


HAT can one say about Jesus Christ that 
has not been said already! Today is 
Christmas, the holy day on which Jesus Christ was 


240 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


born some two thousand years ago. You all know 
about it. All that we see, hear and do are like dream 
scenes which will disappear soon. They are, of course, 
true as long as you sleep. The moment you wake up 
or slide into deep sleep, they just disappear. Similarly, 
all that you see, hear and do in the objective world are 
also like dream scenes. They are unreal and subject to 
constant change. The atma tatwa is the only entity that 
is permanent in all the three periods of time, namely, 
past, present and future as also the waking, dream and 
deep sleep states. This atma tatwa 1s love. In fact, 
love is born out of atma only. If only you cultivate 
love, the entire world will come under your control. 


Make Your Mind Steady By Curbing Your Desires 


Do not hurt anyone. “Hurt never, love ever”. 
Constantly remember love, which is the eternal truth. 
You are not one person, you are three: (i) the one you 
think you are, (11) the one others think you are, and 
(111) the one you really are. That is your real nature. 
You say, “this is my body, this is my mind, this is 
my intellect, this is my chitta”, etc. But who is this 
‘my’? Unfortunately, no one today puts this question to 
themself. When you say, ‘my body’, you are separate 
from your body. You say, “this is my house”. But who 
are you? You have to find answer to this question. How 
long will this house, which you say is yours, last? It is 
sure to dilapidate sooner than later. All these worldly 
objects are subject to change and destruction. There is 


Contemplate On God, The Real Hero, For Victory 241 


only one entity that is changeless, that is brahma tatwa. 
That is love. If only you get hold of it, everything else 
will come under your control. Wherever you look today, 
there are only desires, desires, and more desires. Put 
a ceiling on these desires! Then only will your mind 
become steady. You say “I want this, I want that’, etc. 
Thus, you develop many wants. They are like passing 
clouds. Why should you multiply your wants, these 
passing clouds? Ultimately, nothing accompanies you 
at the time of your leaving this mortal body. 


Great kings and emperors ruled over this world. 
They conquered several countries and accumulated 
boundless wealth. Even Alexander the Great, who 
conquered several parts of the world, could not take with 
him even a miniscule part of the wealth he accumulated. 
He had to leave this world with empty hands. To 
demonstrate this truth, he instructed his ministers to take 
his dead body in a procession through the streets of 
his capital, keeping both his hands in a raised position 
pointing toward the sky. The ministers were curious to 
know the reason for this strange request. He said, “I 
have conquered several countries and accumulated so 
much wealth. There is a vast army under my control. 
Yet, none is accompanying me at the time of my leaving 
this body. I am going with empty hands. This has to 
be demonstrated to all people.” 


Embodiments of Love! 


People should, of course, have some comforts 


242 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


for this physical body and fulfil some desires that are 
necessary for their daily life. But, unfortunately, these 
desires are reaching to a point of insatiability. You may 
live for a few years or full hundred years in this physical 
world. One day or the other the body has to be cast 
off. Hence, one should not cultivate unlimited desires. 
Some people have intense desire to have the vision of 
God. Where is God? But, you are all embodiments of 
Divinity. God is not separate. Men are more valuable 
than all the wealth in the world. God also is in human 
form. 


Good And Bad Arise From Our Thoughts 


We see three kinds of beings in the world: tame 
animals, wild beasts, and humans. One has to analyse 
for oneself whether one belongs to the category of 
animals or beasts or human beings. If you think you 
are a human being, then cultivate human values, lead 
a human life, and develop human thoughts. First and 
foremost, truth is a human value. Truth does not undergo 
any change in all the three periods of time — past, 
present and future. Truth is always truth. Develop faith 
in that truth. All others undergo change. You say ‘I am 
peaceful today’. What about tomorrow? No peace. All 
pieces, pieces! Hence, this state of peace also undergoes 
change. “Love is God; live in love”. In fact, your entire 
life is nourished and nurtured by love. When truth and 
love go together, nonviolence is the result. Where there 
is love, people will not quarrel among themselves. You 
don’t get angry against someone. When you develop 


Contemplate On God, The Real Hero, For Victory 243 


love, you consider all people as your brothers. Supposing 
you meet someone and say ‘hello brother’, even your 
enemy will respond by saying, ‘hello brother’. Yad 
bhavam tad bhavati (as is the feeling, so is the result). 
Hence, you have to develop noble feelings. 


Good and bad arise only from your thoughts. If 
something bad happens, it is not something that others 
have done for you. Nor has God a role to play in this. 
You are bad to yourself! Your thoughts have done 
you harm! Suppose you are happy, even that is not 
caused by God. That too is on account of your own 
thoughts. Hence, one has to purify one’s thoughts, first 
and foremost. When you develop pure thoughts, your 
life will be happy and peaceful. Where there is purity 
there Divinity is. Unfortunately, today Divinity is being 
divided and differentiated in the name of religion. 
Where unity, purity and divinity go together, life is 
happy. God is not responsible for either good or bad 
thoughts. You only are responsible for both. If you have 
bad thoughts, that is your own making. All are one’s 
own making. The same is the case with good thoughts. 
See! How beautiful are these lights in this hall! Who 
made them? The human being only. Hence, there can 
be no Divinity without humanness. Humanness must be 
sanctified. Human beings must cultivate human values. 
Then only can one attain Divinity. The senses create a 
lot of unsteadiness in us. They lead us to bad ways in 
many ways. However, when our mind is pure they lead 
us on the noble path. Hence, keep your mind fresh and 


244 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


pure always. It should not be allowed to waver which 
can lead us to ups and downs. It is said, Manomoolam 
idam jagat (the entire world is permeated by the mind). 
Do not think that God is separate from you. You are 
confused because you think you are separate from 
God. Not only are you confused, but your ‘fuse’ is also 
blown, meaning you are engulfed in darkness. Your 
faith in God must always be steady and unwavering. 


Do Constant Namasmarana 


Today, the world is facing a lot of unrest. People 
are indulging in criminal activities. What then is your 
role in the present situation? You need not do anything 
else. Just do Namasmarana (contemplating and chanting 
the name of God) incessantly. Contemplate upon your 
inner Self. You need not have to make use of any kind 
of bombs and weapons. Remain calm and unperturbed at 
all times. Maintain the attitude that whatever happens 
is for our own good only. On the other hand, if you 
constantly brood that so and so did this and so and so 
did that you will only develop hatred against others. 
Hence, constantly contemplate on God with a calm and 
steady mind. Never lose your courage and fortitude. If 
you do that, the worldly worries cannot trouble you in 
the least and cause fear and anxiety in you. The physical 
body is susceptible to birth and death. It is its nature. 


The Atma is eternal without birth or death. 
It has no beginning, middle or end. It is 
omnipresent and eternal witness. 


(Telugu poem) 


Contemplate On God, The Real Hero, For Victory 245 


Today we are indulging in negative thoughts 
relating to the body. You should never entertain negative 
thoughts. The physical body is like a water bubble. 
The mind is like a mad monkey. The body is bound 
to perish sooner or later. Hence, you should not trust 
the physical body. You should not believe your mind. 
Of course, you should take proper care of your body 
as long as you live; for, the body enables you to lead 
the life. Later, it drops down of its own accord. There 
is no one who lives in this world permanently. There 
is only one entity in this world which is permanent, 
that is the atma. People say ‘my self, my self’ and ‘I’, 
‘I’. This single letter ‘I’ is the real atma (Self). 


If a person has two minds, he is said to be confused 
and ignorant. “A man with dual mind is half blind”. 
Hence, develop single-minded faith and devotion. Once 
you develop faith in anything, it should last till your 
death. Unfortunately, people change their faith every 
now and then. When in difficulties, they respond in one 
way. When passing through better times, their behaviour 
is altogether different. This should not happen. Love, 
love, love — only this quality changeless. Cultivate 
such changeless love. Whatever happens, it is as per 
God’s will. You think you are the doer, out of your 
ego. You are not the doer. Where are you? You are not 
there, really. It is your inner Self, your inner voice that 
really responds to situations. Hence, ‘you’ means your 
‘atma’ (Self). Faith in the inner Self is the basis for 
everything in this world. 


246 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


Accept Everything As God’s Gift 


Jesus was crucified on the cross. Mother Mary 
could not bear that scene and wept inconsolably. Jesus 
then remarked, “Why do you cry? This is natural. 
Whatever has to happen will happen. Hence, you 
should not shed tears.” Jesus helped the fishermen in 
many ways. He gave them bread. Once, the fishermen 
could not catch even one fish. He then called Peter 
and said, “Peter, bring the fishing net and follow me”. 
He directed the fishermen to cast the net at a particular 
place. There was such a huge catch that even all the 
fishermen could not pull the net to the shore. Thus, 
God can do anything at His Divine will. Everything is 
God’s gift only. One has to realise this fact and develop 
faith accordingly. If you are enjoying good times, it 
is God’s gift. On the other hand, if you are passing 
through difficult times, it is also God’s gift. You should 
develop such steady faith. If you are suffering from 
malarial fever, you will be given bitter pills. That is 
also for your good. 


Good and bad coexist, none can separate them. 
You cannot find good or bad to the exclusion 
of the other. (Telugu poem) 


Bad is not there separately in a distant corner. 
Good and bad exist together. It is only a difference of 
time. Hence, we have to accept everything as God’s 
gift. If we encounter bad we express disgust and say, 
‘I don’t want this!’ You should not do that. There is 


Contemplate On God, The Real Hero, For Victory 247 


good even in bad. There is good in bad and bad in 
good. Good and bad are like the obverse and reverse 
of the same coin. Only the time at which they occur 
differs. Supposing you ate nice, tasty food consisting of 
sweets, bread, etc., tonight. Tomorrow morning it turns 
into excreta. The good food has turned into bad matter. 
Thus, good and bad occur at different times, not at the 
same time. What we have to do in the present-day world 
is constant prayer to God. If only one develops faith 
in one’s own self, everything will accrue unto him. If 
you do not have that faith, all your wealth and property 
is a mere waste. We hanker after worldly possessions 
with ego and arrogance, but they lead us to nowhere. 
They are sure to land us in peril one day or the other. 
Hence, one should always conduct oneself with humility 
and faith in God thinking, “everything is God’s gift; 
God is the doer of everything”. 


Your Atma Is None Other Than God 


Where is God? This is the question sceptics often 
raise. God is in you, with you, above you, below you 
and around you. He is your ‘Hridayavasi’ (indweller 
of your heart). Your atma is none other than God, 
verily. Hence, one need not have to search for God 
elsewhere. You repeat the names of Rama and Krishna, 
thus identifying Divinity with a particular name and 
form. That which is beyond the body, that which is 
beyond the name is real Divinity. Divinity has nothing 
to do with the physical body. The physical body may 
subsist for a limited period only. It constantly undergoes 


248 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


change. At the time of birth, you call it a ‘child’. As 
it grows, you call it a ‘boy’. After sometime, you call 
it a ‘man’. Thereafter, when it becomes old, you call 
it a ‘grandfather’. The child, boy, man and grandfather 
are all one only. Though God has come in human form 
and is acting as a human being now, never forget to 
realise Him as God. Since we are in human frames, let 
us know God in human form. Devoid of your physical 
body, you can never realise God. Hence, one has to 
experience God only in human form. 


People develop ego on the basis of their physical 
and intellectual capabilities, wealth and property. It is 
also common to see ego showing its head in positions of 
power. All these will vanish in no time. Even your body 
will perish. Unfortunately, these days people consider 
the ephemeral worldly possessions as permanent, while 
ignoring the really permanent things. Hence, realise the 
true nature of atma tatwa. People flock to this place 
in thousands and lakhs to have the darshan of this 
physical body. The more important thing to realise is 
that the physical body points to the eternal Divinity. 
Divinity is beyond the body. Hence, do not treat the 
physical body as permanent. However, one has to keep 
up the health of the physical body as long as one lives. 
You should not neglect it, thinking that it is bound to 
perish one day or the other. You have to look after the 
welfare of the body till your last breath. It is not your 
concern what happens to it later. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Contemplate On God, The Real Hero, For Victory 249 


You need not go in search of the atma. It is 
omnipresent - behind you, with you, around you and 
above you. People do not repose their faith in such 
an omnipresent atmic consciousness; they hanker after 
ephemeral things. Hence, first and foremost, you have to 
enquire which is permanent and which is not. Enquire 
into yourself, “Who am I?” The answer comes “I am 
a human being”. If you consider yourself a human 
being, you must have human qualities. An animal like 
an ox or a he-buffalo ploughs the land, eats grass and 
does some hard work in the fields. Similarly, the nature 
of a beast is to pounce upon all creatures and cause 
harm to them, including killing. We are not animals 
or beasts. We are human beings. Hence, we have to 
cultivate human qualities. What are they? Truth, peace, 
love and non-violence. If you have to develop the 
quality of non-violence, you have to cultivate love 
first. Where there is love, there will be non-violence. 
Similarly, love, peace and truth are all interdependent. 
When love and truth go together, peace is the result. 
Truth is an innate divine quality. This is not bookish 
knowledge; this is the manifestation of the inner Self. 
There is no human in this world in whom truth is not 
present. However, one conceals that truth and makes 
it appear as untruth. Sadly, we are more interested in 
falsehood than truth, today. 


Repose First Faith In The Omnipresent God 


You might have witnessed a number of dramas 
and playlets on the theme of love. Rama, Krishna, Sita 


250 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


and Radha are all mythological characters. Rama and 
Sita, Krishna and Radha are shining examples of Prema 
Tatwa. Hence, they are referred to as ‘Sitaramulu’ and 
‘Radhakrishnulu’. The demon king Ravana confined 
Sita in Lanka for ten months. He used to coax her 
frequently to become his queen. However, she flatly 
refused to submit herself to his overtures, saying, “You 
are in no way comparable to Rama, the embodiment 
of Truth and Righteousness”. She never even looked 
at his face. She pulled out a blade of grass and threw 
it on the ground saying, “You are like this blade of 
grass. Your might and power cannot be compared to 
that of Rama”. Such was her intense faith in Rama. 
One has to develop such strong faith in Divinity. 


There are a number of terrorists operating in 
various parts of the world. But, none of them can 
cause any damage to you if you develop faith and 
love in God. God is everywhere. You should repose 
firm faith in that omnipresent God. Any number of 
bombs cannot cause the least damage to your body. 
God is in you, with you, around you, above you 
and below you. Unfortunately, people repose more 
confidence in temporary and palliative measures which 
are like peppermints, than developing firm faith in 
the omnipotent and omnipresent Divinity. You should 
not take Divinity lightly. He is the only Chief for the 
entire universe. Develop faith in that Chief. Call Him 
by any name, Rama, Krishna, Jesus or Allah; God is 
only one. Ekam Sat viprah bahudha vadanti (truth is 


Contemplate On God, The Real Hero, For Victory 251 


one, but the wise refer to it by various names). You put 
the single digit 1 and any number of zeroes thereafter, 
the value of that number increases by leaps and bounds. 
But if you remove 1, the value of the number comes 
to zero even if you put one hundred zeroes one after 
the other. God is the only Hero, while all others are 
zeroes. Hence, keep God in the front always. If you 
contemplate on God, the real Hero, you can achieve 
victory in all fields. The so-called bombs and other 
powers cannot do any damage to you. The human power 
is not comparable to any other power. After all, who 
has made the bomb? It is only the human being. Then, 
who is great? Is it the one who made the bomb or the 
object itself? Undoubtedly, the human being is great. 


The Self In You Is The Supreme Self 


A human being should realise his innate strength 
and greatness. The Vedanta (philosophy) exhorts the 
human being to realise his true nature by a process 
of enquiry into himself. If you enquire into yourself 
by putting the question, “Who am [’’?, pat comes the 
reply, Aham Brahmasmi (1 am Brahman). You have 
to constantly remind yourself, “I am not a human 
being, I am God verily”. As far as the physical body 
is concerned, you are a human being. When God is 
with you, in you, around you, why should you have 
to fear the man-made bombs? Develop self-confidence. 
Develop faith in the atma tatwa. The Self in you is the 
Supreme Self. When that Supreme Self is present in 


252 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 41 


your body, why should you have to fear anyone? Even 
if the body becomes weak, the power of that Supreme 
Self drives you to march forward. It will help you. 
Hence, may all people contemplate on God incessantly! 
Do not get confused with names. You can contemplate 
on any name. Many varieties of sweets are prepared 
with sugar, which is the basic ingredient. You may eat 
any sweet of your choice. But, all sweets taste sweet 
only. Everything is God. You should not entertain any 
doubts in this regard. Doubts create confusion in you. 
If a human being is to live the life of a real human 
being, all doubts have to be removed. The sooner the 
better, for, as long as doubts persist they work like slow 
poison. Develop faith in yourself. That is called self- 
faith. If only you possess self-faith, none can cause any 
harm to you. Even the bombs cannot do any damage. 
Many people develop a fear complex these days that 
that area is attacked with bombs, this area is attacked 
with bombs, etc. We need not entertain any such fear. 


Embodiments of Love! 


You have gathered here with great devotion, love 
and faith. Keep up that feeling of love. Constantly 
remind yourself, “I am God” “I am God” with a feeling 
of love for God. If anyone asks your name, do not 
reply “I am so and so”. Instead, reply, “I am God”. Not 
only I, you are also God Everybody is God. Develop 
such confidence. 


(Bhagawan sang two Bhajans, “Prema mudita 


Contemplate On God, The Real Hero, For Victory 253 


manase kaho ...” and Hari bhajana bina ...”’ and then 
continued His Discourse.) 


You all say, “I want peace, I want peace, I want 
happiness”. Where is this peace and happiness? They 
are available in Hari bhajana only (singing the glory 
of God). You will get peace and happiness only by 
singing the glory of the Divine Name. They cannot 
be obtained from any shop. “Hari bhajana bina sukh 
shanti nahin ...”’ Peace and happiness have to well up 
from the inner spring of your own heart. If you wish 
to have peace, happiness and bliss, contemplate on the 
Divine Name in your heart. Be happy. 


Christmas, Prasanthi Nilayam, 25-12-2008. 


It is high time every person who wishes to 
lead a purposeful and righteous life decides to 
engage himself in service to society and devotes 
all his wealth and energies to spreading happiness 


in the community. Men must realise that there can 
be no greater source of real bliss than Tyaga. 


Sri Sathya Sai Baba 





