SATHYA SAI SPEAKS 


VOLUME - 40 


Discourses of 
BHAGAWAN SRI SATHYA SAI BABA 
Delivered During 2007 


PRASANTHI NILAYAM 


SRI SATHYA SAI BOOKS & PUBLICATIONS TRUST 
Prasanthi Nilayam - 515134 
Anantapur District, Andhra Pradesh, India 
STD: 08555 : ISD : 91-8555 
Phone: 287375, Fax: 287236 
email: enquiry@sssbpt.org 


© Sri Sathya Sai Books & Publications Trust 
Prasanthi Nilayam P.O. 515134, Anantapur District, A.P. (India.) 


All Rights Reserved 


The copyright and the rights of translation in any 
language are reserved by the Publisher. No part, para, passage, 
text or photograph or Artwork of this book should be reproduced, 
transmitted or utilised, in original language or by translation, in 
any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photo copying, 
recording or by any information, storage and retrieval system 
except with and prior permission, in writing from the Convener, 
Sri Sathya Sai Books & Publications Trust, Prasanthi Nilayam 
(Andhra Pradesh) India, except for brief passages quoted in 
book review. This book can be exported from India only by the 
Publishers - Sri Sathya Sai Books Publications Trust, Prasanthi 
Nilayam (India). 


International Standard Book Number: 





Second Edition: November, 2008 


Published by 

The Convener, 

Sri Sathya Sai Books & Publications Trust 
Prasanthi Nilayam, India - Pin Code 515 134 
STD : 08555 ISD: 91-8555 

Phone: 287375 Fax: 287236 

email: enquiry@sssbpt.org 


Publisher’s Note 


In this volume in the Series Sathya Sai Speaks there 
are 22 priceless discourses of Bhagawan delivered during 
the year 2007. 

Mamaivamsho jivaloke jivabhuta sanathana - The 
eternal Atma in all living beings is part of My Being. 
Bhagawan recalled these words of Lord Krishna in Bhagavad 
Gita in the very first discourse of the year. He repeated this 
quite often during the year, even reminding us of it in His last 
discourse of the year, thereby emphasizing the importance of 
this Divine revelation. He exhorted that students should not 
forget this truth. Bhagawan said that this is true not only of 
human beings, but even birds, animals and other creatures 
are part of the Divine. 


Every one should develop the confidence that God is 
within him. The same Atma is present in everyone. Chant the 
name of God incessantly. Not only should this, you should 
also help others who are in trouble. Be courteous to the poor 
and help them. Whatever work you do, consider it as the 
work of God. 

One with compassion is a true human being. All are 
divine. Therefore, we should help everybody considering him 
as divine. One who understands this truth will achieve great 
success in life. When somebody is in trouble or injured on the 
road, we should try to remove his or her suffering, whatever 
urgent work we may have. Then God fills us with energy. 


First and foremost we should love our parents and then 


other people. We should love all. Develop love. Share it with 
all. When you exchange love and spend your lives happily, 
evil qualities like hatred, jealousy, ego etc., cannot come 
anywhere near. Draw every one close to you with love; then 
you will attain proximity of God. When we expand our love, 
we can give happiness to the whole world. 

People should have faith in religion, for they teach 
great ideals to be followed. No one should observe any 
difference based on religion. There is only one religion, the 
religion of love. 


Human values are not visible to naked eye. They 
emerge from our own heart. Peace is not something to be 
obtained from the world out side. It has to flow from inside. 
Where there is peace, there will be love. If you strengthen 
love there will be no scope for hatred at all. If you develop 
a feeling of oneness, how can there be a feeling of hatred 
between you and the other man? 


A true seeker can find innumerable such divine 
exhortations through out the pages of this book. The Book 
Trust is happy to bring out this volume with the hope that 
every reader puts into practice at least a few of these Divine 
exhortations in daily life, so as to become worthy of being 
a follower of Bhagawan’s directions and thereby contribute 
towards making our world a peaceful place to live. 


With salutations at Bhagawan’s lotus feet. 


Convener 

Sri Sathya Sai Books And Publications Trust 
23.11.2008 

Prasanthi Nilayam 


10. 
11. 


12. 
2. 
14. 


CONTENTS 


Repose Faith In Your Conscience.............000+ 1 
All Parties Should Unite 

To Make: Bhatat Strom i.cisccsstesstierinateeianacceiens 19 
God Will Help You If You Help Others.......... 29 
Be. United In Divine: LOVG vc sccaicnimianincns 39 
Tread The Path Of Truth By Constantly 
Contemplatins On: GO os .iiescesasednimistressiacn: 47 
Give Up Ego And Attachment 

TO: BECOME Gr pis sinsasssnvcsssnasncncasceevevsavabaiasecten 63 
The Happiness Of Everyone Is 

Dy aE SS sss yaacsesecercoseiaviencten scatvenonsencaiavns 77 
Develop Love And Lead The Life Of 

PR TS MIG asvsscss ter insnitnsercatreniaaunteawepuasaasisavecs 95 
Ever Remember The Name Of Rama............ 103 
Water Is The Gift Of God To Man............... 117 
Make Your Mind The Master Of 

MOUE DGS 8 xcaacetachutasccms ann ceteeexsacavmacuateoercanien 121 
Only Love For God Is True Love............... 129 
Always Be Happy And Peaceful................... Loy 


Exemplary Patriotism Of 
mublias Chandta. BOSC ccs ivicesencevsteceenscersroanastor’ ea 


[5, 


16. 


ag 


18. 


1D; 


20. 
ZA. 
22 


Discrimination Is The Means 


To Self-realisation ..............cccccccccccseeseceesecseseees 157 
Eternal Truths Should Form The 

SUDISCE OT BOOKS vic csexiadasidesensnessnsved uededbacncesesven 173 
All Avatars Are Embodiments Of 

Pure Consciousness ...........cccceccceseeccceesseeseeenees 181 
Make Sathya And Dharma Your 

Steadfast (COMPAMONS ..c<.0sscocccscsnedacsstarssiseaanaes 201 
Akhanda Bhajan — Continuous 

Namasmarana Is The Goal... eeeeeeeeeeeees 211 
Oneness With God Is True Education ........... 223 
Love Is God) Live It OVC vccccssiccsscszcrctessesaves 231 
Anything In Life Can Be Achieved 

With Faith In God... eeeeeecececceeeeseeees 247 


OK 2K 3K 


1 


Repose Faith In Your Conscience 


The sun appears serene and peaceful. The 
days have become shorter, and the cool wind is 
blowing. The fields are ripe with golden crops. 
Marigold flowers are blossoming like garlands 
of pearls on the banks of rivers. The farmers 
are rejoicing and singing. The sweet festival of 
Sankranti has come in the month of Pushya (a 
month in Indian calendar), filling our homes 
with the newly harvested grain. 

(Telugu poem) 


OD willed that the Sankranti festival shall 
bring all prosperity to the people and that they 
should not feel any inconvenience in the matter of food 
and other needs. The farmers, having brought home the 
produce after harvesting it, will be happily taking rest in 
their homes. Even the agricultural workers will be free, 


2 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


for, the harvesting season will be over by then. Having 
worked hard day and night in the fields for some months, 
they will now be enjoying the comfort of a home, by 
God’s grace. Whatever God does, it is for the good of 
the people. For, they are all His ‘amsa’ (parts) only! 
Mamaivamsho jivaloke jivabhuta sanathana (the eternal 
Atma in all beings is a part of My Being), said Lord 
Krishna in the Bhagavad Gita. Not only human beings, 
even animals, birds and insects are the embodiments 
of God. However, all people do not realise this truth. 
Saint Tyagaraja sang in one of his immortal kirtanas, 
cheemalo Brahmalo Siva Kesavaadulalo prema meera 
velasi unde birudhu vahinchina Rama nannu brovara 
(Oh Rama, in Your pure and unsullied form of love, 
You indwell all beings from an ant to Brahma as also in 
Siva and Kesava. Please be my protector too). Unable 
to realise this truth, people kill the ant that crawls on 
their bodies. The same people will worship the ant if 
it appears as an embodiment of Divinity. Thus, the 
feelings make all the difference. 


During this season, the sun appears to be gentle 
and soothing during daytime. The days are shorter and 
the nights long. During the nights, the moonlight is cool 
and comfortable. Having worked hard during daytime, 
people will have comfortable sleep during nights. The 
human body needs rest. Hence, every human being 
should have adequate rest. As the saying goes, “Sleep 
a while after lunch.” One should take a nap at least 
for a short period after lunch. However, one should 


Repose Faith In Your Conscience 3 


not keep himself awake for long during nights. One 
should have sound sleep during night. 


Everything is God’s will. The entire universe 
is created by God. Nothing in this world will move 
without God’s will. 


Not even a blade of grass will move without 
divine Will, 

People who do not realise this truth, get 
carried away by their pride of intelligence and 
discrimination. 

But no one however great one may be knows what 
lies ahead for them in future. 


(Telugu poem) 


Unity Is Divinity 


Who is a “HINDU”? The letters in the word 
HINDU stand for: 


H — Humility, I — Individuality, N — Nationality, 
D — Devotion, U - Unity. 


Wherever there is unity, there will be Divinity. It 
is only Divinity that can unite the world. You should 
not try to break the world into pieces saying ‘This is 
my India’, this is my Japan’, ‘this is my Germany’, 
etc. The divinity called ‘I’ in all human beings is 
only one. There is only one race, that is human race. 


4 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


Humanness is very sacred, holy and divine. The word 
‘Manava’ (human being) means very sacred. The festival 
of Sankranti reminds you of this truth and awakens 
you to this reality. During this holy period of Makara 
Sankramana, people, especially the village folk, enjoy 
themselves by participating in several kinds of rural 
games and play. As a matter of fact, this is a festival 
season for the animals too! Some people in the villages 
bring together the gangireddu (a decorated bull) and a 
cow naming them as Rama and Sita and perform their 
marriage symbolically, in the hope that their marriage 
shall bring forth peace and welfare to the world. The 
cowherd gives suitable training to the bull and the 
cow in advance. He asks the cow “Amma, Is Rama 
handsome?” the cow shakes its head in disapproval of 
the proposal. Then, the gangireddudasu with the stick 
in his hand tries to counsel the cow: “Amma, Rama is 
blackish blue in colour. Yet he is very good. He is a 
great king. He is mighty and prosperous.” Thereupon 
the cow nods its head in approval as if to indicate, 
“Yes, I like Rama.” The children in the village watch 
the gangireddu play very enthusiastically. They invite 
their friends and relatives to witness this play thus: 


“Oh my dear brother, here comes the 
Gangireddudasu. Come, let us go and see him. 
He wears a silver medallion and a waist belt. 
He carries a decorated staff and wears special 
marks on his forehead. He brings with him richly 
caparisoned sacred cow and bull and performs 


Repose Faith In Your Conscience 5 


their marriage. Let us see the marriage ceremony 
and offer our gifts.” (Telugu song) 


Thus, the village folk will be tastefully decorating 
their cattle and playing with them. Sankranti is a festival 
that gives joy to the birds too. They will be perching 
in large numbers on the temples and minarets, chirping 
and singing. They thus teach a lesson in unity and joy 
to the human beings of all regions and religions in the 
world. Sadly, several people nowadays have no faith in 
the religion. Religion sets great ideals for the human 
beings to follow. 


There are several students studying in Sri Sathya 
Sai educational institutions. They have no differences 
of religion at all! In fact, one who believes in such 
differences is not a human being. There is only one 
religion - the religion of love. A real human being is 
one who follows such a religion. We must cultivate 
the goodness in all religions. There is a lot to learn 
from the birds, beasts and insects. Religion means 
love. Today, we do not at all find such religion of 
love. Devoid of love, there can be no relationship with 
anybody. Hence, we must follow the religion of love. 
No one thinks of such religion of love in the modern 
age. Our ancestors did recognise the true meaning of 
religion and followed it in letter and spirit. They took 
their elders as an ideal in this regard. Even now if you 
enquire from children, “ Who told you this?”, they will 
reply “My grandmother told me, my grandfather told 


6 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


> 


me”, etc. One should never disregard the advice of 
elders. When you follow their advice, everything will 
turn out to be good for you. Unfortunately, no one 
listens to the good words of elders these days. They 
prefer to listen to all sorts of movie songs played in a 
tape recorder. They imitate those songs. Whatever tune 
is played in the tape recorder, they try to imitate that 
tune. Man today is not living like a human being. He 
is turning out to be a mere gramophone record or a 
tape recorder. We should never disregard the words of 
elders. Man today does not listen to the sound advice 
of the elders. He acts contrary to the nature of a human 
being. People do not listen to good things; they indulge 
in all unnecessary and unwarranted activities. 


The festival of Sankranti is meant to remind man 
about the sanctity of humanness. It is said, Easwara 
sarva bhutanam (God is the indweller of all beings). 
Hence, every human being, nay, every living being 
is an amsa (part) of God! But, there seems to be a 
flaw in your own behaviour. What is the reason? You 
throw to winds the sacred feelings and allow your 
mind to run after all and sundry things. That is how 
your behaviour is tainted. You are now in your prime 
of youth. Your body, mind and intellect are strong and 
secure in this age. Hence, you have to make proper use 
of your capability to live up to your sacred feelings. 
Sankranti is not to be considered as a mere festival like 
any others. The festival of Sankranti brings great joy 
to one and all. Even a poor man will arrange to make 


Repose Faith In Your Conscience 7 


payasam (sweet pudding) in his house and partake of 
it happily. The festival of Sankranti will bring joy in 
ever so many ways. It is not limited to song and play. 
It expands one’s heart with joy. It is a festival of unity; 
that unity develops purity resulting in divinity in human 
beings. Hence, people must cultivate unity and purity 
in the first instance. What is purity? Our vision must 
be sacred; our words must be soft and sweet and our 
ears must listen to only good things. Our nose should 
smell only divine fragrance. Thus, all the senses in our 
body must be put to proper use. 


Man is born out of karma. Karma is the most 
important Dharma (duty) of a human being: 


Man is born in action, is sustained by action and 
ultimately merges in action. Action is the cause 
for pleasure and pain. Truly speaking, action is 
God for man. (Telugu poem) 


Hence, we should continue to perform karma. What 
is karma? It is not merely reading and participating in 
the games of football, volleyball, etc. Even inhaling and 
exhaling are karma! There can be no karma without 
these two. When you inhale your breath, the sound of 
‘so’ emerges. Similarly, when you exhale your breath, 
the sound of ‘hum’ emerges. Thus, every act of inhaling 
and exhaling results in the sound of ‘sohum’, meaning 
‘I am that Divinity’. That life-breath which is a great 
energy is the gift of God to a human being. It is vital 


8 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


to the sustenance of a human being. It is not the real 
nature of a human being to only eat, drink and be 
merry. First and foremost, wherever you go, people will 
observe your qualities. You must conduct yourself in 
such a way that people will be able to say, “Look, his 
behaviour is good. We feel very happy to talk to him. 
We feel very happy by merely looking at him.” It is 
only your good qualities that bring happiness and joy to 
you. Man should make proper use of his panchapranas 
(five vital airs), panchabhuthas (five elements) and 
panchendriyas (five senses). The food we eat must be 
satwic. It is not good to take too much of chillies or 
chilli powder. One should not hanker after ‘taste’. It 
will ‘waste’ our life. One should eat for the sake of 
satisfying one’s hunger, without hankering for special 
taste or flavour. 


There is no charity greater than feeding the hungry, 
There are no greater gods than parents, 


There is no greater gain than the company of the 
good. (Telugu poem) 


Truth Is Supreme 


There is nothing greater than truth. Truth is only 
one, not two. By associating yourself with good people, 
you will also become good. Who are real friends? It is 
only the good people who are real friends to you. It 
is said, “Tell me your company, I shall tell you what 
you are”. Hence, you must always join good company, 


Repose Faith In Your Conscience 9 


talk to good people and live with good people. Only 
then will you become a good person. Otherwise, you 
will spoil yourself. Good friends will always strive 
to work for the good of each other and bring about 
a transformation in each other. If for any reason your 
friend took to bad ways on any occasion, of what use 
is your friendship, if you do not try to bring him back 
into good path? On the other hand, if you are taking to 
bad ways, your friend should help you to come back 
to normal ways. Thus, trying to help each other to 
tread the good path is the hallmark of true friendship. 
However, friends in present time wish each other ‘hello’ 
and separate. Later, they say ‘goodbye’. Such attitude is 
not good. Instead of saying ‘goodbye’, you must become 
a good boy. Thus, you must tread the path of truth in 
daily life. Only then will you become an educated and 
courageous person in the real sense, with a sense of 
discrimination. If you are a good person with a sense 
of sacrifice, people will follow you. If your behaviour 
is not good, none will even look at your face. It will 
only be people without character who will be moving 
in your company. It will do no good for your spiritual 
advancement. 


You say, “So and so is my good friend”. But, 
for how long? Only for some time. Later on, if that 
person does not pay attention to your words or refuses 
to oblige your demands, you hate him. You will become 
enemies. Indeed, you must be very careful in developing 
friendship with others. 


10 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


In every aspect of our life, our behaviour itself is 
a witness to our interpersonal relationships. You may 
reside in any place or go to any country; but, keep 
up your good character. Respect all. Love all. Hate 
none. Earn a good name for yourself. It is not the 
academic degrees that bring greatness to us. Haven’t 
we so many Ph.D.’s in this world today? Haven’t we 
so many people who did I.A.S. in the country now? 
Has the world become better in any way on account 
of these people? In fact, it is only because of the so- 
called educated people that the country is sliding down 
from its eminence. Let us not be concerned with such 
so-called ‘great’ people. It is enough if people wish 
each other with a Namaskar and enquire their welfare. 
That itself is greatness. One has to imbibe humility and 
obedience, along with education. Only such a student 
is the real student; you should not have even a trace 
of ego, pride, pomp and such other bad qualities. 


The student who did the role of Prahlada in 
yesterday’s play did well. His voice was sweet. Also, his 
acting was exemplary. Prahlada’s father Hiranyakasipu 
had to undergo punishment on account of his hatred 
towards God. God assumed the form of Narasimha 
Avatar and killed him. When we lead a good and 
virtuous life, our end will also be good. We will also 
earn a good name for ourselves. Right from our birth 
till death, we must lead an exemplary life. However, 
people do not listen to good words. They listen to 
only wrong advice and spoil themselves. It is our 


Repose Faith In Your Conscience 11 


common experience that while we travel in a train 
or a bus, we come across a beggar singing the glory 
of Ramanama beautifully. Our fellow travellers will 
be happily listening to the song fully immersed in it. 
Finally, when the beggar completes his song and begins 
to move away, people compliment him saying, “You 
sang well and made us very happy.” They express their 
gratitude to him by offering some charity. Thus, life 
can be really meaningful when you make others happy. 


Be Good In Thought Word And Deed 


You are all students gathered in this hall. You 
must share good thoughts and words amongst you on 
such occasions as these. Good thoughts, good words 
and good deeds are the qualities of Divinity. We must 
cultivate good qualities. When you stand in front of 
the sun at sunrise, your shadow will be fifty feet long 
while you are actually five feet tall. As the sun begins 
to rise in the sky, the length of your shadow becomes 
shorter. When the sun positions itself exactly above 
your head at noon, your shadow falls under your feet. 
In the same way, when you begin your journey towards 
God and gradually progress in the Godward path, the 
shadow of maya (illusion) falls behind. On the other 
hand, if you go against God and travel in the opposite 
direction, the shadow of maya will be in front of you. 


Embodiments of Love! All our students are gold. 
What sort of gold? Pure 24 carat gold. Wherever they 


12 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


go and in whichever activity they participate - in sports, 
in education, in behaviour, in their talk and in every 
activity, they are earning good name for themselves. 
It is only due to this reason, I have heard people 
praising everywhere, “The students of Sri Sathya Sai 
Educational Institution are exemplary in character”. If 
you just look at them, you will find Sai Baba reflecting 
on their faces. 


The Ati Rudra Yajna will commence on the 19th 
of this month in Chennai. But, the people in Chennai 
are eagerly awaiting the arrival of Swami’s students, 
not the Ati Rudra Yajna. They are looking forward 
with a feeling, “We understand Sai Baba will be here 
to participate in the Yajna along with His students. His 
students alone are ideals for us.” 


The sanctity of education is deteriorating due to 
the misuse of scientific knowledge, today. The scientists 
are endeavouring to change the laws of nature. If a 
tree were to bear fruit, it is being given an injection. 
If a cow were to yield milk in greater quantity, it is 
fed tripe from other slaughtered animals. They think 
that by feeding animal parts to the cow it will grow 
strong and yield more milk. Even the water is polluted 
nowadays. It is that polluted water that is responsible 
for all the diseases suffered by man today. In whichever 
fruit you see, there are insects and bacteria. The figs 
used to be very good for consumption, earlier. But, now 
there are bacteria and pollutants even in the figs. What 


Repose Faith In Your Conscience 13 


is the reason? Only the polluted water that is fed to 
the plant. People have to clean and boil the water and 
then only drink it. We have supplied drinking water 
from the Krishna river to the people of Chennai by 
spending 200 crore rupees. I have seen small children 
bathing in cesspools and drinking the same dirty water. 
I felt very sorry for them. I had decided then itself, 
“T will not visit Chennai till we supply pure drinking 
water to the people of Chennai.” That was ten years 
ago. Now I have supplied drinking water to them. I am 
now visiting Chennai in the backdrop of the children 
drinking pure water and happily spending their time 
in play. We can be healthy and happy only when we 
drink pure water and eat healthy food. That is how you 
have to protect your health. However, I find that some 
students are not taking good food. They are tempted by 
all varieties of dishes. You please do not look for the 
taste. You just see for yourself whether the food you 
are eating is good for your health or not. Only then 
will you be healthy and happy. 


Dear Students! Study well. Do not waste time. 
Whenever you find time, read only good books. Tread 
the good and Godward path and become good people. 
It is only the students of Sathya Sai Educational 
Institutions that can transform all the people in the 
world into good citizens. You be good and make others 
good. Avoid evil qualities like kama (desire) and krodha 


(anger). 


14 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


Today, our children are going to present a play 
called “Sri Krishna Rayabaram”. You all know that 
in the Mahabharata the evil Kauravas troubled the 
Pandavas in many ways. However, the Pandavas were 
of very good nature. Their mind was pure. They tried 
their best to do good to the Kauravas. I will quote one 
small example to illustrate how pure their minds were. 
The elderly Kunti, mother of the Pandavas broke down 
and breathed her last on hearing the sad news of Lord 
Krishna leaving His mortal coil. Dharmaraja, her eldest 
son who was near her during her last moments kept 
her head on his lap. The four brothers Bhima, Arjuna, 
Nakula and Sahadeva surrounded him. Dharmaraja then 
explained to his brothers, “Dear ones, Lord Krishna 
who protected us all the while has left for His heavenly 
abode. We should not therefore remain in this world 
any more.” He then called Bhima near him and told 
him to make arrangements for the funeral of their 
mother. He also called Arjuna and told him to make 
arrangements for the coronation ceremony of Parikshit as 
king. Finally, he called the two younger brothers Nakula 
and Sahadeva to his side and ordered them, “We have 
to begin our great march towards the Himalayas. You 
go and make all arrangements for our journey.” Thus, 
on one side he was arranging for the funeral of their 
mother and on the other, the coronation of the grandson 
of his younger brother as king to ensure the continuity 
of the dynasty. Can anyone undertake such task in such 
a grievous situation? Thus, all responsibilities were 
discharged at the same time, then and there. 


Repose Faith In Your Conscience 15 


The Pandavas embarked on their great march. 
Droupadi, Bhima, Arjuna, Nakula and Sahadeva dropped 
down in the middle of the journey. Dharmaraja continued 
his journey and first reached Naraka (hell). He saw 
many people undergoing several kinds of punishment 
for their sins, there. The moment Dharmaraja stepped 
into hell, they were relieved of their suffering and felt 
very happy. Now, the question arises as to why at all 
Dharmaraja had to go to hell in the first instance? 


He never spoke a le during his entire life. 
However, during the Mahabharata war he spoke the 
words, “Aswatthama hathah” (Aswatthama died) loudly 
and then “kunjarah” (the elephant) softly, in order that 
the mighty warrior Dronacharya dies on account of 
the shock of the news. The words, “Aswatthama hatha 
kunjarah” meant the elephant by name Aswatthama died. 
Unfortunately, the name of the son of Dronacharya’s 
was also Aswatthama. In the din and commotion of the 
war, Dronacharya could not hear the word “kunjarah” 
properly and mistook the words of Dharmaraja as 
‘Aswatthama died’. Unable to bear the grief and shocked 
over the ‘death of his son Aswatthama’, he threw away 
his bow and arrows in the battlefield. Thus, Dharmaraja 
was indirectly responsible for the fall of Dronacharya 
by uttering falsehood on one occasion. For expiating 
this sin, he had to spend some time in hell. Thereafter, 
he was taken to heaven. While Dharmaraja was leaving 
for heaven, the people undergoing punishment in the 
hell fell at his feet and prayed, “Sir! Please do not 


16 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


leave us, you stay here itself and give us happiness”. 
Dharmaraja then replied, “My dear ones! I cannot 
but obey the command of God”, and left for heaven. 
Wherever we are, if we do good, we will experience 
good only. Good work begets good results only. 


Dear students! After passing your examinations in 
this Institution, you can pursue higher studies elsewhere 
if you wish. But, along with academic excellence, let 
your behaviour also set an example to others. Do not 
indulge in falsehood, injustice and evil ways. Follow 
the path of truth and become immortal. Lord Krishna 
declared, “Mamaivamso ...” You should not forget this 
truth. You pursue any type of education anywhere, with 
this awareness. (Bhagawan then enquired, “Am I giving 
you any trouble?” The students replied in one voice, 
“No Swami”.) Making you all happy, working for your 
progress, striving to remove all pain and suffering from 
you, making your parents also happy — this is My job. 
Your happiness is My food. I need no other food. That 
one type of food is sufficient for Me. Hence, may you 
all lead a happy and blissful life always! You may 
encounter any number of difficulties; keep them aside 
and march forward. 


Today, some people are indulging in false 
propaganda saying, “Sai Baba’s reputation is growing 
day by day. Sai Baba is converting all foreigners as 
Hindus.” They are highly jealous of Me. Due to this 
jealousy, they write all sorts of trash in the newspapers. 


Repose Faith In Your Conscience 17 


We should ignore such writings. We must have firm 
faith in our own conscience. Whatever they may say, 
put it aside considering it as nonsense. We have nothing 
to do with it. You repose faith in your conscience. 
Whatever I do, it is for the good of all. If someone 
abuses you, you take it as, “He is abusing only my 
body, not me”, If they hurl abuses against you openly, 
let those abuses merge into thin air. On the other hand, 
if they scold you silently, they do not reach you. Do 
not bother about them. Keep your faith in God firmly. 
That should be your attitude. 


God is immanent in every living being. The name 
and form may be different. But, God is only one. He 
is present in one and all. You are all embodiments of 
Divinity! Develop that feeling in you. Do not cultivate 
the differences of high and low. All are one. Repose 
faith in the principle of the fatherhood of God and 
brotherhood of man and lead your lives happily. 


Dear students! 1 wish that all of you should come 
out in Ist class in your examinations with good marks. 


Sankranti Message, 15-1-2007, 
Prasanthi Nilayam 


18 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


You should give happiness to your parents. 
In the traditions of our country, it is said that you 
should give happiness to your father and your 
mother. Only when you are able to do this, will 
you have achieved something. It is only when you 
can put such ideals into practice, that you will 
have learnt something. Students, boys and girls, 
you should do all your work with the thought of 
God in your mind. I bless you that you get this 
strength. 


It is not as if you do not know the current 
situation in the world. Wherever you go, qualities 
like untruth, unkindness, hatred, and jealousy are 
becoming prominent. At such a time, students like 
you, armed with weapons of kindness, forbearance, 
love, and patience must enter society and bring 
about a social transformation. 


Baba 





2 


All Parties Should Unite To Make 
Bharat Strong 


Forbearance is the real beauty in this sacred 
land of Bharat. Of all the rituals, adherence 
to truth is the greatest penance. The nectarous 
feeling in this country is the feeling of love 
towards one s mother. Character is valued far 
higher than the very life itself. People have 
forgotten the basic principles of this great 
culture and are imitating Western culture. 
Alas! The Bharatiyas are not aware of the 
greatness of their cultural heritage just as a 
mighty elephant is not aware of its own streng 
th. (Telugu poem) 


have never so far given a discourse in Tamil in 
such a vast assembly. I will not speak about a 
particular State or a region since I do not observe any 
such differences. The whole of Bharat is important 


20 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


for Me. It is only man who has divided the land into 
various regions. God has not willed any divisions. 


Make Atma The Basis Of Your Life 


All Bharatiyas should join hands to make Bharat 
a land of prosperity. It is possible only through love. 
The awareness of the principle of the atma can unite all. 


Religions are many, but goal is one; 
Clothes are many, but yarn is one; 
Flowers are many, but worship is one. 


Therefore, embodiments of love, do not observe 
any differences on the basis of religion. The same 
effulgent atma is present in the heart of everybody. 
People may wear different types of dresses and speak 
different languages, but the atma present in all is one 
and the same. Names and forms can be different, but 
the divine principle is one in all. He is a true Bharatiya 
who recognises this truth and acts accordingly. It is man 
who has created all differences. We give different names 
to different forms for the sake of identification. But 
God has no form. He is also referred to as atma. We 
should love atma and make it the basis of our life. This 
is true human quality. That itself 1s Sathya, Dharma, 
Santhi, Prema and Ahimsa (truth, righteousness, peace, 
love and non-violence). Where there is love, there are 
peace and truth. Truth is one, not two. If you adhere 
to the path of truth, you will encounter no difficulties 


All Parties Should Unite To Make Bharat Strong 21 


or dangers. Man should love his fellow human beings 
like his own brothers and sisters. This is true devotion. 
At the worldly level, you should discharge your duty 
and at the spiritual level, you should love everybody 
without observing any differences. Even if you come 
across your enemy, you should not turn your face away 
from him. Rather, you should greet him, saying, “Hello 
brother, how are you?” Then, he will also say, “How 
are you, brother?” Mind is the witness of mind. A fool 
will witness only foolishness. We should never act in 
a foolish manner. Love All, Serve All. Not only that, 
Help Ever, Hurt Never. We should not harm anyone. We 
should love everybody. Then, this love will reach God. 


Love attracts everybody. The five elements, the 
five senses and the five life-breaths are all present 
within you. It is a sign of ignorance to search for 
God outside when He is present very much within 
you. You should develop self-confidence that God is 
within you. When you have self-confidence, you will 
have self-satisfaction, and self-satisfaction will lead 
you to self-sacrifice. When you practise self-sacrifice, 
you will attain self-realisation. Hence, self-realisation 
does not come from outside. If you ask a millionaire, 
“Sir, do you have peace?” his reply will be, “I have 
money, I have a number of houses, I have everything, 
but I have no peace of mind.” Where does the peace 
of mind come from? Peace lies within us, not outside. 
You are unable to experience peace because you have 
turned your innate peace into pieces. We should live 


22 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


in unity and love without observing any differences. 
All the people of the world belong to the same family. 
Instead of living like members of one family, people 
create differences on the basis of parties which bring 
harm to the country. We should never give scope to any 
differences whatsoever. The Vedas declare, Na karmana 
na prajaya dhanena Thyagenaike amrutatthwamanasu 
(immortality is not attained through action, progeny or 
wealth; it is attained only by sacrifice). Money comes 
and goes. Nothing is permanent. Only consciousness 
is eternal. We should take this as the basis of our life. 


We should respect all parties. All parties are one. 
Just like human beings have different names, parties 
also have different names. Everybody will be happy 
when we develop the feeling of oneness of the atma 
without observing any differences. “He is happy, but I 
am unhappy.” Why do such differences arise? Happiness 
and sorrow are not separate from each other. Pleasure 
is an interval between two pains. There can be no 
happiness without difficulties. So, we should treat both 
of them with equanimity. 


Put Your Wealth To Proper Use 


I am very much pained to see the plight of the 
poor. Once I was travelling to Madras (Chennai) by 
car. There were many cars following My car. As I was 
coming to Chennai, I enquired at a place, “What is 
this?” The devotees who were travelling with Me in 


All Parties Should Unite To Make Bharat Strong 23 


the same car said, “It is Red Hills.” They told, “The 
rain water collected in this area is used for growing 
crops. But it has now become dry because there is no 
rainfall.” I saw small children drinking dirty water from 
puddles. They told me that the same water was being 
used for cooking. By drinking such dirty water, we spoil 
our health ourselves. People in many villages are put 
to a lot of trouble due to lack of drinking water. Here 
and there they dig borewells for water, but borewells 
are not a permanent solution to their water problem. 
They are functional only for a short time and then 
they become dry. There are three things that affect our 
health water, food and environment. Man can enjoy 
good health when all these three are pure. Today our 
health is spoiled because we drink polluted water, eat 
improper food and breathe in polluted air. I said to a 
devotee travelling with Me in the car, “My dear, there 
are a number of wealthy people in Chennai. Why don’t 
they make some sacrifice?” When a beggar comes to 
their doorstep, they drive him away. They even chase 
him away by their dog. Is there anyone who gives even 
a paisa for the welfare of society? Can’t they extend 
a helping hand to others and the country at large? 
Can’t they provide drinking water to quench the thirst 
of others? They spend so much money on cigarettes, 
cinema, eating and drinking. Instead of indulging in 
misuse of money in this manner, is it not possible for 
you to provide even a gulp of water to poor children? 
Health, education and peace of mind are very important 
for man. 


24 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


If we look at the present educational scenario, 
we find that one has to pay a huge amount to get a 
child admitted even in a primary class. Over and above 
this, one has to pay fees every month. Wherefrom can 
poor people get so much money? We should bear this 
in mind that the money which is with us is not really 
ours; it is the gift of God. With this sacred feeling, we 
should utilise the money for the welfare of the masses. 
(Narrating the story of the great conqueror Alexander, 
Bhagawan explained the futility of amassing wealth and 
conquering territories since everyone has to go from this 
world empty-handed howsoever wealthy or powerful 
one may be.) For whose sake should you accumulate 
so much wealth? You may very carefully accumulate 
great wealth, but all that may be spent by your children. 
During your lifetime itself, you should make proper 
use of your wealth. I do not keep even a single paisa 
with Me. Any money sent to Me is directly sent to the 
bank. I utilise all the money on welfare projects. As I 
am undertaking many welfare projects, a lot of money 
is getting collected in the banks. What for should we 
keep money in banks? It is only for spending on noble 
causes. In many villages, small children have to walk 
long distances to go to school. We should help these 
children by establishing schools in those villages. Many 
women have to take their sick children to a hospital at 
a far off place to consult a doctor. Hence, we should 
establish a hospital in every village. Seeing the plight 
of people who are unable to get medical treatment, 
I have established hospitals, two of which are super 


All Parties Should Unite To Make Bharat Strong 25 


speciality hospitals. Crores of rupees have been spent 
on each building. Those who come to our hospital for 
any treatment are not put to any inconvenience. Not 
only are they given free medicines, they are given free 
food also. 


Besides the hospitals, we have established 
educational institutions also. Students come to our 
institutions from various places. We do not collect 
even a paisa from them, not even examination fee. In 
this manner, thousands of students are receiving free 
education in our institutions. (At this point of time, 
Bhagawan asked some students to come onto the stage.) 
All of them are postgraduates. They have completed 
courses like M.A., M.B.A., M.Sc., etc. After completing 
such courses, these boys have been praying to Me, 
“Whatever work Swami gives us, we will happily do it.” 
That is why I have given them village work. They go 
from village to village distributing food to poor people. 
What is the use of all your education if you do not 
help the poor? Aren’t there so many highly educated 
people in this country? They are heroes in accumulating 
wealth and zeroes in noble tasks. Accumulation of 
money is not important; the work we do is much more 
important. Education will become worthwhile if you 
utilise it in the service of others. Otherwise, it is all a 
waste. (Pointing to a student) This boy has come from 
Himachal Pradesh. Students come here from many 
places, and even from Russia and America. Those who 
come from Russia have so much devotion. I send them 


26 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


along with our college students to distribute food from 
door to door in villages. They go to each and every 
house and distribute food and clothes and experience 
bliss. 


There is no charity greater than feeding the hungry, 
There are no greater Gods than parents, 

There is no greater gain than the company of the 
good, 

There is no enemy greater than anger, 

There is no wealth greater than good reputation, 


There is no greater Dharma than compassion. 
(Telugu poem) 


One with compassion is a true human being. One 
without compassion does not deserve to be called a 
human being. We are born as human beings. When 
we call ourselves humans, we should not behave like 
animals. Fighting and killing are the qualities of animals, 
not of human beings. The selfishness that is seen in 
man today is not found even in monkeys. Everything 
man does is motivated by selfishness; he does not 
undertake anything for the welfare of others. All fields 
of human endeavour like music, literature, politics, etc., 
have become polluted by selfishness. 


Love each other with a pure mind. Never hate 
anybody. Desire the welfare of all. When all are happy, 
we will also be happy. When there is no happiness in 
the world, how can we be happy? I want that all of you 


All Parties Should Unite To Make Bharat Strong 27 


should live in unity like brothers and sisters. Money can 
fill your belly, but it cannot give you mental satisfaction. 
Money comes and goes, morality comes and grows. 
Hence, develop morality. Only then can we live up 
to the title of a human being. Strong determination 
is very essential on the path of spirituality. Having 
resolved something, we should never give it up under 
any circumstances. 


Having resolved, what ought to be resolved, hold 
on to it till you have succeeded. Having desired 
what ought to be desired, hold on to it till your 
desire is fulfilled. Having asked what ought to be 
asked, do not leave the hold till you get it. Having 
thought what ought to be thought, hold on to it 
till you have succeeded. With heart mellowed, 
the Lord must yield to your wishes or forgetting 
yourself, you should ask Him with all your heart. 
Persevere, be tenacious, and never give up, for 
it is the quality of a devotee never to retreat, 
abandoning his resolve. (Telugu poem) 


If you find anybody in trouble, you should go and 
talk to him lovingly. That itself will give him great 
satisfaction. You are all embodiments of God. Do not 
think that only Sai Baba is God. God is present in 
all. All of you are divine. Therefore, help everybody 
considering him as divine. This is very important. One 
who understands this truth and acts accordingly will 
achieve great success in life. I am not talking about 


28 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


any particular party or individual. I am talking, keeping 
the welfare of the entire country in view. When the 
individuals are prosperous, the country will also become 
prosperous. There are five fingers in the hand. It is 
possible to catch any object only when all the five fingers 
join together. In the same manner, people of all parties 
should become one. Followers of one party should not 
hate those of other parties. You pursue what you want, 
let them have what they want. Not only should you not 
hate people of other parties, you should not hate the 
followers of other faiths also. I want that you should 
live in unity without hating anyone. 


Divine Discourse, 21-1-2007 
Nehru Indoor Stadium, Chennai. 


If we can light one bright lamp in one house, 
the entire street will be lighted. In a similar manner, 
if each student has a bright light in his heart, 
there will be then be no doubt whatsoever that 


the whole community will be led from darkness 
to light. 


Baba 





3 


God Will Help You 
If You Help Others 


Man is born in action, is sustained by action 
and ultimately merges in action. Action is the 
cause for pleasure and pain. Truly speaking, 
action is God for man. (Telugu poem) 


Embodiments of Love! 


HERE is no need for man to search for God 

anywhere. God is present in each one of 
you. Lord Krishna declared in the Bhagavad Gita: 
Mamaivamsho jivaloke jivabhuta sanathana (the eternal 
atma in all beings is a part of My Being). “All are an 
aspect of My Divinity,” He declared. Where then would 
you search for God when He is in you and with you? 
Whatever work you do, consider it as the work of God. 


30 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


The Youth Should Tread The Sacred Path 


God has blessed man with body, mind, intellect 
and mind-stuff (chitta). The youth are endowed with 
a healthy body, a strong mind and a sharp intellect 
capable of deep thinking, but they are misusing them. 
Instead of thinking of God and making proper use of 
their limbs, they are misusing their senses. This is a 
big mistake. At this age, you should put the power of 
the body, mind and intellect to right use. What is meant 
by right use? It means, treading the sacred path. 


Just because we are gifted with eyes, there is no 
need to see everything. Try to see all that is good. Do 
not hear with your ears the criticism of others or all 
that is unnecessary. Hearing the criticism of others and 
seeing all that is evil is a great sin. We will acquire 
evil only when we see evil. We do not try to listen to 
good words with our ears; instead, we listen to evil 
talk. Surdas was blind. But he constantly chanted the 
name of Krishna. Hence, Krishna gave him Darshan 
and fulfilment in life. Why has God given you tongue? 
Is it to enjoy the taste of anything and everything or to 
talk ill of others? No, no. It is meant to sing the glories 
of God. Man can attain God-realisation by putting these 
modes of worship into practice: Sravanam (listening), 
Kirtanam (singing), Vishnusmaranam (contemplating 
on Vishnu), Padasevanam (serving His Lotus Feet), 
Vandanam (salutation), Archanam (worship), Dasyam 
(servitude), Sneham (friendship), Atmanivedanam (self- 
surrender). 


God Will Help You If You Help Others 31 


Consider All As The Children Of God 


Chant the name of God. Let others also hear it and 
redeem their lives. We do Kirtan (devotional singing). 
What for do we do it? Is it to enjoy the melody of 
Raga (musical mode)? No, no. We do it to get rid 
of our roga (disease). “Rama, save me!” This can be 
recited like a poem. But it does not give us as much 
happiness as it gives when we sing it in the form of a 
song. If we chant the name of Rama wholeheartedly, 
it is enough. The name Krishna is also very powerful 
and supreme. Many people describe and praise Krishna 
in many ways. What we are supposed to do now is 
not merely to chant the name of Rama, Krishna or 
Sai, but to help those who are in trouble, saying, “Oh 
dear one, what do you want? Are you hungry? Take 
this food.” You should offer food and help to him to 
the extent possible. Many small children roam about in 
the streets when both their parents go to work. They 
are exposed to many accidents and dangers. We should 
help such children and protect them from dangers and 
mishaps. Some people get injured in accidents; they 
should be taken to hospital and provided treatment and 
other necessary help. Be courteous to the poor and help 
them. Provide help and means of treatment to those 
who suffer from some ailment. Extend a helping hand 
to those who are weak and unable to walk. 


When we teach others the value of Seva (service) 
after putting it into practice in our own life, it will 


32 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


create awareness in them. Then people will think, 
“These children are teaching us so many good things; 
so, we should also extend help to them.” We should 
talk to children nicely. When we call them, we should 
do so lovingly, saying, “Dear child, please come.” We 
should avoid calling like, “Hey, come here” with anger. 
Talk lovingly and sweetly without hurting them. Do 
not cast angry looks on them. We should express our 
love towards them while talking to them. Love is a 
supreme power. Therefore, call everybody with love, 
saying, “Come, brother, come.” Ask him about his 
difficulties, “Do you have financial or health problem?” 
After understanding his problems thoroughly, provide 
necessary help to him. There are some who lead a 
lonely life as they are without father, mother, relatives 
or friends. We should offer brotherly affection to them. 
We should encourage them by saying, “I am like your 
brother,” and talk to them lovingly, saying, “Oh dear 
one, you have no elder or younger sister? I am your 
elder sister; 1am your younger sister.” Speaking to them 
in this intimate way, we should give them courage and 
succour. You are all the children of one mother, verily. 
That mother is God. Follow the maxim: Brotherhood 
of Man and Fatherhood of God. Since all are the 
children of God, you should consider all of them as 
your brothers and sisters; you need not, however, share 
your property with them. Whomsoever you come across, 
talk to him nicely and love him wholeheartedly. 


God Will Help You If You Help Others 33 


God is the embodiment of love. He protects the 
entire mankind by His love. If only there is love in 
you, it is enough. Then you will all become united. 
You should not create distance between one another 
by your talk or conduct. Draw everybody close to you 
with love. Then you will all attain the proximity of 
God. When you look at others with love, God will also 
look at you with love. In whatever situation you may 
be, you should never show anger, jealousy, hypocrisy 
or pomp. Do not treat others with anger or hatred. By 
experiencing your love, love in others will also increase. 
When you treat others with love, they will also show 
love towards you. On the other hand, if you show anger 
towards them, they will also behave angrily with you. 
When any beggar stands in front of your house and 
begs for food, saying: Bhavati, bhiksham dehi (Mother, 
please give me alms), you should lovingly ask him to 
stay for a while, bring food from inside the house and 
offer it to him, thereby making him happy. 


During the war for the liberation of Rangoon, a 
mother and her son somehow escaped from the area 
of war and managed to reach Kolkata. They had no 
shelter or food. The mother would go begging for alms 
from house to house, give most of it to her son and 
partake of whatever little was left. When she did not 
get enough for both, she would give the entire quantity 
of food to her son and would herself go without food. 
Consequently, she became weak day by day. One day 
the son, unable to see her suffering, told her, “Mother, 


34 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


from today, you take rest, I will fetch food for both of 
us.” From that day, he would go begging from house 
to house, give most of it to his mother and partake of 
whatever little was left. Sometimes, he would lie to his 
mother that he had already taken his food. Consequently, 
he too became very weak. The son had no strength 
to look after his mother nor did the mother have any 
strength to protect her son. 


One day, he stood in front of the house of an 
officer and begged for alms. The officer was relaxing 
in an easy chair in the verandah, reading a newspaper. 
He took pity on the boy, went inside and brought some 
food on a plantain leaf. He told him to sit and eat it 
there itself. But the boy said that he would take it 
home for his mother. The officer said, “You say you 
are hungry, then why don’t you sit here and eat? You 
can take it for your mother afterwards.” Then the boy 
replied, “Sir, all these days my mother was bringing 
food for me taking great pains. Consequently, her health 
deteriorated. Hence, I have to feed her first.” As he was 
uttering these words, he felt giddy. He fell down and 
breathed his last with the words, “First to my mother, 
first to my mother...” on his lips. The officer felt very 
sad. He was astonished at the love the boy had for his 
mother. He went in search of the mother and found her 
lying under a tree. He was in a dilemma as to how to 
break the tragic news of her son’s demise. With the 
help of a servant, he brought the dead body of her 
son and placed it next to her. She got up at once and 


God Will Help You If You Help Others 35 


called, “My dear one! My dear one.” But there was no 
response. Then the officer said, “Oh mother! Your son 
breathed his last while bringing food for you.” She was 
immersed in grief and lamented, saying, “Alas! Where 
is the necessity for food when I have lost my son?” 


Worldly Relations Bereft Of Love Are Useless 


So far as the mother has strength, she nourishes 
her children. The children should nourish their mother 
in the same way. God has given us human birth to 
nourish and nurture each other. What for are the relations 
like brothers and sisters? Not merely for the sake of 
division of property and wealth. These relations are for 
developing love and sharing it with each other. Real 
relations are those who share love with each other. 
Worldly relations bereft of love are useless. Those 
who are strong and powerful should protect the weak 
and helpless. When you see someone in trouble, show 
kindness towards him and try to wipe his tears. This is 
real compassion. This compassion is righteousness; it is 
love. When we expand our love, we can give happiness 
to the whole world. Therefore, develop love. If you 
come across a poor man, a sick person or one who is 
in trouble, give them whatever help you can. When 
you extend help to such people, God will shower His 
love on you. In every human being, God is present in 
the form of love. We should not waste or misuse this 
love. Today we express our love arbitrarily for anything 
and everything. By loving undesirable things, we tread 
the wrong path and come to a sorry state. 


36 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


Some people show great love for outsiders, but 
do not show the same love towards their mother and 
father in their house. First and foremost, we should love 
our parents and then, other people. But we should not 
limit our love to our friends and relatives alone; we 
should love all. Only then will God shower His love 
on us. When we see somebody in trouble or an injured 
person on the road, we should not show indifference 
towards them. Howsoever urgent be the work we are 
having, we should try to remove their suffering. Then 
God will manifest before us and fill us with energy. 
There is none in this world who can give us more love 
than God. We do bhajans and perform service activities 
only to attain the love of God. God’s love fills us with 
great energy. It is God only who gives us this energy. 
Therefore, love God, and love all people who are verily 
the children of God. Some children become orphans. 
You should alleviate their suffering. Then your birth 
as human being will become worthwhile. You see a 
person in trouble and go away without showing any 
kindness to him. There is no sin greater than this. The 
next day when you are in trouble, then your friends will 
also ignore and deride you. Therefore, you should love 
others and receive their love. Charity and kindness are 
an important part of Dharma (righteousness). 


There is no charity greater than feeding the hungry, 
There are no greater Gods than parents, 
There is no greater Dharma than compassion, 


God Will Help You If You Help Others 37 


There is no greater gain than the company of the 
good, 


There is no enemy greater than anger. 
(Telugu poem) 


In no condition should we allow anger to overpower 
us. We should obey our parents. We should love even 
those who hate us. One should sacrifice even one’s life 
for the sake of love. One’s life becomes worthwhile 
only when one has love. 


Develop Love And Experience Unity With God 


Members of Seva Dal! First and foremost, imbibe 
love in your heart. Whomsoever you come across, you 
should talk to him with love. Draw all those who are 
in trouble close to you. Then God will shower His love 
on you. How can you receive the love of God if you 
do not love your fellowmen? If you want to become 
deserving of God’s love, then first and foremost you 
should become deserving of the love of your fellowmen. 
God will help you if you help others. Help Ever, Hurt 
Never. Never put anyone to trouble. Love everyone. 
Lead your life with goodness of heart. Your heart should 
melt with love and love should flow in it. 


Therefore, embodiments of love, you all embody 
love. Develop love in you more and more. This is an 
aspect of Divinity. It is in reference to this that Lord 
Krishna declares that all beings are only an aspect of 


38 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


His Divinity. Dear ones! You are not different from Me; 
I am in you and you are in Me. As I love you, you 
should also love one and all. Then your love and My 
love will unite. If you add love to love, it will increase 
immensely. You can achieve greatness only when you 
develop love in you. This is the service you have to 
render. Only when you develop love will you become 
deserving of God’s love and grace. 


Divine Discourse, 27-1-2007, 
Thiruvanmiyur, Chennai 


You should offer the fruits of your Sadhana... 
the fruits which will come from your own life, to 
God. These fruits are good conduct, truth, good 
habits, love, etc. 


If such fruits, grown by your Sadhana, are 
offered to God, the benefit will come to you. In 


the preliminary stages such pujas with flowers 
plucked from a tree are necessary. To adopt this 
procedure for all your life is not the right type of 
Sadhana. It will be like sitting in the same class 
in a school for all your life. 


Baba 





4 
Be United In Divine Love 


Embodiments of Love, Young Men and Women, 


T is very necessary to recognise the importance 

of human values, today. People these days are 
unable to lead the life of a human being since they 
lost the human values. The qualities of a human being 
are of two types, internal and external. Kama (desire), 
krodha (anger), lobha (greed), moha (attachment), mada 
(pride), and matsarya (jealousy) are external. Sathya 
(Truth), Dharma (Righteousness), Santhi (Peace), Prema 
(Love) and Ahimsa (Non-violence) are internal. 


Today, we are giving a go-by to the inner, eternal 
and truthful qualities and are hankering after the 
worldly and transient matters. This is not correct. We 
must develop the inner vision of atma bhava. If only 
there is Truth, it is enough; Righteousness will follow. 
Where Truth and Righteousness go together like the 


40 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


positive and negative, there will be Peace; where there 
is Peace there will be love. There will be no scope 
at all for violence when a human being is surcharged 
with the current of Love. Today, violence is rampant 
everywhere. People suffer from sorrows and difficulties. 
Hence, you must strive to cultivate the innate human 
values. Truth is eternal. It cannot be destroyed. It is 
said, Sathyam bruyath, privam bruyath, na bruyath 
sathyamapriyam (speak Truth; speak pleasantly; avoid 
speaking Truth that is unpalatable). Truth is not born 
out of an individual, nor does it go away with one 
individual. Truth is universal. It applies equally to all 
human beings. You must cultivate such universal Truth. 
What you think, you must speak; what you speak, you 
must put into action. That is real humanness. 


Anger, desire, greed, attachment, pride and jealousy 
are unbecoming of a human being. Today, man is 
limiting his love to his own wife and children. He is 
not developing broad-mindedness. As the saying goes 
Ekam Sath viprah bahuda vadanthi (Truth is only 
one; the wise men say it in different ways). Sarvam 
khalvidam Brahma is the declaration, which means 
everything in the universe is Brahman only. Truth is 
the very embodiment of Brahman. And that Brahman is 
omnipresent. Hence, first and foremost, establish Truth 
in your heart. Thereafter, the other four human values 
of Righteousness, Peace, Love and Non-violence will 
reign in the world. Then, there will be no violence at 
all in the world and all human beings irrespective of 


Be United In Divine Love 41 


religion and nationality will live in peace and harmony. 
A human being has enormous strength in him. That 
has to be channelised properly. Anger, desire, greed, 
delusion, pride and jealousy have to be controlled. 


You sing various bhajans. It is only when you 
sing the bhajans in proper sruthi, it will be melodious. 
Similarly, your desire must have a limit. If you wish to 
marry, you can do so. Later on you may wish to have 
children; you can have that also. But, you must bring 
them up in proper way, so that they become useful 
citizens in their later life. God has prescribed certain 
code of conduct for the proper conduct of life of a 
human being. One should not behave like an animal 
or a bird or a beast. We must control our behaviour. 
This is the most important value to be cherished by a 
human being. 


The human values are not visible to the naked eye. 
What is the form of Truth? None has seen the form. 
Rather, it is beyond any form. It emerges out of our 
bosom. What is Dharma (Righteousness)? Dharma is to 
follow the teachings of our own heart. Where is Santhi 
(Peace)? Is it outside? No. it is only asanthi (unrest) 
outside. Man today craves for peace and peace alone, 
inspite of possessing all sorts of wealth. You ask any 
millionaire. His reply will be “I have money, houses 
and all kinds of wealth; but, I have no peace’. Peace 
therefore is not to be obtained from the world outside. 
It has to flow from within. Where there is Peace, there 


42 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


will be Love. The light of Love shines in one and all. 
It is Love that illuminates the entire universe. Hence, 
if you strengthen Love, there will be no scope for 
hatred at all! It is only when you develop a feeling of 
separation, there will be hatred between one another. 
On the other hand, if you develop a feeling of oneness, 
how can there be a feeling of hatred between you and 
the other man? 


Dear Golden ones (bangaru), No one should 
develop bad qualities like jealousy, hatred, desire and 
anger. Develop Love. Love is God and God is Love. 
“Prema muditha manase kaho Rama Rama Ram......... 7 
is the bhajan. Love is the greatest gift God has given 
to a human being. The value of any material object in 
this world can be assessed; but not the value of Love. 
Hence, develop Love. Not only that, share that love 
with others. Thus, when you exchange love and spend 
your lives happily, evil qualities like hatred, jealousy, 
ego, etc., cannot come anywhere near. You must be 
knowing about a chemical stick called “Lakshmana 
Rekha”. When a line is drawn with this stick in 
the house, no insect of any kind can enter the area. 
Similarly, where there is Love, there the evil qualities 
cannot enter. Hence, only one quality, the quality of 
Love is sufficient to drive away all evil qualities. Love 
can be shared with any number of people; it will not 
deplete in quantity. In fact, the more you share it with 
others the more it will grow. God is our father, we 
are all His children. All these children have a right to 


Be United In Divine Love 43 


inherit His property. All have to share that ‘property’, 
i.e., the property of Love. You may forget anything in 
this world; but you should not forget God. Everything 
in this world is transient. But, Love is not that which 
comes and goes. On the other hand, it grows. Develop 
such Divine Love. Constantly do namasmarana, with 
absolute faith in God. We are uttering so many words 
every day. Can’t we utter sacred words like Rama and 
Krishna? Surely, we can. Once you chant these Divine 
names, all your sorrows and difficulties will vanish. 


Man has several types of worries: 


To be born is a worry, to be on the earth is a 
worry; world is a cause of worry and death too; 
entire childhood is a worry and so is the old age; 
life is a worry, failure is a worry; all actions and 
difficulties cause worry; even happiness too is a 
mysterious worry. Devotion to Swami alone will 
put an end to all your worries. Oh people! Develop 
such devotion and love. (Telugu poem) 


Develop Love for God, so that you may get rid 
of those worries. That is the only effective medicine 
for all your worries. By chanting the Divine Name of 
God, all your worries can be cured. Where is God? He 
is everywhere (omnipresent). The panchabhuthas (the 
five elements of earth, water, fire, air and ether) are 
the embodiments of Divinity. The body is like a water 
bubble. The mind is like a mad monkey. Hence, you 


44 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


should not follow either the body or the mind. You 
should follow the advice of the intellect. You should 
develop a pure and steady consciousness (chittha). In 
fact, all our sadhanas (spiritual practices) are meant to 
develop only chittha shuddhi (purity of consciousness)! 
The evil qualities of desire, anger, greed, delusion, pride 
and jealousy are only acquired qualities and not our 
innate qualities. Our innate qualities are Sathya (Truth), 
Dharma (Righteousness), Santhi (Peace), Prema (Love) 
and Ahimsa (Non-violence). We have to manifest them. 


Today, wherever you turn only violence is present. 
People indulge in violence for the sake of money. Money 
comes and goes, but morality comes and grows. In 
the past several kings and emperors had accumulated 
enormous wealth. But, could any one of them take even 
a paisa with them? No. Alexander the Great during his 
last moments called his ministers and requested them 
to wrap his body after his death with a white cloth, 
keeping his empty hands projected upward and take 
it in a procession through every street of his capital 
city. His idea was to convey a message to the people 
that man has to leave this world with empty hands, 
in spite of acquiring great wealth or conquering vast 
kingdoms. Whatever we acquire in this material world 
is only for our satisfaction. True and Eternal Bliss can 
be acquired only through Love. It is not enough if you 
spend your time with Love when you are in Prasanthi 
Nilayam. Those blissful moments should be cherished 
forever. Wherever you are, you should continue to live 


Be United In Divine Love 45 


with Love. Irrespective of the country where you are 
living, U.S.A., U.K., Japan or Germany, Love has no 
difference. Your body may be in a particular place, 
but Love is universal. Love is all-pervading. You must 
develop such love. You must love even those who hate 
you. 


Whenever you encounter an enemy, offer your 
pranams to him and enquire, “Hello brother, how are 
you?” I am sure he will respond saying “Brother, How 
are you?” All are brothers and sisters, verily. God is 
the only Father to one and all. The Bhagavad Gita 
declares, Mamaivamsho jivaloke jivabhuta sanathana 
(the eternal Atma in all beings is a part of My Being). 
You are not different from Me; we are all one! You 
must develop faith in such Oneness. Where is God? He 
is present as the indweller in every human being. You 
should develop the feeling ‘Whatever I do is an offering 
to God, the Indweller of my heart’. You must develop 
the faith that whatever happens, whether happiness or 
sorrow, is for your good only. You are aware that a 
person suffering from malarial fever will be administered 
the bitter mixture of quinine. It is only when that bitter 
mixture is taken the fever will subside. Similarly, realise 
the truth that the sorrows and difficulties you undergo 
are for your own good. God is omnipresent, you need 
not go far to realise Divinity. If you search your own 
heart and share your love with others, you can easily 
understand Divinity. All are bound by the bond of love. 
All will be united with love only. Hence, wherever you 


46 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


go, be united. Especially, the youth can achieve a lot 
if they are united. Prayer, chanting of the divine name 
and love for God are the three sadhanas we have to 
undertake. When you conduct yourself based on these 
three sadhanas, you can achieve anything. 


God is not separate from you. You are not separate 
from God. You and God are only one. You must always 
think “God is residing as the Indweller in my heart. I 
am verily God.” There may be differences in names and 
forms, but God is One and One alone. The different 
names like Rama, Krishna, etc., are those visualised 
by poets and artists like Ravi Varma. In fact, God has 
no particular form. They pray “A//lahu Akbar’. Allah 
has no form. There is no one higher than Allah. He 
is Supreme. God has no name and form. But, He will 
assume the form you constantly contemplate upon. Yad 
Bhavam tad bhavati (as is the feeling, so is the result). 
We are visualising Him in a particular form as per our 
own thoughts and feelings. You develop the feeling 
“God is in me, with me and is guiding me” and march 
on. May you all be happy! 


Bhagawan Ss message to devotees of Adilabad 
on 1-2-2007 at Prasanthi Nilayam 


5 


Tread The Path Of Truth By 
Constantly Contemplating On God 


The creation emerges from truth and merges 
into truth, 


Is there a place in the cosmos where truth does 
not exist? 


Visualise this pure and unsullied truth. 
(Telugu poem) 


RUTH is all-pervading. Truth is omnipresent. 

We are witnessing Truth everywhere. In 
fact, all our Darshan, Sparshan and Sambhashan are 
associated with Truth only! Where is Shuddha Sattwam 
(pure consciousness)? It is everywhere. Truth has no 
form. Whatever we see is Truth. (Saying there Swami 
created an object) This is Truth. From where did it 
come? It has come from Truth and it will merge in 
Truth. It is said, Sarvam khalvidam Brahma (verily all 


48 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


this is Brahman). Truth is the embodiment of Brahman. 
Truth is indivisible. It is not two; one and only one. 
Yet, people have to make a lot of effort to realise this 
Truth. Truth is not merely a word. It assumes several 
forms. Similarly, Brahman assumes infinite number of 
forms. Yet, Brahman is one only. That is the reason 
why it is said, Brahma sathyam jagan-mithya (Brahman 
alone is real, the world is a mistaken perception). 
Everything else is the reflection of Brahman, nothing 
else. Truth is one, but the wise say it in different 
ways. Everything in this Universe is born out of Truth. 
Dharma (righteousness) has emerged from Sathya 
(Truth). It is said, Sathyannasti paro Dharma (There 
is no Dharma greater than adherence to Truth). When 
Truth and Righteousness go together, Peace is the 
result. From Peace comes Love. This Love envelopes 
one and all. There is no place in this world, where 
Love is not present. Similarly, there is no place in this 
world where Truth is not present. Thus, from Truth and 
Righteousness emerges Peace and from Peace, Love; 
and finally from Love emerges Bliss. Where there is 
love, there is no scope for hatred. It is exactly at such 
a place, non-violence makes a beginning. Hence, if 
you wish to promote non-violence, you must cultivate 
love. If only there is love, all will become one. The 
Bhagavad Gita says, Mamaivamsho jivaloke jivabhuta 
sanathana (the eternal atma in all beings is a part of 
My Being). The import of this declaration is “All are 
My amsa (part). You are not different from Me. You 


Tread The Path Of Truth By Constantly Contemplating On God 49 


are My own reflections! You are Me and I am you.” 
Names and forms may be different, but, the atma 
present in everyone is the same. Each body assumes a 
different name. These names are given for the purpose 
of identification. They do not, however, reflect your 
true self. It is the same atma that is in all life. Hence, 
love that atma. Then, it amounts to loving yourself. 
Today, love has assumed different names and forms 
in the world. The love between a husband and wife is 
termed as anuraga. Similarly, the love a mother has 
towards her children is referred to as vatsalya. These 
are all mental feelings only. However, the love that 
permeates all individuals is only one. With such a 
universal love, all can be united. There will be no scope 
at all for differences. There will be no duality. Where 
there is no duality, all are one. It is said that. “A man 
with dual mind is half blind” We are not blind. Are 
we? We have two eyes; together, they see one object 
only. Hence, we are all one. 


Wipe Out The Feeling Of Differences 


When the feeling of ‘fatherhood of God and 
brotherhood of man’ is cultivated, the feeling of 
difference, fighting with one another, unrest, agitation, 
etc., will be wiped out from the world. All are children 
of one father, God. We have to foster such a noble 
feeling today. Only then will humanity become one. 
How do you refer to yourself? You say, “I am a human 
being.” Who is a human being? A person full of kama 


50 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


(desire) and krodha (anger)? No, no. The real meaning 
of the word Manava is one who conducts his life with 
no feeling of difference. In fact, we should not entertain 
any feeling of differences. We are all embodiments of 
Divine Self! We are the children of one father, verily! 
The names and forms appear to be different. Basing 
on these names and forms, we should not develop a 
feeling of differences. Wherever we go, we must all 
be united. Is it not a fact that the hand is only one, 
though the five fingers are different from one another? 


Jewels are many but gold is one. 
Cows are many but milk is one. 
Beings are many but breath is one. 
Castes are many but humanity is one. 
(Telugu poem) 


We have taken birth as human beings. We are all 
human beings. Though we are all human beings we 
may have different capabilities, but the Atma in all 
the human beings is one only. Look! There are several 
electric bulbs glowing here. Though the bulbs appear 
to be different, the current flowing in them is only 
one. Human bodies are like those bulbs. Each bulb 
may be of different wattage. I will always be happy 
to drive home this point of oneness. I have received 
lakhs of letters recently urging Me to restrain Myself 
from drawing out /ingam from My body. They prayed, 
“Swami, You are making the Atma Linga emerge out 


Tread The Path Of Truth By Constantly Contemplating On God 51 


of Your body. The doctors are also advising against it. 
You are, of course, required to bring out the Linga to 
make the human beings realise the truth and experience 
its divine effulgence. The Hiranyagarbha Linga will 
be in liquid form in the body. For it to solidify, a lot 
of energy is required. To expel the Linga calls for a lot 
of strength of the body. Each Linga that emerges out 
of your body has much weight. It is not good for your 
physical body to spend so much energy to draw out 
those Lingas. Let those who believe your Divinity do 
so; have no concern for others who do not. Please do 
not strain Your physical body under any circumstances. 
Your body is very important for us. We have, in fact, 
sought refuge in You. If you thus weaken Your body, 
we are very anxious. Hence, kindly restrain Yourself and 
conserve Your physical energy. God, by His Divine Will 
can achieve anything. He can change the earth into sky 
and vice-versa. It is very easy for Him. But, of what 
use it is? What will happen to the Sadhakas, thereafter? 
Hence, please do not make use of Your precious divine 
energy to make the people happy or to satisfy them.” 
True. This body is already 81 years old. This will last 
for a few more years. I have to maintain this body to 
provide joy to all of you in several ways. Very soon, 
I will provide you infinite bliss. For those who will be 
happy to see My physical body in good condition, the 
body is important and necessary. Hence, it is also My 
duty to take good care of My physical body. 


In Bharat devotion is very important. You call this 


52 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


country as ‘Hindu’ country. The five letters in this word 
‘Hindu’ stand for several pentads of entities such as 
Panchabhutas (five elements), Pancha Pranas (five life- 
breaths) and Pancha Koshas (five life sheaths). Then, 
what is the inner meaning of this word ‘Hindu’. The 
letter ‘H’ stands for Humility, ‘TP for Individuality; ‘N’ 
for Nationality; ‘D’ for Divinity and ‘U’ for Unity. It is 
only when you maintain unity, you can achieve divinity. 
Similarly, it is only when you develop divinity, you can 
achieve peace and happiness. We have to safeguard the 
national feeling. We have to develop faith in the unity 
of the nation. If we lose the national feeling, we cease 
to exist. What is it that protects national feeling? The 
individuality will sustain humanity. 


Have Faith In The Atma Tatwa 


We have to set a limit to our aspirations in 
this world. Only then will we have peace. God is 
omnipresent. The entire universe emerges from truth. 
The entire creation reflects collectivity. Wherever you 
see, it will only be equality. Do not imagine that God 
is somewhere far away in a niche of his own. You 
are all embodiments of Divinity! You develop that 
feeling. In fact, this truth is being experienced by every 
human being directly. You just reflect on yourself for 
a moment, closing you eyes: “Who am I?” What did 
you see on closing your eyes? Nothing. But, you hear 
one question constantly ringing in your ears: “Who am 
I? Who am I?” Then you will realise, “I am not this 
form.” All these names and forms are transient. They 


Tread The Path Of Truth By Constantly Contemplating On God 53 
are never permanent. 


The body is given to you to toil hard. You should 
not feel bad about sorrows and difficulties. If there are 
no difficulties at all, you will not know the value of 
happiness. Pleasure is an interval between two pains. 
In fact, we derive pleasure out of pain only. Even 
difficulties are only for a short period. If you wish to 
acquire more happiness, you must experience some 
difficulty and pain at least. Saint Purandaradasa sang 
thus: 


Oh Rama! Who is the one that painted the 
peacock’s feathers? 


Who is the one that gave a red beak to a green 
parrot and made it beautiful? 


Who is the one that watered the tree on a hill? 


Who is the one that provides food to the frog in 
the rock? 


You are the sustainer of the entire universe. 
(Telugu poem) 

Divinity is the direct witness to humanness 

May you therefore protect all! 

May you pervade all living beings! 

You are omnipresent as the Divine Atma 

The Atma protects Atma, none else; 


Oh God, May you grant all, the awareness to 
realise this truth. (Telugu poem) 


54 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


We have to develop faith in the atma tatwa. Atma 
has no name and form, whatsoever. Yet, if you develop 
faith in the atma tatwa, it will protect you always. In 
fact, atma is the living divinity! 


Sarvatah panipadam 

Tat Sarvathokshi siromukham, 
Sarvatah sruthimalloke 
Sarvamavruthya tishthati. 


(with hands, feet, eyes, head, mouth and ears pervading 
everything, He permeates the entire universe). 


The atma tatwa that pervades all living beings is 
true and eternal. The Atma is indivisible. The same Atma 
permeates all, just as the same current flows through all 
bulbs. If the electric wire that carries current to all the 
bulbs is cut at one place, all the bulbs cease to glow. 


Dear students! The scientific advancements are 
creating lot of havoc in the world. Several difficulties 
are arising on account of these scientific experiments. 
Cows are being fed with tripe in America, with an 
expectation that they will yield more milk. But, those 
cows are suffering from several other diseases. In fact, 
those who drink their milk are also exposed to diseases. 
Each country is experimenting with some new changes. 
It is only the Bharatiyas who are leading a natural life 
till now. One should not lead a life of artificiality. If 
you lead such a life, everything in your life will be 
artificial. For example, you might have observed a lot 


Tread The Path Of Truth By Constantly Contemplating On God 55 


of changes in the vegetables we consume of late. We 
the Indians consume a lot of green leafy vegetables. 
The leafy vegetables provide good strength to our body. 
Now, they are grown with the polluted water flowing 
through the drainage system. Today, all the vegetables 
and green leafy vegetables are polluted. Several people 
in India, especially those living in the southern states, 
like brinjal curry (called Vankaya in Telugu). There is 
a poem which extols the taste of this curry thus: 


Matchless is the taste the curry of Vanka(ya) 


Matchless is the face of virtuous Sita like a 
blossomed Panka(ja) (lotus) 


Unmatched is the compassion of the Lord Sanka(ra) 


Unequalled indeed is the valour of the victor of 
the Lord of Lanka. (Telugu poem) 


But, this poem does not apply to the present-day 
brinjals. They are totally polluted. Because of this 
increasing pollution day by day, our minds are also 
polluted. 


Recognise The Glory of Indian Culture 


Dear Students! You are well educated. You should 
not read all sorts of trash and pollute your mind. Follow 
our glorious Indian culture. Indian culture is very sacred. 
Our ancestors experienced the glory of our great culture 
and led their lives happily. I am sure that in the very 
near future even the people from overseas will fully 


56 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


realise the greatness of our Indian culture and adopt it. 
We, however, need not wait till such time. Let us take 
to the noble path right now. God protects all in every 
way. He knows everything. When God Himself is in 
us and with us, we need not fear anything. 


Prior to independence in our country, I used to 
conduct meetings in villages. I used to tour the villages 
with a view to help the poor people. When I was 
moving about in the villages wearing a knicker and 
half sleeves shirt, people used to restrain Me treating 
Me as an immature boy. They used to bring a dhoti 
and make Me wear it over My shorts so that I may 
look like an adult to match the kind of activities I was 
doing. I used to go to the houses of the Harijans and 
teach them some folk songs. Here is one such song 
that was meant to bring about a transformation in the 
rich, in their attitude towards the poor: 


We toil in the fields day and night 
ploughing and sowing and harvesting; 
You sit in the cozy comfort of your mansions 
eating, drinking and making merry; 
You dont even get down and enquire our welfare, 
Toil is ours and all comforts, yours; 
Is it proper? 
(Telugu song) 


The Harijans used to sing songs composed by 


Tread The Path Of Truth By Constantly Contemplating On God 57 


Me in the public. Whenever anyone questioned their 
intransigence, they used to sing another song composed 
by Me, as a reply: 


The earth is Gods gift, 

not the property of the rich, 

If you attack us with your might, 

God is there for us; 

Great souls there are, charged 

with the feeling of brotherhood, 

Awake! Awake! Rise up from the slumber of Maya. 
(Telugu song) 


While I was thus inspiring the poor and the 
downtrodden with My songs, the rich used to feel 
embarrassed and wanted to attack Me. Even the elder 
brother of this body used to reprimand Me, saying 
“Why do you engage yourself in such activities in 
the public? You don’t go out. Sit quietly in the house 
and study Your lessons. You should not stir out of the 
house, hereafter.” So saying, he used to lock Me up 
in a room at home. All My regular companions would 
come to our house and call Me, “Raju! Raju! Raju!” 
Poor souls! They were so much attached to Me. I used 
to counsel them saying, “My dear ones, bear with Me 
for sometime. I shall surely come out and fulfil your 
aspirations. I belong to you.” Thus, I have been helping 
the poor since then, till date. To protect the poor, provide 
succour to them by giving food, shelter and water and 


58 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


thereby make them happy is My duty. Even now I am 
sending My students to every nook and corner of the 
villages to distribute food to the villagers. Whenever 
a hungry person stood in front of our house, I used to 
provide food to him even foregoing My own share of 
food. For those who had no clothes to wear, I used to 
give away My clothes. Thus, I have been helping every 
needy person since My childhood. My motto then as 
well as now has been ‘Help Ever, Hurt Never’.I had 
a lot of opportunities to help others since childhood. 
Several people pay ‘lip service’ to the poor, but they 
do not really help them. 


Manasyekam vachasyekam, 

Karmanyekam mahatmanam; 
Manasyanyath vachasyanyath, 
Karmanyanyath duratmanam. 


(Those whose thoughts, words and deeds are in perfect 
harmony are noble ones; those who lack harmony of 
these are wicked). I have been protecting, fostering, 
counselling and making the people tread the right path 
since My early days till today. I never did any harm 
to anyone. I have never shown anger or hatred to 
anyone. However, some people, out of egoistic envy, 
are fabricating some stories about Me and publishing 
them in the newspapers. They are resorting to false 
propaganda about Me in the print and electronic 
media. All this does not perturb Me. I am not afraid 
of anybody. My very name is “Sathyam, Sathyam, 
Sathyam”’ (truth). I am bound by truth. The name of 


Tread The Path Of Truth By Constantly Contemplating On God 59 


this body is Sathyam (Truth). I will never stray away 
from the path of truth. Persons indulging in vituperative 
publicity impelled by envy, greed or hatred will reap 
the appropriate consequence. The time has come when 
proper action has to be taken to dissuade these people 
from resorting to such false propaganda. Of course, they 
are also not to be blamed. They are resorting to such 
false propaganda for the sake of money. They must try 
to realise their mistake. There has not been even an 
iota of dosha (impurity) in Me at any time. Hence you 
all follow Sai. You can achieve anything in this world 
by following the path of truth. Tread the path of truth 
by constantly contemplating on God. (At this point, 
Swami enquired the children whether He was causing 
any inconvenience to them by giving a long discourse. 
The children replied in one voice, “No, Swami’) 


It had never been My intention to cause suffering 
to anyone. Such thoughts do not come anywhere near 
Me. Whatever I do is for your own good, not for Me. In 
fact, even the food I partake is for you only. The water 
I drink is for you. Thus, all the activities I undertake 
are for your good only. Those who realise this truth 
will be benefited. Their lives will be sanctified. 


Help Others And Do Good To All 


I was deeply pained to know that people in some 
upland areas of the East and West Godavari districts are 
drinking polluted water. Immediately I arranged for the 


60 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


supply of pure drinking water at a cost of two hundred 
crore rupees. Nearby in the lowlands the Godavari flows, 
but they had not even a drop of water to drink. Hence, 
I arranged for lifting the Godavari water to the upland 
areas through pipes. They are all very happy now. I 
intend to visit those people shortly. That is great news 
for them. They are very happy and give expression to 
their joy thus: “Swami, We never imagined that You 
will shower such abundant grace on us. Your love and 
compassion are unparalleled. We are extremely happy 
and grateful to know that You are visiting us.” They 
are cleaning all the roads en route and are making all 
arrangements for My visit. Ramakrishna and Kondal 
Rao, who executed the project, are accompanying Me. 
Thus, we must help others and do good to all, to the 
extent possible. If you thus lead your life, you will 
also be happy. Everything will be turning out to be 
good for you as well. 


Dear Students! Whenever you come across an 
enemy, offer Pranams (salutations) to him lovingly 
and say, “Oh Brother!” They will also wish you in the 
same way, with love. All are brothers only. It is only 
when you conduct yourself in such a manner that you 
would earn good name to our Sathya Sai Institute of 
Higher Learning. We are not taking even a paisa from 
the students. Not even examination fees. Students from 
different parts of the country and even from abroad 
come here, pursue their education and go with high 
academic degrees. We are even providing for research 


Tread The Path Of Truth By Constantly Contemplating On God 61 


degrees like Ph.D., at great cost. If all the students 
develop such exemplary character as in Sathya Sai 
Institute, our country will earn great name. We have 
good news about our past students pursuing their 
vocations in America. Recently, a plane load of our 
past students from U.S.A. visited Prasanthi Nilayam. The 
plane was specially chartered from America for their 
visit in appreciation of the services rendered by them 
in that country. They said, “Swami, there are several 
students from your Institute in our country. They are 
great people. They are giving us a lot of joy.” There 
are two hundred past students from our Institute. They, 
along with their families, numbering 250 in all, came 
here. They experienced great bliss during their stay in 
Prasanthi Nilayam. While leaving, they expressed their 
gratitude saying, “Swami, we never imagined even in our 
dreams that You would provide so much grace to us.” 


I intend to undertake a world tour, shortly. Several 
devotees are coming here from Africa and Russia. The 
devotion of the Russians is indescribable. There are 
several Russian devotees sitting in this hall. They enjoy 
a lot, My discourse. (Pointing towards the Russian 
devotees) “Look! Those devotees with raised hands 
are all Russians.” They are all very devoted. (Pointing 
towards the Russian devotees again ...) “You are not 
Russians. You belong to our country only! I love you 
all.” 


Dear Students! There are several countries in the 


62 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


world like Russia, America, Germany, Japan, Italy, 
France, etc. Though the countries are different, the 
people living in all those countries belong to us only! 
They helped a lot for the construction of the Indoor 
stadium in Prasanthi Nilayam. They worked hard day 
and night. They love Swami intensely. Wherever I go, 
they follow Me. They run after My car. They even came 
to Chennai (Madras) recently when I was there. They 
are coming here, unmindful of the great difficulties and 
expense. You have to learn a lot from their devotion 
to Swami. 


Sivaratri, 16-2-2007, 
Prasanthi Nilayam. 


Our good and our bad are contained in our 
qualities. For all these things, the factor which 
is responsible is one’s selfishness. So long as this 
selfishness is present, man cannot experience 
any kind of happiness. The quality of selfishness 


is of a demoniac nature. It does not take into 
consideration the happiness or the well-being of 
others. 

Baba 





6 


Give Up Ego And Attachment 
To Become Great 


Dear Students, 
Can all the birds of green colour talk like a 
parrot? 
Can the insects that crawl on the flowers 
become the bumble bees? 
Can an over sized pig become an elephant? 
Can one who does not know about himself 
acquire knowledge of the Self? 

(Telugu poem) 


AN today considers himself as great. On the 
other hand, one who is devoid of humanness 
is not a human being at all. A real human being is 
one who manifests humanness. A real human being 
is one who practises the five human values of Sathya 
(Truth), Dharma (Righteousness), Santhi (Peace), 


64 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


Prema (Love) and Ahimsa (Non-violence) and preaches 
them to others. Even if one out of these five values is 
deficient, it is unbecoming of a human being. Man, in 
fact, is very intelligent. His intelligence is unlimited 
and unparalleled. But, it is not being reflected in his 
behaviour. 


Once Lord Easwara was absorbed in intense tapas 
(penance). Parvati wished to marry Him. But, her parents 
tried to dissuade her. They started to reason with her 
describing Siva’s form thus: 


Oh Gowri, you are very young and 

Sambasiva is old; 

He has matted locks and 

wears a tiger skin; 

He rides a bull and 

is constantly on the move; 

He is adorned with snakes; 

How did you court Him? 

Dont you know all this? 

He has no house of His own and 

sleeps in the cremation ground. 
(Telugu poem) 


Parvati paid no heed to all these reasoning and 
ignored it. Lord Easwara knew her nature and Parvati 
knew Siva’s nature. They are, in fact, not different from 
one another. Lord Siva is Siva-sakti-atmaka-swarupa 
(embodiment of Siva and Sakti). So too is Parvati. 


Give Up Ego And Attachment To Become Great 65 


How can the ordinary mortals understand such mystic 
nature of Lord Easwara and Parvati! Where there is a 
feeling of duality, there arises doubt. It is said that a 
man with dual mind is half blind. In fact, there is no 
difference between Lord Siva and Parvati. 


Meanwhile, Saraswati arrived on the scene to 
counsel Parvati about Lord Siva’s unsuitability as her 
bridegroom. She explained, “Dear Parvati, society 
will not accept such an odd combination. There is no 
compatibility between you and Lord Siva. You yourself 
know everything. I need not elaborate on the point 
further. I am sorry that knowingly you have fallen into 
that illusion.” Parvati replied firmly, “Oh Saraswati. I 
am interested only in Lord Siva and none else. I have 
no other interest in life except becoming the consort 
of Lord Siva. No one can change my decision.” 


Isavasyam idam sarvam (the entire universe is 
permeated by God). The power of Lord Siva permeates 
the entire universe. The foremost duty of a human 
being is to love Easwaratwa (the divinity of Lord 
Easwara). Actually, the same divine power is immanent 
in every human body also. Just as the human body is 
covered with a cloth, Divinity is enveloped in maya 
(allusion). Hence, though Easwaratwa is omnipresent it 
is not visible. In accordance with the maxim Easwara 
sarva bhutanam (God is the indweller of all beings), 
Easwaratwa is permeating every living being. Parvati 
explained that this Easwaratwa transcends age and it 


66 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 
is in no way related to external appearance. 


Mother Lakshmi too tried to dissuade Parvati 
from marrying Lord Siva. She explained, “My dear, 
you are quite young and beautiful. You have great 
power in you. It is unbecoming that you seek to wed 
someone who goes begging from house to house for 
alms.” Parvati was very upset and she sternly replied, 
“My bridegroom is no beggar. In fact, He is the one 
who gives alms to the entire world. It is not proper for 
you all to indulge in this campaign of slander against 
Him.” Several others also were averse to the choice of 
Parvati. They enquired, “He is adorning Himself with 
snakes. How did you court such a person? Don’t you 
know about it?” Parvati retorted, “The snakes have 
poison only in their fangs. But, a human being has 
poison in the entire body. His vision, his hearing and 
his actions are all full of poison. You consider such a 
poisonous human being as a good person. If the fangs 
are removed, the snake cannot harm anybody. But, the 
human being with his two fangs of ahamkara (ego) and 
mamakara (attachment) is roaming about nonchalantly 
and causing great harm to fellow human beings and 
to the world around. He is considering himself great. 
Man is full of poison. How can such a human being 
be corrected?” 


One with pride will not be successful in any of 
his endeavours. 
He will commit sins and will be ridiculed by 


Give Up Ego And Attachment To Become Great 67 


one and all. 
His own people will abandon him. 
He will lose all wealth and respect. 
His pride will ruin him completely. 
(Telugu poem) 


God is loved by one and all. Every human being 
lives by love alone. In fact, one who has no love in 
him is not a human being at all. The love that exists 
between God and human being is comparable to that 
between a father and a son. What a great sin it is to 
attribute ill-will to such pure and unsullied love? In 
fact, it is the result of evil qualities that has permeated 
society. When the innate divine nature of every human 
being is recognised, there will be no scope for any kind 
of differences. All are one, be alike to everyone. We 
have to achieve such transformation in our lives. You 
study several texts. Mere reading is not enough. It will 
not help you in any way. The truth contained in those 
texts has to be realised and experienced. 


Laila and Majnu were great lovers. Theirs was 
selfless love, which became immortal. Unable to 
understand the true nature of their sacred love, people 
attributed all sorts of motives to their love and created 
a lot of confusion. The mind must be filled with pure 
love. One should not develop attachment to sense 
objects and poison one’s own mind. It is only then 
can real happiness be experienced. Every human being 
in this world must analyse for himself what is to be 


68 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


changed and corrected and what is to be accomplished. 
Accordingly, he should conduct himself. It is only 
then that he would have realised real humanness. The 
Divinity called ‘I’ is immanent in every human being. 
This Divinity ‘I’ is not to be construed as Brahma, 
Vishnu or Siva. These are all names ascribed by man to 
Divinity for the purpose of recognition. The names are 
not that important. The real Divinity is ‘I’. ‘Iam I’. We 
consider Brahma as the creator, Vishnu, the sustainer 
and Siva, the destroyer. God grants darshan to each 
one in the same form on which each one contemplates. 


Parents Are Living Divinities 


Once Lord Siva and Mother Parvati were strolling 
in the ethereal world. They saw, on the earth, one 
person cutting the branch of a tree on which he was 
resting. The branch was almost cut and was about to 
fall any moment. Parvati was very anxious. She prayed 
to Lord Siva, “Oh Lord, Please save him immediately 
from falling on the earth below.” Easwara replied, “It 
is you who saw him first. You only realised that he 
may fall down by cutting the branch on which he was 
sitting. Hence, it is your responsibility to save him.” 
Parvati then laid down a condition, “Swami, normally, 
any person falling from a height will express his agony 
by uttering the words ‘Amma’ or ‘Appa’ If this man 
cries ‘Amma’ I will rescue him. On the other hand, 
if he cries ‘Appa’ You have to rescue him.” Easwara 
agreed for this suggestion. Meanwhile, the branch that 


Give Up Ego And Attachment To Become Great 69 


was being cut finally broke. The person sitting on it 
fell down. Mother Parvati was ready to save him. Lord 
Siva was also ready. But, the person prayed to neither 
‘Amma’ nor Appa’ He just wailed ‘Avvo’ Though Lord 
Siva and Mother Parvati were both waiting to rescue 
him, the man did not call them! This story is a reminder 
to one and all that we must always remember our 
parents wherever we are and in whichever situation 
we are placed. They are the living divinities constantly 
guarding and guiding us. The Upanishads exhort, Matru 
devo bhava, Pitru devo bhava, Acharya devo bhava, 
Atithi devo bhava (revere your mother, father, preceptor 
and guest as God). You may be highly educated. You 
may be an adept in all branches of knowledge in this 
world. Yet, to your mother you are only a child. Your 
mother’s blessing will always be with you. The life of 
a son who neglects such a mother is worthless. 


It is only Mother Parvati who has a compassionate 
heart to protect a man in distress. Hence, we must 
constantly contemplate upon that Saktiswarupini. 
Lord Easwara is the Father and Mother Parvati is 
Saktiswarupini. Easwara cannot independently move 
forward to save a devotee. It is only after Sakti takes 
a step forward, Lord Easwara follows her. Hence, one 
has to worship the Saktiswarupini in the first instance. 
She is the mother, verily. That is the reason why it 
has been said Matru devo bhava. It is the mother 
who has been given the first place. Even one’s own 
country is compared to the mother. We say, “India is 


70 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


my motherland.” Everyone refers to his country as 
‘motherland’ and not as ‘fatherland’. It is a common 
practice in the country of Bharat that a girl after her 
marriage goes to her in-laws’ house to live there with 
her husband and in-laws. The lady of the in-laws’ house 
is referred to as ‘mother-in-law’ in the English language. 
But Mother Parvati is ‘Mother-in-love’ for the whole 
world. ‘Law’ is a word relating to the world, whereas 
‘love’ refers to one’s heart. Hence, first and foremost 
develop love. Consider love as your everything. It is 
only then that you would have led a fruitful life. Your 
mother may be very simple and not worldly-wise. She 
may be very weak physically and intellectually. Yet, 
a mother is a mother. You should not neglect your 
mother simply because she is weak or has fallen sick. 
A mother is always full of love for her children. That 
is the reason why Bhakta Ramadas prayed to Mother 
Sita, “Oh Mother Sita, Please represent my case to 
Rama and help me. When you are engaged in happy 
conversation with Rama in solitude, kindly make a 
mention about my pitiable condition.” Bhakta Ramadas 
worked as a Tahsildar under Nawab Tanisha. He spent 
all the revenue collected from the people in building 
a temple of Lord Rama, Lakshmana and Mother Sita 
and decorating the idols with gold jewellery. He was 
imprisoned on charges of misappropriation for not 
depositing the money in the treasury. Unable to bear the 
agony in jail, he lamented, “Swami, I have dedicated 
all the money collected by me in your service only.” 
In a beautiful Airtan (song), he sang thus: 


Give Up Ego And Attachment To Become Great 71 


Oh Ramachandra! I have spent ten thousand gold 
coins to adorn Mother Sita with a gold necklace 
and another ten thousand sovereigns to decorate 
your brother Lakshmana with a gold belt. That 
crest jewel which adorns You cost me another ten 
thousand gold coins. Unmindful of my travails, 
You are flaunting the jewellery as if You have got 
it with Your own money! 

(Telugu poem) 


One cannot achieve anything in life, unless one gets 
rid of ego and attachment. Anything can be achieved 
with humility and obedience. In all spheres of life — 
moral, spiritual, physical and even political, one should 
conduct oneself with devotion. Only then will the task 
achieved shine in glory. 


There Is No God Greater Than One’s Mother 


When a mother leaves her physical body, her 
soul will still be concerned with her children and their 
welfare. One day a mother approached Me and pleaded 
with Me, “Swami, my daughter listens to everyone. 
But, she gives importance to only Swami’ words. My 
daughter is obstinate from the very beginning. She does 
not listen to what I say. But, if You once talk to her, 
she will follow Your advice. She has lot of faith in 
You. She will not disobey Your words.” Thus, several 
mothers come and pray for several things on behalf 
of their children. Mothers have an important role to 


72 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


play. There is no God higher than mother. Hence, one 
should never disregard one’s mother. Those who ignore 
their mothers will always encounter difficulties. Women 
should be respected, loved and shown gratitude. It is 
only then will men and women reach an exalted position. 
You may be great or highly educated or you may be 
illiterate even. But you must respect your mother and 
give weight to her words as your foremost duty. 


A mother and her son by name Ishwarchandra 
Vidyasagar used to live in a small village near Kolkata. 
The mother used to struggle a lot to bring up her son. 
Since there were no lights in their house, Vidyasagar 
used to sit under the streetlights and study his lessons. 


Thus, he worked hard day and night and studied 
well. Finally, he attained a good position in his life. He 
became very famous as an orator. People used to gather 
in thousands to hear his lectures. Once, Vidyasagar 
was travelling in a train to go to some town to give a 
lecture there. An I.C.S. officer was also travelling in 
the same compartment to go to the same town to hear 
his lecture. As soon as the officer alighted from the 
train at the station, he called for a coolie to carry his 
briefcase. Vidyasagar approached that officer and told 
him, “Sir, give me that briefcase. I will carry it for you. 
By the way, where have you to go?” The I.C.S. officer 
replied, “I am going to the place where Ishwarchandra 
Vidyasagar will deliver a lecture.” On hearing those 
words, Vidyasagar smiled to himself and started for the 


Give Up Ego And Attachment To Become Great 73 


place of meeting. As soon as they reached that place, 
Vidyasagar handed over the briefcase to that officer and 
said, “Sir, I take leave of you.” The officer offered some 
money to Vidyasagar for carrying his briefcase, saying, 
“Look! Take this money.” Vidyasagar replied, “Sir, I 
have carried your briefcase as an act of service, not 
for money,” and politely declined the offer of money. 
The meeting commenced. Vidyasagar was profusely 
garlanded and brought on the stage with honour. The 
officer, on seeing Vidyasagar recognised him as the 
person who carried his briefcase a few minutes ago. 
He felt very embarrassed. As soon as the meeting was 
over, he fell at the feet of Vidyasagar and begged for 
pardon. 


It is only humility and obedience that brought 
great honour to Vidyasagar. Even today, you will find 
the life story of Vidyasagar in the textbooks. Greatness 
is not in the education we pursue or the high academic 
degrees we obtain. It is humility and obedience that 
bring greatness to us. There are several educated people 
in this world. But, of what use it is? What benefit 
does the world derive out of their education? It is only 
because of ego and attachment that a person is spoiled. 
One can become really great when he sheds these two. 


During his debating tour of north India, Adi 
Sankara met a great scholar named Mandana Mishra. He 
had a wife by name Ubhayabharati. She was selected to 
be the arbitrator and judge to decide the winner in the 


74 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


debate between Adi Sankara and Mandana Mishra. She 
considered truth as God and was therefore eminently 
suited for the assignment. Sankara defeated Mandana 
Mishra in the debate and he was declared the winner 
by Ubhayabharati. As per the conditions of the debate, 
Mandana Mishra had to take to sanyas (renunciation), 
and he did accordingly. As a dutiful wife, Ubhayabharati 
followed suit and she also became a renunciant. 


One day, Ubhayabharati was going along with her 
disciples to the river Ganga for taking bath. On the way, 
she observed a sanyasi who was relaxing, keeping a 
dried bottlegourd under his head. He was using this for 
storing drinking water, and hence he was preserving it 
carefully. Ubhayabharati saw this sanyasi’s attachment 
to the bottlegourd and said to her disciples, “Look! 
This man calls himself a ‘Sanyasi’, but he is attached 
to a bottlegourd which he is keeping under his head 
as a pillow.” The Sanyasi heard this comment, but did 
not utter anything then. While Ubhayabharati and her 
disciples were returning from the river, he threw away 
the bottlegourd in front of them in order to demonstrate 
that he was not attached to it. Observing his action, 
Ubhayabharati aptly remarked, “I thought there was 
only one defect in him — abhimana (attachment). Now I 
realise that he has another defect also — ahamkara (ego). 
How can one with abhimana and ahamkara become a 
Jnani and Sanyasi?” Her comment was an eye-opener 
for the Sanyasi. He expressed gratitude to Ubhayabharati 
for imparting true knowledge of renunciation to him. 


Give Up Ego And Attachment To Become Great 75 


Diverse population must be following different 
paths in the world. Lord Krishna is the one who taught 
the path of wisdom and established the truth that the 
quality of love is common to all. He forgave even 
people with demonic qualities, like Duryodhana and 
Dussasana. Though Karna joined the evil forces, he was 
a man of noble qualities. Hence, Lord Krishna praised 
his qualities. Karna did not have even a trace of ego 
and attachment. He was a great warrior and a person 
of highest charity. One should therefore emulate his 
noble qualities. Every student should hear good things 
and put them into practice. Experience bliss and share 
that bliss with all. This is your foremost duty. 


Sivaratri Message, 17-2-2007, 
Prasanthi Nilayam. 


Too much of anything and extremism are not 
good. We need food, but we should take it in limits. 
We need water, but we should take it in limits. If 
we transgress these disciplinary limitations, it will 


cause a disease... In the same manner, wealth, 
anger, temper, and all qualities should be within 
limits. We must put these qualities along an useful 
path. 

Baba 





76 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


In this tumbler, there is water and at the 
bottom of the water there is sugar. If we drink 
the water from the surface, it will be tasteless. If 
we stir it nicely and then drink it, the water will 
taste sweet. There was sugar even earlier, but 
when we stirred the sugar, it spread everywhere 
and gave us the sweetness. So also in the tumbler 
of our heart, there is the sweet sugar in the form 
of divinity. Because we do not recognise this 
divinity, we experience only the superficial worldly 
pleasures. But if we use our Buddhi as a spoon 
and stir the sugar, with the help of Sadhana then 
there will be sweetness everywhere. Therefore, if 
you perform Sadhana, materially and spiritually 
you will taste sweetness. 


Baba 





7 


The Happiness Of Everyone Is 
My Happiness 


Embodiments of Love! 


HERE are sixty years in the Telugu almanac 

by name Prabhava, Vibhava, Shukla, 
Pramodhutha, Prajotpatthi, Angirasa, Srimukha, 
Bhava, Yuva, Dhathu, Easwara, Bahudanya, Pramadhi, 
Vikrama, etc. This cycle culminates in the 60th year 
Akshaya. This body has seen two Akshaya years so 
far. This year, Sarvajit, is very significant to realise 
the divinity latent in a human being. A human being 
has several desires and aspirations. The year Sarvajit 
fulfils such desires which are truthful. The year will see 
significant progress being made in the moral, physical, 
righteous, spiritual and scientific fields. A truthful desire 
will always result in fulfilment. One has, however, to 
hold on to Truth with steadfast faith. Sarvajit year 
will bring victory in all possible ways. It is the most 


78 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


important year in all these sixty years. ‘Jit’ signifies 
victory. Sarvajit means victory in all fields of human 
endeavour. If one were to progress in life, one has to 
cultivate truthful desires in this Sarvajit year. I have 
not seen a single person who cultivated such truthful 
desires and failed in his life. Hence, I exhort you all 
to cultivate truthful desires and aspirations and lead a 
life full of happiness and bliss in this Sarvajit year. 


Goddess Parvati was responsible for naming this 
year as Sarvajit. She did severe penance for a number 
of years with an ambition to marry Lord Siva, giving 
up food and sleep. Lord Siva was pleased with her 
penance and appeared before her. He enquired, “For 
whose sake are you doing this penance?” She replied, 
“Oh Lord, I am doing this penance to win your grace.” 
Lord Siva then told her, “Your wish is fulfilled today. 
You can join Me now.” Before Parvati could join Lord 
Easwara, several divine ladies tried to dissuade her 
from marrying the Lord, criticising thus: 


Oh Gowri, You are very young and 
Sambasiva is old; 

He has matted locks and 

wears a tiger skin; 

He rides a bull and 

is constantly on the move; 

He is adorned with snakes; 

How did you court Him? 

Dont you know all this? 

He has no house of His own and 


The Happiness Of Everyone Is My Happiness 79 


sleeps in the cremation ground. 
(Telugu poem) 


They enquired, “Why do you wish to marry such an 
old man who goes about begging in the streets?” Parvati 
replied “You do not know, you are seeing only his 
external form. You are not making any effort to realise 
the Atma Tatwa in him. I am, in fact, aspiring for the 
divinity in him. Divinity is changeless and eternal.” Lord 
Easwara accepted Parvati as His consort. She was happy 
in every respect. The day on which Goddess Parvati 
could fulfil her desire surmounting all difficulties, is 
celebrated as the New Year day of Sarvajit. In fact, 
this name to the New year was given by Goddess 
Parvati herself. The names of the years that follow 
this Sarvajit are Sarvadhari, Virodhi, Vikruthi, Nala, 
Pingala, Kaalayukthi, Siddharthi, Roudri, Durmathi, 
Dundubhi, Rudhirodgari, Raktakshi, Krodhana and 
Akshaya. It is only when you pass through all these 
years that you can reach Akshaya. Goddess Parvati 
rejoined the divinity, that is Akshaya (imperishable), 
only by great penance and after undergoing several 
hardships and pain. Divinity always incarnates in the 
year Akshaya only. This body was born in the year 
Akshaya during Brahmamuhurtha (the auspicious period 
at dawn) at 6.00 a.m. It is only when we get into the 
inner meaning, that we will be able to know the good 
and bad of any aspect. 


The Birth of Chennai Water Supply Scheme 


80 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


Parvati is the Goddess who supplies water to 
the entire world. Lord Easwara granted this boon to 
her. Ganga is another form of Goddess Parvati. That 
is why the river Ganga is worshipped as Gangadevi. 
Some years ago, I visited the East Godavari district 
in Andhra Pradesh. I had to travel by car to reach 
Chennai (Madras). There is a place called Red Hills 
near Chennai, where a huge reservoir was built to store 
water. I was told that drinking water was being supplied 
from that reservoir to the entire city of Chennai. But, 
there was no water in the reservoir itself at that time. 
How can water be supplied to the city? There were, of 
course, a few places in the reservoir where rain water 
had collected as small cesspools. I saw some children 
drinking polluted water from those cesspools. I was 
also informed that the same water was being used 
for drinking and cooking as well. There were a few 
devotees travelling along with Me in the car. They 
enquired, “Swami, when would this reservoir get filled?” 
For everything, there is a time, action, reason and duty, 
which shall go together. Keeping these aspects in view 
I told them, “I will not step into this city of Chennai 
for the next ten years. It is only after supplying water 
for drinking and irrigation purposes, and the people 
of Chennai started drinking pure water that I would 
visit Chennai again.” Ten years passed by. I fulfilled 
My promise of supplying drinking water to the entire 
city of Chennai. Besides, it is also being used for 
irrigation purposes. Accordingly I visited Chennai 


The Happiness Of Everyone Is My Happiness 81 


during Janurary this year. 


The Britishers who ruled this country prior to 
Independence, lived for 200 years in Chennai city. There 
were no proper roads or cars in those days. They used to 
go to far off places and hilltops on horse-back and search 
for water sources. Nevertheless, they could not solve 
the drinking water problem till they left this country. 
At the time of acute water shortage, the rich could buy 
water in tankers from private owners of borewells. But, 
what about the poor people? They have no money to 
purchase water. One day, I was in Teynampet in Chennai 
city. Several people gathered there. They represented, 
“Swami, We have no drinking water.” There were a 
number of small children in that gathering. It was a 
holiday for the primary school children on that day. 
They all surrounded Me and prayed, “Swami, We need 
drinking water.” I told them, “My dear boys, Surely you 
will get drinking water. I will arrange for the supply of 
pure drinking water from the river Krishna.” I fulfilled 
My promise. The Britishers promised to link the three 
rivers Ganga, Godavari and Krishna. But, they did 
nothing in this regard. The Godavari water is going 
waste by draining itself into the sea. Of course, the 
Krishna river is not going that way. Even now, there is 
copious supply of water in the river Krishna. Several 
dams and reservoirs are being built across the river 
Krishna. We had to spend a huge sum of two hundred 
crores of rupees to supply drinking water to the city of 
Chennai, as also for irrigation purposes. The people of 


82 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


Chennai are very happy that they are able to drink pure 
water now. During My recent visit to the city, I went 
to Teynampet once again. The people there expressed 
their feelings thus: “Swami, We are able to drink pure, 
sweet and refreshing water now. How can we express 
our gratitude to You? Words fail to express our sense 
of gratitude to Swami.” 


God can do anything, achieve any insurmountable 
task. But, foolish human beings fail to realise this 
truth. You teach a proper lesson to such fools. They 
have accumulated enormous wealth. But, they don’t 
shell out a coin in charity to the beggars. I told those 
people, “You need not depend on the charity of others. 
God Himself who is the creator, can grant everything 
unto you. Hence, pray to Him for whatever you need.” 
They gathered there to greet Me on My way and 
express their gratitude to Swami for this boon of sweet 
drinking water. I told them, “Drink this pure, sweet 
water and be happy. That would be enough, I don’t 
need anything else”. Now, the same water is supplied 
to every house and even small huts by laying pipes. 
All people are drinking sweet and pure water. I must 
tell you that My entire heart is filled with sweet water! 
The happiness of everyone is My happiness. This is 
the inner meaning of the prayer, “Lokah Samasthah 
Sukhino Bhavanthu” (May all the people of the world 
be happy!). You also pray this way. 


The Happiness Of Everyone Is My Happiness 83 


Drinking Water For Godavari Districts 


Our next project was the supply of drinking 
water to the people living in the upland areas of East 
and West Godavari districts of Andhra Pradesh. The 
District President of the West Godavari district, Dr. 
Bhaskara Rao is now here. They all worked very hard 
for completion of this project. It is very difficult to lift 
the water from the low lying areas to the upland areas. 
It is a tedious and expensive work. I assured them, 
“You do your job; I will look after everything else.” I 
sent Ramakrishna, former Vice President of M/s Larsen 
& Toubro Company and Kondal Rao, former Chief 
Engineer, Government of Andhra Pradesh to inspect the 
progress of work. They were surprised to find that the 
work was going on at a brisk pace. They exclaimed, 
“Oh! To what great heights the water reached! It is a 
miracle. It cannot be expressed in words. It is only to 
be seen to be believed”. 


The people living on those hills and hillocks are 
not living like other human beings. They do not go 
down the hills and interact with fellow human beings 
living in plains, as they are afraid of them! They 
expressed their awe at this huge water supply project 
thus: “Swami, we are living in the hills right above 
the river Godavari flowing in the plains. But, till today 
we did not taste even a drop of Godavari water’. Such 
people are now happily drinking sweet and pure water 
right in their homes, supplied by laying pipes up to 


84 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


their doorstep. Several of those people, especially 
ladies came all the way to Prasanthi Nilayam by walk 
to see this place and have My darshan. They spoke 
to the devotees here and expressed their sentiments 
thus: “How fortunate you are! Of course, we are also 
fortunate! We will also settle at the Lotus feet of Swami 
one day.” Thus, we have supplied pure drinking water 
to several villages to the complete satisfaction of one 
and all. They composed songs in their local dialect 
and expressed their gratitude to Swami, singing those 
songs. The theme of their songs was, “The water we 
drink is supplied by Sri Sathya Sai. We should not 
waste even a drop of that water. Come! Let us drink 
that water and sustain our lives.” They set the song 
to a fine tune and sang it in a group, dancing all the 
time. Thus, those villagers are very happy that their 
drinking water problem has been solved permanently 
by Swami. They fill that sweet water in big vessels 
and carry them to their homes by means of a Kavadi 
(yoke). It is a beautiful scene to be seen. In fact, there 
is a lot to be learnt by the people of the towns and 
cities from those innocent and jubilant villagers. They 
are experiencing indescribable bliss and contentment 
in their lives. 


Yesterday, Ramakrishna and Kondal Rao came 
to Me and represented, “Swami, You must surely 
visit those villagers. They are all praying and eagerly 
waiting for Swami’ visit.” I told them I would surely 
visit them. Very soon, I will visit Rajahmundry. But, 


The Happiness Of Everyone Is My Happiness 85 


there is no way I can go to those villages by car from 
Rajahmundry. Their places can be reached only by foot. 
The villagers pleaded with Me earlier, “We will not 
cause any strain to the body of Swami. We will try to 
take you to our places, without making you walk. We 
will carry Swami on our shoulders, if necessary.” Thus, 
those villagers are very happy and eager to receive 
Swami in their villages. 


On this holy occasion of Ugadi, we are launching 
a new scheme for rural development under the name 
“Village works”. It is necessary that every house in every 
village should be kept clean. The houses are to be kept 
neat and clean both inside and outside. The children 
in these homes are also to be groomed into clean and 
healthy children. We propose to cover every village 
under this scheme. Of course, the project involves 
huge expenditure. But, we don’t hesitate to incur the 
necessary expenditure. Money comes and goes. But, the 
help and good work we render remain. Hence, we must 
undertake this rural development project immediately. 
We are launching this scheme from today itself on the 
holy occasion of Ugadi. The elders as well as children, 
the poor and rich, all should work united for the success 
of this project. It is Seva that unites people. Both the 
villages and towns should join and work together in 
a spirit of unity. We are sure that very soon it will be 
a reality. We are launching this scheme today itself. It 
is our wish that by the next Ugadi, all the villages are 
shaped and moulded into model villages. All of you, 


86 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


including children shall take part in this village service. 
You must consider it as Daiva Seva (service to God). 
“Service to man is service to God”. 


Develop Unity And National Interest 


At present, we are at the individual level. We are 
working with an individual interest. This attitude must 
change. We must change. We must develop unity and 
national interest. The entire country must stand united. 
In a recent meeting held at Chennai, several Chief 
Ministers, Governors of States and several I.A.S. officers 
participated. Many people attended that meeting. All 
these people shared a common cause. Thus, you must 
all come united and participate in this village service 
programme. If all people work together, the entire world 
can be changed into a better place to live in. I am with 
you always, guarding and guiding you at every moment. 
Whatever you need, ask Me; I will provide. Like the 
rivers that flow and merge into the sea ultimately, 
whatever seva you do to anyone, reaches Me only. 
Hence, don’t fear for anything. Why fear, when I am 
here? Do not hesitate to ask Me for whatever you may 
need. Surely, I will provide everything to you. Hence, 
make yourself ready to participate in this service, both 
men and women. Yesterday, a group of devotees from 
Mumbai had come to Prasanthi Nilayam. They are very 
rich. They represented to Me, “Swami, we propose to 
erect a Dwaja Sthamba in the name of Swami in the 
sea near Mumbai. It will be several hundred feet high. 


The Happiness Of Everyone Is My Happiness 87 


We propose to arrange a beacon light on top of the 
Dwaja Sthamba, so that it is visible to all from long 
distances. It will have the divine name “Sai Ram” 
and will involve an expenditure of several crores of 
rupees. We will come again to Prasanthi Nilayam after 
the project is completed and have Swami’s Darshan.” 
No doubt, the devotees of Mumbai are doing a lot of 
seva. Everything is good; but the city of Mumbai is 
very dirty. First and foremost, make the city free from 
pollution. Some efforts were made earlier in this regard, 
but they were not successful. The reason being, at high 
tide the sea is at a higher level than the city drainage 
system. As you all know, the water flows down only. 
Unless the drainage water in the city is pumped out, 
the city cannot be kept clean and beautiful. I am sure 
that a way can be found for tackling this problem. I 
am also sure that the people of Mumbai can certainly 
undertake this task. I told them in no uncertain terms, 
“You finish that work; I will surely come.” I wish that 
the entire country of Bharat be made beautiful and the 
people lead a happy and peaceful life. “Lokah samasthah 
sukhino bhavanthu” (May all the people of the world 
be happy!). Swami’s happiness lies in the happiness of 
all. He does not need anything special. Your happiness 
is My happiness. Hence, whatever work you undertake, 
let it be for the peace, welfare and happiness of all 
people. 


More than anything else, the foremost requirement 
today is water for all. Water is life sustaining. You may 


88 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


live without food for a few days, but you cannot live 
without water. In future, there will be copious rains. 
No one need to have any fear of drought. In fact, I 
have come into this world to correct all these maladies. 
I will surely provide you happiness, by correcting and 
forgiving your faults. You must all live in unity and 
love. We consider the Panchapranas (the five vital 
airs) are Prana, Apana, Vyana, Udana and Samana. 
No; what I mean by Panchapranas is Sathya (Truth), 
Dharma (Righteousness), Santhi (Peace), Prema (Love) 
and Ahimsa (Non-violence). Where there is Truth, there 
will be righteousness. Where there is righteousness, 
there will be peace. Where there is peace, there will 
be love. Where truth and love go together, everything 
else will be added unto such a person. Very soon, the 
entire world will be united into a single unit. Students 
should strive to achieve that ideal. The senses are very 
strong in children. The physical, mental and spiritual 
strength in them is of a high order. You have to make 
proper use of that strength. I expect you not to misuse 
your senses. Only then can you do great service to the 
world. It is not enough if you simply go to one temple 
and do some whitewashing to its walls. It is no service 
at all. Every house must be kept clean. You can visit 
any house that is not kept clean. 


In the earlier days, the Harijans used to live in 
houses built separately, at a distance in Puttaparthi. I 
used to visit their houses also. There used to be one 
person by name Nagappa in those days. His son-in-law 


The Happiness Of Everyone Is My Happiness 89 


Ramulu was educated up to 3rd form (8th standard). 
He knew about Swami and His divinity to some extent. 
One day, he invited Me to have lunch in his house. 
I informed the matter to Subbamma. She was taken 
aback and tried to dissuade Me from going to his house 
saying, “Alas! Swami, will You go to the houses of 
Harijans? Please do not go.” I insisted on going. I also 
told her to go along with Me. Subbamma belonged to 
the orthodox Brahmin community. Nevertheless, she 
decided to follow Me saying, “I will do anything for the 
sake of Swami.” I was leading and she was following 
Me. Ramulu was walking in front of Me. By the time 
we reached that house, the entire area was filled with 
divine fragrance?. I enquired from the inmates of the 
house, “From where did you bring this fragrance.” 
Ramulu replied, “Swami, we did not bring it from 
anywhere. It is emanating from You only.” I stepped 
into that house. Subbamma willingly followed Me. She 
was then 62 years old. I was served with some rice 
in an aluminium plate. In fact, that is what they had. 
There were no stainless steel plates then. Subbamma 
was served food in another aluminium plate. Subbamma 
used to have a feeling of belonging to the high caste 
Brahmins, in the beginning. Later on, she changed her 
attitude on the advice of Swami. She decided, “Fie on 
me! I should not entertain such feelings of superiority.” 
She happily dined in their house, along with Swami. 
By the time we returned to the village after finishing 
our lunch in Ramulu’s house, the entire village joined 
together and started heckling us saying, ““Subbamma has 


90 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


become a Mala (low caste).” They issued a decree that 
none in the village should touch Subbamma. Subbamma 
responded by saying, “That is exactly what I desire. 
Let no one touch me. It is enough if Swami alone 
touches me. I have no children. I need not maintain 
any relationship with any family. Neither I need give 
my children in marriage to other families nor do I 
need bring their children into my house. It is enough 
if Swami is with me.” In those days, she used to cook 
food for every devotee visiting Swami, in Puttaparthi. 
In keeping with her hospitality, fortune favoured her 
and she used to reap rich harvest from her fields. Her 
fields were yielding rich crops two to three times a 
year. Those extra paddy bags could not be taken into 
her house. Hence, the bags used to be emptied into a 
specially built granary from above. Thus, Subbamma 
sanctified her life in the service of Swami. One day, I 
enquired from Subbamma what she needed from Me. 
She replied, “Swami, I have no desire for anything. 
Before I leave my mortal coil, if You can graciously 
pour a few drops of sanctified water into my mouth 
from Your divine hands, it would be enough.” I assured 
her that her wish would be fulfilled. 


Glorious End Of Subbamma’s Life 


Once I was returning from Chennai to Bukkapatnam, 
by car. Subbamma died the previous night. Her relatives 
were making arrangements to bring her dead body from 
her house to the cremation ground in Bukkapatnam. As 


The Happiness Of Everyone Is My Happiness 91 


soon as they saw Me, they ran towards Me and informed, 
“Subbamma died yesterday.” I told them, “It is only 
your illusion. Subbamma did not die. She won’t leave 
her mortal coil till she had My Darshan.” So saying, 
I reversed My car towards her house. Subbamma’s 
mother was still alive then. With an agonising heart 
she told Me, “Swami, she was remembering You all the 
while and was chanting “Sairam”, “Sairam’”, till last 
night. She was enquiring from everyone, “Did Swami 
come?” The body of Subbamma was covered with a 
cloth. I removed that cloth and called her, “Subbamma! 
Subbamma!” To everyone’s surprise, she opened her 
eyes. When God gives a word, He will not forget it 
under any circumstances. I told her, “You wanted that 
I should pour a few drops of water into your mouth 
during your last moments. Is it not? Here it is; have it.” 
So saying, I dipped a basil (7ulasi) leaf in a tumbler 
filled with water and put a few drops of that sanctified 
water in her mouth. Subbamma then drank the water, 
held both My hands tightly and placed them reverentially 
on her eyelids. She took leave of Me saying, “Swami, I 
have been waiting to take leave of You finally before I 
shed my mortal coil. You have fulfilled my last wish, as 
promised. Now permit me to leave. Here I am going.” 
I gave her permission and she merged in Me. 


I have built a housing colony in memory of Late 
Subbamma and named it after her. Subbamma was a 
great soul. She used to go up on the terrace of her 
house and converse with Mother Easwaramma, every 
now and then. She used to tell her, “Easwaramma, You 


92 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


gave birth to Swami and I fostered Him. Hence you 
are Devakidevi and I am Yashoda.” Easwaramma used 
to reply, “Subbamma, You served hundreds of Swami’s 
devotees by giving food and shelter to them in your 
house. Don’t you deserve the fruit of that seva? Surely 
you do.” Before Subbamma left her mortal coil, she 
came to Easwaramma one day and pleaded with her, 
“T am leaving. You look after Sathyam well.” Both of 
them shed tears. The next day Subbamma died. 


The name of Subbamma’s husband was Narayana 
Rao. He always used to sit near the Tulasi Brindavan 
in front of his house. When he took to bad ways, I 
composed some songs and trained a few children to 
sing those songs in front of his house in order to correct 
him. The children used to move in a group in front 
of his house, singing those songs, one of which runs 
as follows: 


Dont seek the company of women of bad 

character; 

Surely you will fall down. 

Your caste people will not allow you into their 

houses; 

Your relatives will discard you; if they see you; 

Your friends will beat you with chappals 

if they see you in the company of such women. 
(Telugu poem) 


While the children were moving about in a group 
singing this song, he felt very much embarrassed. He 


The Happiness Of Everyone Is My Happiness 93 


called them inside and enquired, “Who taught you this 
song?” The children replied, “Raju taught us, Sir!” He 
thought, “Yes, it is true. Who else can know about my 
behaviour?” From then on, he shed his bad thoughts 
and bad habits. In those days, cartloads of mango fruits 
used to be brought into his house. He used to distribute 
those fruits to all the children, lovingly. 


The wrist watches had just arrived in those days. 
If anyone in the village wore a wrist watch, he was 
considered to be a great person. Not only that. The 
gents in those days used to have a small insect-like 
moustache under their nose, as a fashion. Keeping in 
view these vainglorious fashion trends, I composed a 
song and taught it to the school children so that they 
may go about in the streets singing that song: 


People wear some glittering white badge to the 
left hand 

with leather belt tied to it. 

What fashion is this, Oh Dear! 

What fashion is this? 

Disgusting appearances are they; 

What fashion is this? 

Long moustache is trimmed and shaved; 

Few hairs are kept under the nose instead; 
What fashion is this, Oh Dear! 

What fashion is this? (Telugu song) 


Thus, I used to compose songs and make the 
children sing those songs in the village in order that 


94 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


people shed the craze for fads and cultivate noble 
thoughts. I used to bring about a transformation in one 
and all right from the children to the elders, by such 
methods. 


From today onwards, you must all embark on 
a mission to bring about a transformation in the 
villages. It does not mean that the villages are to be 
transformed into towns and cities. In fact, I don’t like 
such transformation. First and foremost, the villages 
are to be kept clean. Already, the towns and cities are 
stinking with filth. The people living there wear a neat 
pant, shirt and a neck-tie. But, their inner feelings are 
all bad. You must cultivate good thoughts and feelings, 
in keeping with the neat dress you wear. First of all, 
you try to bring about a transformation in your own 
self and then work for a change in the outside world. 


Yesterday, three boys sang a nice Burra Katha 
about Easwaramma. They rendered it well. There was 
a wonderful description about Subbamma in that Burra 
Katha. 1 am very happy about it. In fact, it was such 
a unique story. No one has written such a story so far. 


Ugadi, 20-3-2007, 
Prasanthi Nilayam. 


8 


Develop Love And Lead The Life Of 
A True Manava 


Students! Citizens of Anantapur! 


HE words you uttered and the programmes 

you presented got imprinted in My heart. You 
have set an example to others and proved beyond doubt 
that people of Anantapur are endowed with immense 
potentiality and talent. It is My wish that all other 
districts should emulate your example. I do not have 
any other desire. I want to purify your heart and confer 
peace and bliss on you. That is the only desire I have. 
I do not have even a trace of hatred in Me nor do I 
have any enemies. All are Mine. It is My love that 
is present in all of you. I speak only about love and 
nothing else. I have immense love for the children. In 
fact they are My only property. If they come up in life, 
the entire world will prosper. 


96 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


Maintain The Spirit Of Unity 


You should always be united. You call yourself 
a Hindu. What does the term HINDU signify? H - 
Humility, I - Individuality, N — Nationality, D — Divinity, 
U — Unity. These are verily our five life-breaths 
(Pranas). Just as five elements, five senses and five 
life-sheaths constitute our physical body; these five 
principles constitute the very essence of spirituality. 
Hence you have to safeguard these five principles 
and stand united. Never give scope for differences of 
opinion even in trivial matters. If any differences were 
to arise, each should be prepared to forgive the other. 
All are the children of God. All are brothers and sisters. 
You should understand this truth and conduct yourself 
accordingly. There is love in everyone. It is only when 
man develops love in him can all be united. When we 
develop love and give up hatred, our innate power 
will manifest. Elders are bogged down by a number 
of worries which weaken their mental power. But the 
youth are endowed with immense power of mind and 
senses. They should develop it by putting the senses 
to sacred use. 


We should develop the spirit of unity. Never think 
that you belong to a particular state and thereby give 
rise to differences. You should always think that you 
belong to India. This is what I told in Madras (Chennai) 
recently. Do not identify yourself with Vyashti Tatwa 
(individual principle). We should identify ourselves 


Develop Love And Lead The Life Of A True Manava 97 


with Samashti Tatwa (societal principle) and cultivate 
unity. Never forget the feeling of nationality. Consider 
truth, righteousness, peace, love and non-violence as 
your Pancha Pranas (five life-breaths) and uphold the 
sanctity of the name ‘Manava’ (human being). Where 
there is love, there is peace. Where there is peace, 
there is non-violence. One bereft of love cannot attain 
peace. Peace cannot be purchased in a shop. In the 
external world, you find only pieces, but not peace. 
Even if you were to ask a millionaire, he will say, “I 
have everything except peace of mind”. One can attain 
peace only through love. Divine love is the basis for 
every thing. When we develop love for God, everything 
will be taken care of. If we do not have love for God, 
we will be giving scope to evil qualities such as anger, 
hatred, jealousy, etc. Man today has given up human 
qualities such as love, peace, compassion and is leading 
the life of an animal. 


We should face all difficulties with forbearance. 


Forbearance is the real beauty in this sacred land 
of Bharat. Of all the rituals, adherence to truth 
is the greatest penance. The nectarous feeling in 
this country is the feeling of love towards ones 
mother. Character is valued far higher than the 
very life itself’ People have forgotten the basic 
principles of this great culture and are imitating 
Western culture. Alas! The Bharatiyas are not 
aware of the greatness of their cultural heritage 
just as a mighty elephant is not aware of its own 


98 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 
strength. (Telugu poem) 


Man is endowed with great power. The power 
that is present in us cannot be traced anywhere else. 
But we forget our innate power as we are immersed in 
evil qualities such as hatred and jealousy. We should 
never have hatred or anger towards any— one. Do not 
be perturbed if someone vents out his anger on you. 
Offer your salutation to him and remain calm and 
composed. Greet even your enemy with love saying, 
“Hello brother, how are you?” When you address 
him as brother, he will reciprocate the same brotherly 
affection. On the other hand, if you tell him, “You 
are my enemy”, he will continue to develop hatred 
towards you. All your feelings will come back to you 
in the form of reaction, reflection and resound. As is 
the action so is the result. Can you get the belch of 
pineapple when you eat a mango? No. The smell of 
your belch depends on the fruit you have consumed. 
Likewise, you will experience only love when you fill 
your heart with love. 


Love Is The True Human Quality 
Dear Children, 

You should develop love right from this tender age. 
Here love implies not worldly love, but divine love. 


When you have divine love, you will not be affected 
by the ‘deep wine’ of worldly desires. Hence, develop 


Develop Love And Lead The Life Of A True Manava 99 


divine love. My life bears testimony to the principle of 
divine love. Love is the hallmark of true humanness. 
One bereft of love cannot be called a human being at 
all. Hence, develop love and lead the life of Manava 
in the true sense of the term. Earn a good name. 


The programme you presented today and the 
feelings you have expressed should be propagated to 
the entire nation. Unfortunately, these days none of the 
newspapers carry reports of such sacred events. They 
give wide publicity to all the trash of the tinsel world. 


We should fill our heart with sacred, selfless 
and unwavering love. God is described as Nirgunam, 
Niranjanam, Sanathana Niketanam, Nitya, Shuddha, 
Buddha, Mukta, Nirmala Swarupinam (God is 
attributeless, pure, final abode, eternal, unsullied, 
enlightened, free and embodiment of sacredness). We 
should make efforts to sanctify our human birth. How 
can it be sanctified? Is it by indulging in conflicts and 
developing hatred? No, no. These are bestial qualities. 
Love is the true human quality. Hence, dear children! 
Develop love. Whenever there is difference of opinion 
among you, brush it aside. When you consider love 
as your life-breath, there will be no scope for bestial 
tendencies such as hatred and jealousy. Animals are 
living in forests without any hatred towards each other. 
Such an evil tendency is seen often among men who 
are supposed to lead a civilised life. It is contrary to 


100 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


human nature. Human life is meant to develop love, 
not to accumulate money. “Money comes and goes 
but morality comes and grows.” 


Dear Children, 


You are endowed with a pure heart and a steady 
mind. When you have the purity of heart, it is easy to 
develop love. In fact, your love can become as expansive 
as the sky. Never give up love under any circumstances. 
Swami is always in you, with you, around you, above 
you and below you. Hence, develop love. Very soon I 
will come to Anantapur. It is more than ten years since 
I last paid a visit to Anantapur. But now, drawn by 
the power of your love and Sankalpa, | will certainly 
come. Be prepared for My visit singing bhajans more 
and more and sharing your love with one and all. “Hari 
bhajan bina sukha santhi nahin...”’ One cannot attain 
peace without singing the glory of God. 


There are many women who are endowed with 
bhakti and prapatthi (devotion and a sense of surrender). 
They should all come together and organise activities. 
They should keep their homes clean and mould their 
children along the sacred path. But today educated 
women are undertaking jobs. Such women will have 
little understanding of their responsibilities on the home 
front. 


If women go out for jobs, who will take care of 
the home? 


Develop Love And Lead The Life Of A True Manava 101 


If women go out to teach others’ children in 
schools, who will look after their own children? 
(Telugu poem) 


Firstly, you should teach your own children and 
put them on the right path. Only then can you be called 
a true mother. If you go to office neglecting your own 
children, they may take to wrong ways. Consequently, 
you will lose your peace of mind. Hence, take proper 
care of your family in the first instance. Respect your 
parents and in-laws. There lies the true meaning of 
ideal womanhood. Children, youth, elders, men and 
women, all should tread the path of truth. Only then 
can you spread joy and bliss every where in our nation 
and to the world at large. It is not merely our home or 
our physical body that we have to safeguard. We have 
to protect our nation. After all what is this physical 
body? It exists today but may not live to see another 
day. Body is like a water bubble. Mind is like a mad 
monkey. Do not follow the body, do not follow the 
mind. Follow your conscience. Only then can you attain 
happiness in all respects. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Today your love has deeply touched My heart. 
My heart is filled with immense bliss watching you 
distribute various items to the poor and the needy. 
Aswattha Narayana and his family have extended all 
their support to this noble cause. Many people of the 


102 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


town, professors and lecturers worked together with 
great enthusiasm. They have done much more than 
what they had planned. 


(Addressing the beneficiaries Bhagawan said) 


Ask Me whatever you require, I will certainly give 
you. Do not give up your studies for want of money. If 
you cannot afford to pay your monthly fees, ask Me. 
I will give you the required money. Your parents may 
be struggling to make both ends meet. Hence, do not 
trouble them for money. “Matru devo bhava, Pitru devo 
bhava” (Revere your mother as God, father as God). 


Do not think that God is present in a distant land, 
far away from you. God can never be away from you. 
He will never forsake you. He is always in you, with 
you and around you. Have firm faith in this truth 
and be happy always. When you are alone, think that 
God is with you. Tell yourself, “I am not alone. God 
is with me.” Right from this moment, develop such 
firm conviction. You will be free from all worries and 
anxieties. Develop sacred feelings in your heart. 


Ugadi Message (Evening) 20-3-2007, 
Prasanthi Nilayam. 


9 


Ever Remember The Name Of 
Rama 


HOUSANDS of years have passed since the 

advent of Treta Yuga, yet even now everyone, 
right from children to elderly people, remember the 
name of Rama. The glory of Rama’s name is such 
that it has not diminished even a bit with the passage 
of time. This truth should be recognised by all. Rama 
is the name given to a form, but the name of Rama 
is not limited to a form. Atma is Rama, and its true 
name is Atmarama. Therefore, wherever and whenever 
you remember the name of Rama, Rama is there with 
you, in you, around you. 


The Name Of Rama Is Eternal 
Embodiments of Love! 


Rama is one, whether you identify him with the 


104 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


atma or with the form installed in your heart. Every 
year comes the festival of S7i Rama Navami. But we 
have not so far understood its true significance. You 
identify Rama with a form. But Rama is not limited to 
any particular form. It is the name that is latent in your 
heart. Many changes and variations keep occurring in 
the world, but the name of Rama is immutable, eternal, 
unsullied and everlasting. Rama was not an ordinary 
individual. He was verily God who incarnated on earth 
for the welfare of mankind. People call God by many 
names like Rama, Krishna, Easwara and Mahadeva. 
They are all the names of one God. You should recognise 
the glory of this name. Sage Vasishta said, “Ramo 
vigrahavan Dharma” (Rama is the personification of 
Dharma). Dharma itself incarnated in the form of Rama. 
You should follow Dharma. Which Dharma should you 
follow? Do not follow the Dharma associated with your 
mind. Follow the principle of Dharma which comes 
from your heart. 


Sita became the consort of Rama who was the 
personification of Dharma. Wherefrom did Sita take 
birth? Sita was born out of the womb of the earth. 
When King Janaka was ploughing a field in the process 
of the performance of a Yajna, he found a box in it. 
When the box was opened, a small baby was found 
in it. Considering this as the boon of God, he took 
the baby home and brought it up with great care and 
affection. This baby was given the name Sita. Since 
she was the daughter of the King of Videha, she was 


Ever Remember The Name Of Rama 105 


also called Vaidehi. This name had great significance 
since it meant one who transcended the illusion caused 
by body attachment. 


Once Sita was playing a game of ball with her 
companions in her house. There was a big box in the 
house of Janaka, which contained a huge bow. As her 
playmates were playing with the ball, the ball went 
under the box. It was not possible for anyone to move 
this box. Sita went there and put it aside with her left 
hand. Seeing that act of Sita, King Janaka decided that 
very day that Sita’s power should be made known to 
the world. Thereafter he organised a Yajna and made a 
declaration: “Whoever strings the bow of Lord Siva, I 
will give my daughter Sita in marriage to him.” 


Kings of many countries came there. All of them 
thought it was a great good fortune to marry Sita and 
to become the son-in-law of King Janaka. They came 
one after the other and tried to lift the bow but all of 
them failed in their attempt. In that assembly, Rama 
and Lakshmana were also present, accompanied by 
Sage Viswamitra. As per the direction of the sage, 
Rama went forward. Rama walked with great humility 
to the delight of one and all. His speech, His actions 
and His demeanour were full of sweetness. He went 
near the bow, lifted it with His left hand and bent it. 
It broke with a thundering sound. Everybody expressed 
their happiness with a loud applause. People thought 
it would be very difficult to lift the bow; but what is 


106 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


difficult for Rama? His mere sankalpa (Will) could 
do any stupendous task. Viswamitra went near Rama 
and said, “Rama, today You have demonstrated Your 
divine power. Certainly it is not a human power. It is 
indeed divine.” 


Everyone praised Rama and started garlanding 
Him. Then King Janaka brought his daughter Sita. 
As she came, Rama did not even look in the direction 
from where she was coming. Why? He did not want 
to look at her without the command of His parents. 


King Janaka conveyed the good news to King 
Dasaratha at Ayodhya. He requested all of them to 
come after deciding the muhurtham (auspicious time) of 
the marriage. He said, “Your son has achieved success 
in the competition organised by me. Therefore, all of 
you are requested to come prepared to celebrate the 
marriage of Sita with Rama.” 


Welcome to all for Rama’s wedding; 

together we shall witness the joyous scene. 
Many have gathered already, 

decked up in all their finery. 

With necklaces the ladies are adorned 

of jewels pure and gleaming. 

Rama shall tie the knot today 

to beauteous Sita, oh what a fine match they ma 
ke. (Telugu song) 


The women of the kingdom came to participate 


Ever Remember The Name Of Rama 107 


in the wedding and joyfully sang the song: 
Come let us go and see the marriage of Rama 
and Sita, 
The sight shall confer great merit. 
Blessed are those who see this scene. 
Oh come one and all, watch with joy the sacred 
marriage. (Telugu song) 


In this manner when the women came from one 
direction, men came from another direction singing 
joyfully, “Come, let us go and see the marriage.” 
Dasaratha along with his queens and his sons Bharata 
and Satrughna and his ministers arrived in Mithila 
with great enthusiasm. It appeared as though the entire 
Ayodhya had come to Mithila. King Janaka extended 
a royal welcome to them with great honour. 


The name of the second daughter of King Janaka 
was Urmila. His younger brother had two daughters, 
namely, Mandavi and Srutakeerthi. It was decided to 
give Urmila to Lakshmana, Mandavi to Bharata and 
Srutakeerthi to Satrughna in marriage. Everyone was 
happy that all the four pairs were going to be married 
at the same time. 


When everyone was seated in their respective 
places, the marriage ceremony started. Sita, Urmila, 
Mandavi and Srutakeerthi stood in front of Rama, 
Lakshmana, Bharata and Satrughna respectively. 
First Sita put the garland around the neck of Rama. 
Thereafter, the other three brides garlanded their 


108 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


respective bridegrooms. All the people joyfully hailed 
the occasion. 


The Glory Of Rama 


It is not possible to describe the /ee/as and glories 
of Rama. After the marriage function, all left for 
Ayodhya. On the way they heard a deafening sound. 
When they looked around to find out where the sound 
had come from, they were confronted by Parasurama 
in his fierce form. All of them were perturbed to think, 
“What is this great hurdle after the glorious celebration 
of the marriages?” Good and bad always follow each 
other. After experiencing great joy in Mithila, they 
were confronted with a great difficulty on their way to 
Ayodhya. Dasaratha and others became fear-stricken. 
Parasurama came forward and asked, “Who has broken 
the bow?” “It is I who has done it,” said Rama. 


“Tf that is so, let us see if you can break my bow,” 
saying so he gave his bow in the hands of Rama. Rama 
broke even that bow with His left hand. Seeing that 
Parasurama offered his salutations to Lord Rama and 
went away. Experiencing the joy of victory, all of them 
returned to Ayodhya and participated in the festivities 
held in Ayodhya with great joy and enthusiasm. The 
people celebrated that functions with great joy to 
propagate the power of Rama and the devotion of Sita 
to the world. 


Manthara became jealous to see all those festivities. 
You can find people like Manthara everywhere. 


Ever Remember The Name Of Rama 109 


Manthara became very angry when King Dasaratha 
decided to crown Rama instead of the son of Kaikeyi; 
she started poisoning the mind of Kaikeyi by fabricating 
many false stories against Rama. Hearing this evil talk 
of Manthara, the mind of Kaikeyi changed. Though 
a queen, she was influenced by the words of her 
servant and became responsible for the exile of Rama. 
Afterwards she repented, realising it was the conspiracy 
of Manthara. In reality Kaikeyi loved Rama very much. 
It was Kaikeyi who taught many things to Rama. Rama 
also loved Kaikeyi more than His mother Kausalya. 


Manthara pleaded with Kaikeyi: “Mother, I am 
your servant. From your very birth, I have nursed you 
and brought you up. Kindly fulfil a desire of mine. 
King Dasartha has decided to crown Rama. But as 
per the promise given to you earlier, he should crown 
Bharata. Rama should be sent on exile for fourteen 
years.” 


Both Sita and Rama were ready for the coronation 
wearing yellow coloured silk clothes. All were waiting in 
the royal court to extend welcome to them. Meanwhile, 
Rama went to mother, Kausalya and said, “Oh mother! I 
am going to forest. Kindly permit Me.” Then Kausalya 
asked, “Why my dear one, why do you want to go to 
the forest now, as this is the time of Your coronation.” 
Rama said, “Mother! It is the command of My father 
that I should stay in exile in the forest for fourteen 
years; I have to uphold the promise made by My 


110 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


father.” Saying so, he saluted His mother and went to 
meet Sumitra. 


Sumitra was the second wife of Dasaratha. Prior 
to his marriage with Sumitra, Dasaratha sought the 
consent of Kausalya. Kausalya replied, “Our kingdom 
needs an heir, doesn’t it? Hence, you may marry a 
woman of your choice. I will also participate in the 
marriage.” Dasaratha was very happy and pleasantly 
surprised. Such women are also there in the world who 
go by the wishes of their husbands! 


Sumitra was one of great virtues. True to her 
name “Su-mitra” (good friend), she was the friend 
of all. She went to Kausalya and spoke words of 
great encouragement. “Dear elder sister, why should 
you worry? What do you think of Rama? He is Lord 
Narayana Himself. How does it matter to Him whether 
He is in Ayodhya, or in a forest? Wherever He is, He 
is always with us. For Rama, Ayodhya and Aranya 
(forest) are one and the same.” 


Kausalya was somewhat comforted to hear the 
words of Sumitra. Her mind also became peaceful. 
Sumitra added, “Dear elder sister, two sons were born 
to me, while both you and Kaikeyi gave birth to one 
son each. Do you know why? The reason is that both 
my sons will have the opportunity to serve their elder 
brothers; Lakshmana will serve Rama, and Bharata 
will be served by Satrughna. Therefore, pay attention 


Ever Remember The Name Of Rama 111 


to my resolve. Lakshmana will go to forest with Rama 
and will protect Rama as the eyelids protect the eyes. 
Therefore, do not have any fear. 


Before proceeding to the forest, Lakshmana went to 
meet his wife Urmila. She had not come to know that 
Rama, Lakshmana and Sita were going to the forest. 
Sitting in her room, she was absorbed in painting the 
scene of the coronation of Rama and Sita. At that time, 
Lakshmana went there and called “Urmila” to draw her 
attention. “Yes, Swami’, said she, getting up suddenly 
from her seat. As she got up, by mistake the paint got 
spilled on the painting. Distressed at this happening, 
she exclaimed, “Oh! A beautifully painted picture is 
spoiled.” Then Lakshmana said, “Urmila, here, you 
are worrying that the picture is spoiled. There, Kaikeyi 
has spoiled the coronation of Sri Rama which could 
bring about immense good to others.” Lakshmana then 
informed her that he was going to the forest with Rama. 
Frightened at the news of Rama going to the forest, 
she asked Lakshmana, “What do you mean by saying 
Rama is going to the forest? A few moments from 
now He is going to be crowned. Is it not so?” Then 
Lakshmana apprised her of all that had happened. As 
she was endowed with a great spirit of sacrifice, she 
was not at all perturbed by the thought of separation 
from her husband. Overjoyed at the thought of her 
husband getting the opportunity to serve Rama and 
Sita, she said to Lakshmana, “Sanctify your time by 
serving Rama and Sita. Very few have such a great 


112 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


fortune. Go happily.” Saying thus, she bade farewell 
to Lakshmana. 


Cautioning his daughter about the dangers of the 
forest, Janaka asked Sita, “Sita, you are going to the 
forest with Rama. Many fierce animals roam about in 
the forest and frightening sounds are also heard there. 
Can you bear all this without getting frightened?” Sita 
replied, ““Where is the scope for any fear of animals 
when Rama, a lion in the human form is there with 
me? Rama is Lord Narayana Himself. Therefore, I 
have nothing to fear.” In this manner, Sita, Rama 
and Lakshmana put at rest the fears of everyone and 
proceeded to the forest. In the forest, Lakshmana 
protected Rama and Sita with great care and engaged 
himself in their service. 


After killing Ravana, when Rama returned to 
Ayodhya along with Sita, the people of Ayodhya 
welcomed them enthusiastically hailing their return 
with great festivity Saying, “Rama has come. Mother 
Sita has come. Ayodhya is shining in the effulgence 
of their glory. This is a great day for Ayodhya.” There 
were many great celebrations on their return to Ayodhya 
and the people were overjoyed to see Rama and Sita 
whom they revered as Lord Narayana and Lakshmi. 


Sita counselled Rama, “Transform this kingdom 
into a kingdom of joy where everybody can lead their 
life happily. Even today people in every village, every 


Ever Remember The Name Of Rama 113 


house and every hut of Bharat worship Rama. It is a 
common practice among the people of Bharat to name 
their children as Rama and Sita. There is no change 
in the name of Rama and Sita even after the passage 
of thousands of years. The glory of these names is 
eternal and immutable. There have been wars in many 
countries, but not in Bharat. People may fight with each 
other due to their personal differences, but no war was 
fought in this country. Not only that, there will never 
be any war in Bharat. It is Rama Rajya. It is the land 
of peace. It is the land of love. 


This land of Bharat has given birth to many noble 
women like Savitri who brought her dead husband 
back to life; Chandramati who extinguished wild 
fire with the power of truth; Sita who proved her 
chastity by coming out of blazing fire unscathed 
and Damayanti who reduced an evil-minded hunter 
to ashes with the power of her chastity. This land 
of piety and nobility attained plenty and prosperity 
and became the teacher of all the nations of the 
world because of such women of chastity. 
(Telugu poem) 


Such great women took birth in the land of Bharat. 
Therefore, every day in Bharat is a festival and an 
occasion for celebration. You know, when a man’s 
wife dies he immediately makes efforts to marry again. 
But the women of Bharat are not like that. Bharat is 


114 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


befittingly called the teacher of the world. In this sacred 
land, Lord Narayana incarnated and redeemed the life 
of the people by showing them His divine play and 
divine glory. 


The Atmarama In All Is The Same 


Every individual is the image of the Atma. The 
same truth was propounded by Krishna: Mamaivamsho 
jivaloke jivabhuta sanathana (the eternal atma in all 
beings is a part of My Being). All of you are the 
embodiments of the Atma. You may be having different 
names, but the Atmarama in all of you is the same. 
Therefore, do not think Rama is somewhere else. Your 
heart itself is the temple of Rama. Therefore, constantly 
contemplate on Rama who is immanent in your heart. 
Rama is there with you, in you, around you not only 
in your waking state, but also in the dream and deep 
sleep state also. He is eternally with you. Rama is not 
limited to a particular form. He assumes innumerable 
forms. Though the forms are many, the Divinity in 
them is one. Therefore, whomsoever you see, offer 
your salutations to him, considering him as the form 
of Rama. Now Swami is being extolled as Sai Rama 
and Sai Krishna as He embodies the same principles 
of Dharma (righteousness), Prema (love) and Santhi 
(peace) which Lord Rama and Lord Krishna had 
personified. 


Rama is immanent in everyone; Easwara is present 


Ever Remember The Name Of Rama 115 


in all; Rama is within you. In fact, you yourself are 
Rama. Establish this truth in your heart firmly and spend 
your time profitably. Then your life will be filled with 
everlasting bliss. Constantly recite the name of Rama. 


Aeons have passed, yet the name of Rama has not 
been forgotten. Rama is not separate from you. You are 
not separate from Rama. You may call a person by his 
name, but it is Rama who is present in him. You may 
call Him Sai Rama, Sita Rama or Ayodhya Rama or 
any other name, but do remember Rama forever. 


Sri Ramanavami, 27-3-2007, 
Prasanthi Nilayam. 


The value of an individual depends on his culture. 
One ’ culture is a very sacred aspect and has been inherited 
from our ancestors. We cannot interpret or understand 
culture superficially. It has a very deep meaning. It is the 
first duty of every individual to give up bad conduct in his 
daily life and improve his good habits. The deservedness 
by which you will be entitled to become useful citizens of 
the country should be acquired while you are students. 
In the entire life of a human being, the most important 
period is the period of being a student. A student is like 
the root for the tree of his life. Recognising such truth, 
you should happily lead the life of a student and learn 
good lessons from it. 
Baba 





116 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


If you cannot see God because of your 
ignorance, as you cannot see the stars in the 
daytime because of light, do not say that God 
does not exist. What other truth can I convey to 
you. Good people always see only good. They 
do not find a fault at all. They keep on praising 
all that they see. There is another category of 
people who describe a fault as a fault and good 
as good. The third category of people always find 
only faults, and they never see good anywhere. A 
fourth category of people see even good acts as 
bad acts, and they blame all the people around 
them. The first three categories can be tolerated. 
The fourth category are so bad that even demons 
are better than them. 

Baba 





10 
Water Is The Gift Of God To Man 


Embodiments of Love! 


S mentioned by the speakers who spoke just 

now, I provided water to Chennai both for 
drinking as well as for cultivation purposes. But the 
repair work of the canal was done only up to the border 
of Andhra Pradesh. Not only was this work executed 
without any problem, but it was also done in such a 
nice way that not even a drop of water was allowed 
to be wasted. 


Depend Only On God 


Thus, the water of the river Krishna reached up 
to the border of Tamil Nadu very smoothly without 
any wastage. But there was wastage of water after it 
entered Tamil Nadu border as that part of the canal 
on the Tamil Nadu side was not repaired. It was 
envisaged that this work would be done by the Tamil 


118 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


Nadu Government, but it has not been done so far. 
Naturally, the people are worried as the work has not 
been completed. Therefore, I have decided to undertake 
this task (loud applause). The length of the canal to be 
repaired towards Chennai is about 25 km. The cost of 
repairing it is estimated at 30 to 40 crore rupees. There 
is no need for you to depend upon anybody else. It 
is enough if you pray to God. God can perform any 
task. Very soon, I will complete this work so that the 
water reaches the people of Chennai in full measure. 
Shortly, I will send the engineers there. As there are 
breaches in the canal on the Tamil Nadu side, a lot of 
water is being wasted. After the repair work is done, 
adequate water will reach Sathyamurthy Sagar. Thus, 
Sathyamurthy Sagar will be filled with Sathya Sai water 
(loud prolonged applause). I will do this work. This 
will ensure permanent supply of water to Chennai. 


Everybody Has Equal Right On Water 


Sai can do any work which nobody else is able 
to do. The remaining part of the canal will be nicely 
repaired with cement lining. You have seen for yourself 
how much water is being wasted now. Water is not 
anybody’s property; it is God’s property. People are 
fighting with each other for water, which, in reality, is 
the property of God. So, they have no right to fight. 
Water is God’s gift to man. Everybody has equal right 
over it. 


Water Is The Gift Of God To Man 119 


The name of this year is Sarvajit. What is the 
meaning of Sarvajit? It means victory in all fields, 
namely, business, agriculture, education, etc. Hence, 
we will also be victorious in performing this task. I will 
complete this work so that you have no inconvenience 
henceforth. | am prepared to spend any amount of 
money. The five elements are the gift of God; water is 
one of them. It is in the hands of God. You need not 
approach anyone else. You may inform Karunanidhi 
that I will surely do this work. Convey this good 
news to the people of Chennai also in this auspicious 
Sarvajit year. May you all lead a happy life! Constantly 
contemplate on God. This is your total protection. How 
can people have any problem when they have this sacred 
protection? Why fear when I am here? (loud applause) 
In this Sarvajit year, I will give water for Sathyamurthy 
Sagar. Therefore, you should have no worry. Have faith 
that God will not only provide food and water to you, 
but He will look after you in all respects. 


Today is the sacred New Year day. It is an important 
day both for the people of Kerala and Tamil Nadu. 
The people of Kerala and Tamil Nadu are recipients of 
My grace in full measure (loud prolonged applause). 
Hereafter, you will have no problems. Earlier, small 
children were suffering from many ailments by drinking 
polluted water. Now drink this sweet water, enjoy good 
health and lead a blissful and happy life without any 
problems. 


120 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


All of you who have come here should go back 
happily. You will have no dearth of anything in life. 
I have great love for Chennai. Where is Chennai and 
where is Puttaparthi? Did anyone come here and pray 
to Me? No. Sai Himself has come to you and provided 
water. My love for Chennai cannot be described in 
words. May you all enjoy good health by eating good 
food and drinking pure water! 


Tamil New Year and Vishu, 14-4-2007, 
Prasanthi Nilayam 


The country does not merely consist of dust 
and land. It consists of people who live in it. 
Students should recognise that setting right the 
country means setting right the people and putting 
them on the proper path. The first natural outcome 


of education should be the ability to do some 
service to the country and re-establish the spiritual 
values in the country. We should thus show that, 
in this aspect, we have leadership of the world. 


Baba 





11 


Make Your Mind The Master Of 
Your Desires 


Embodiments of Love! 


ASWARAMMA day is held to commemorate 
the day when Easwaramma left her physical 
body. 


The body is made up of five elements and is bound 
to perish sooner or later, but the indweller has 
neither birth nor death. The indweller has no 
attachment whatsoever and is the eternal witness. 


(Telugu poem) 


Understand The Importance Of The Mind 


People are deluded by body attachment. Body is 
ephemeral, evanescent and impermanent. Whatever is 
born is transient only. Whatever is there in this world 


122 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


is bound to perish. Only one thing remains forever 
and that is the mind. But many people call it monkey 
mind. No, no. You belong to mankind and have nothing 
to do with monkey mind. The mind, in fact, is of the 
nature of the Self. You should make befitting efforts to 
understand its true nature. Only those who have control 
over their mind can be called human beings. There are 
many in this world who are highly educated. There 
are also many who have mastered various forms of 
knowledge and are engaged in mighty tasks. But they 
cannot be called human beings in the true sense of the 
term if they have no control over their mind. All kinds 
of good and bad thoughts occur in the mind. Keeping 
the mind away from all that is bad, you should accept 
only that which is good. Never allow your mind to 
associate it self with anything that is bad. 


Goddess Lakshmi always chants “Narayana, 
Narayana” only. The principle of atma originates 
from Lord Narayana. You may say Atma or mind or 
hridaya; they are all one. The atma means Narayana 
only. The mind is also Narayana. And so is the heart. 
Narayana is called Hridayavasi (indweller of the heart). 
We should give utmost importance to the mind. But 
many people do not give due importance to it. One 
who considers his mind as the basis of his life is a 
true human being. One who leaves his mind to its 
whims and fancies is, in reality, a monkey and not a 
human being. You should make your mind the centre 


Make Your Mind The Master Of Your Desires 123 


of your awareness. Leaving the mind to its arbitrary 
ways is like leaving your life principle itself. Hence, 
make your mind the basis of every aspect of your 
life. (Here Bhagawan materialised a gold medallion). 
This medallion has the image of Lakshmi at its centre 
with precious stones all around it. The precious stones 
represent the desires, over which presides Lakshmi 
who is true, eternal and permanent. You should make 
your mind the master of desires like Lakshmi. Manah 
eva manushyanam karanam bandhamokshayo (mind is 
the cause of bondage and liberation of man) Everyone 
should try to know this truth. 


As Are The Feelings, So Is The Result 


At the time of My departure for East Africa, 
Easwaramma tried to dissuade Me from going, saying, 
“Swami! I hear there are many fierce animals in those 
forests and the place is full of all kinds of dangers. 
Therefore, You should not go there. Whatever You will, 
all that will come here. Then, why do You want to 
go there?” I told her, “I am not going to see the wild 
animals there. I am going in response to the loving 
prayers of My devotees.” 


When I went there, the devotees of East Africa 
arranged small aeroplanes. I went round the forest in 
one such plane. There were thousands of wild elephants 
in the Kampala forest. It looked as though the entire 
forest was full of elephants. I had taken bananas with 


124 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


Me and gave one each to some of them. All of them 
enjoyed eating it. Bisons were also seen in thousands. 
We saw lions lying on the road here and there. Even 
when we drove our jeep over their tails, they did not 
react. Even fierce animals will not harm us if our mind 
is good. They will attack us only when we try to harm 
them. When we look at them with love, they will also 
look at us with love. Yad bhavam tad bhavathi (as are 
the feelings, so is the result). Our thoughts are the cause 
of their enmity or trust. As we went forward looking 
at the animals, we saw fifteen lions lying near a road. 
Some were suckling their young, some others were 
eating the meat of an animal brought by them. I said to 
Dr. Patel and others who accompanied Me, “When we 
do not harm them, they also do not harm us.” Taking 
a camera from one of those who accompanied Me, I 
went near the lions and took their photographs. All of 
them were happy to see Me. You can see, none of the 
lions did any harm to us. When you approach them 
with the evil intention of harming or killing them, they 
will also try to kill you. We should never go to them 
with such wicked thoughts. In fact, we should not look 
at any being with evil intentions. 


Do Not Develop Body Attachment 


Meanwhile, Easwaramma kept thinking about 
Me with great concern and did not even eat her food 
properly, with the result that she became quite weak. 
I kept her informed everyday morning and evening by 


Make Your Mind The Master Of Your Desires 125 


phone from Kampala, saying, “I am quite all right.” 
Hearing this, she used to be somewhat comforted. 
When I came from Kampala, she was very happy. She 
came near My car and garlanded Me, saying, “Swami, 
You look very happy and healthy.” She took Me inside 
and rotated a coconut in front of Me to ward off the 
effect of evil looks of others. She was beside herself 
with joy and said, “Swami, I never imagined that Your 
trip would be such a grand success.” She shared her 
joy with one and all in Puttaparthi also. Whenever 
we visited other places, on our return to Puttaparthi, 
Easwaramma used to describe to the people all that 
happened during these visits and exhorted them to 
follow the ideals set by Swami. 


Once the Summer Course on Indian Culture and 
Spirituality was being conducted at Bangalore. At that 
time, Easwaramma had also come with Me. As long as 
she was alive, she always desired, “Swami, wherever 
You go, I should go with You.” She asked Me to give 
her a promise that I would not leave Puttaparthi. I 
gave her this promise. “Wherever a tree is planted, it 
should be allowed to grow there only. If it is pulled out 
and planted at different places, it cannot attain proper 
growth,” she used to say and pleaded with Me, “Swami, 
You should always reside at the place of Your birth.” 


One day, after her breakfast, she had a cup of 
coffee. Suddenly, she shouted “Swami, Swami, Swami.” 
I said, “I am coming, I am coming, I am coming.” 


126 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


Then she asked Me to come quickly and I came to 
her immediately. She caught hold of My hands and 
placed them on her head and breathed her last. Where 
was the need to keep the body which had no life in it? 
Therefore, I immediately sent her body to Puttaparthi. 
I sent Ramabrahmam with the body after giving him 
necessary instructions. Those who were present there 
said, “Swami, You should also go with the body.” But 
I refused to go. Summer classes were in progress and 
students had come from many countries. The students 
thought, there would be no classes on that day as Swami 
would be going with the body of Mother Easwaramma. 
But the classes were held as usual and I went to 
the second class. The students wondered, “How has 
Swami come! He was supposed to go with the body 
of Mother Easwaramma!” Why should I go with the 
body? The body goes as it comes. I did not come with 
her body; I came separately. Therefore, I sent her body 
to Puttaparthi in a car with the instructions to make a 
Samadhi for her. 


Many people in Puttaparthi also wondered, “Why 
Swami has not come with the body!” The body comes 
alone and goes alone only. Everyone comes alone and 
goes alone. Ekameva Adviteeyam Brahma (God is one 
without a second). After the completion of summer 
classes, I went to Puttaparthi. I told everybody there, 
“It is natural for the body to have birth, growth and 
death. All bodies are like that. Therefore, nobody should 


Make Your Mind The Master Of Your Desires 127 
have body attachment.” 


(Here, Swami told the life story of Ishwarchandra 
Vidyasagar who fulfilled the noble desires of his mother 
and set an example of service to society. He also taught 
the lesson of humility and selfless service to an I.C.S. 
officer by carrying his briefcase from the railway station 
to the place where he himself was to deliver a speech.) 


Easwaramma was happy that I ate only simple 
food. She would say, “Swami, You should let the world 
know about Your food habits.” I said, I would certainly 
do so. Right from those days, I have been emphasising 
on the need to have simple and Satwic food. When I 
am in Puttaparthi, I always eat ragi sankati (gruel made 
of a coarse grain) with groundnut chutney. Sometimes, 
I take sankati with totakura dhal (a preparation made 
of a leafy vegetable) instead of chutney. I do not relish 
any other item. I do not touch spicy curries like kurmas, 
burmas, etc. I do not even like the smell of kurma. My 
only dietary requirement is sankati with chutney. But 
when I visit other places, people in those towns do not 
know what sankati is. So, I eat whatever the devotees 
prepare for Me. I conduct Myself in accordance with 
the time, situation and circumstances. However, I never 
deviate from My practices; I strictly adhere to them. 
Let people think what they want. I never imitate the 
practices of others. In this manner, this body is entering 


128 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


its 82nd year. But none can say that I look like an 
82-year-old person. 


May you sanctify your time in the service of 
Swami! May you put into practice the principles of 
service that I have taught you! With this, I bring My 
Discourse to a close. 


Eswaramma Day 6-5-2007, 
Sai Sruthi, Kodaikanal. 


The human body is not an ordinary thing. It 
is like the temple of God. This body is also like 
a chariot for God. This chariot cannot be empty. 
In the chariot, the one who has the form of the 
Atma is the God. It is in this context that we say 
that God, who is ancient, because he is eternal, 


is living in this new human body. In this sacred 
and divine temple, the human body, the effulgent 
Atma is living. Like every river which flows to join 
the sea, the human life must also flow to join its 
ultimate destination, the ocean of Divinity. 


Baba 





12 
Only Love For God Is True Love 


E see a large number of living beings in this 

world. But none of them has the greatness, 
wisdom and discrimination of man. That is why it is 
said, Jantunam nara janma durlabham (of all living 
beings, human birth is the rarest). 


Everything in this world is constituted by five 
elements. These five elements are present not only 
in man but also in animals, birds, insects and trees. 
But what is the use if man does not make proper use 
of these five elements? Today man is engaged in the 
pursuit of knowledge. How vast is this knowledge? It 
is aS vast as an ocean. Similarly, man makes efforts 
to develop common sense. His common sense touches 
the height of the Himalayan mountains. In spite of all 
his knowledge and common sense, man’s power of 
discrimination is zero. What is good and what is bad? 


130 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


What should be done and what should not be done? 
This power of thinking is zero in man today. That is 
why humanness has suffered a great decline. The value 
of humanness depends only on discriminatory power. 
Man may possess anything and everything, but what 
is the use if he has no discrimination? People keep on 
comparing themselves with others in many ways. But 
nobody is making efforts to know if his discrimination 
power is more or less. Today man is engaged in 
amassing wealth. But he does not use his knowledge 
of discrimination to know whether he needs that much 
money or not. Wherever we see today, we find people 
hankering after money. 


You Are God Yourself 


The mind of man is very powerful. But man’s mind 
today is deluded. (Bhagawan showing His handkerchief) 
What is this? This is cloth. How does it take the form 
of cloth? It becomes cloth by weaving thread. But where 
does this thread come from? It comes from cotton. So, 
first cotton, second thread and third cloth. In the same 
way, you are not one person but three: the one you 
think you are, the one others think you are, the one 
you really are (loud applause). The thread and cloth 
come only from cotton. Similarly, man is constituted 
by five elements. Krishna declared in the Bhagavad 
Gita: Mamaivamsho jivaloke jivabhuta sanathana (the 
eternal atma in all beings is a part of My Being). It 
means that we all are parts of the Divine. All of you 


Only Love For God Is True Love 131 


are in search of God. But there is no need to search for 
God, because you yourself are God. When you have 
light in your own house, where is the need to go to 
the houses of others in search of light? 


You develop the feelings of ‘I’ and ‘mine’ due to 
the delusion caused by body attachment. Body is, in 
fact, the cause of all attachments. But, how long does 
this body last? It is desired only so long as there is life 
in it. When the life principle goes out of it, the body is 
mercilessly put on fire. Then, to whom does this body 
belong? Therefore, you are not the body. You say, “This 
is my body, this is my hand, this is my leg, this is 
my mind, this is my buddhi (intellect).” Everything is 
my, my, my. Then, who is that ‘my’? When you say 
‘my leg’, you are separate from your leg. Then who 
are you? You are you only. In this way, man today is 
deluded by his attachment to his body and senses. But 
you are not the body, you are not the senses, you are 
not the intellect, you are you. You should realise, “I am 
I.” That universal ‘I’ principle is only one. Ekam sath 
viprah bahudha vadaniti (truth is one, but the wise refer 
to it by many names). But the individual ‘I’ represents 
ego. When you cut this ‘I’, it becomes the cross which 
is worshipped by the Christians. It means, when you 
give up your ego, you become your true self. 


You are not an ordinary person; you are God 
yourself. There is no need to search for God. Wherever 
you see, God is there. This cloth is God, this flower is 


132 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


God, this table is God, everything is God. It is only due 
to your ignorance that you give scope to differences like 
‘T’ and ‘you’. You are not a separate entity. Iam I. I am 
not Sathya Sai Baba. Sathya Sai Baba is the name given 
to this body. I don’t have any particular name. Your 
body is the gift of your parents. This body is endowed 
with Pancha Bhutas (five elements), Panchendriyas (five 
senses) and Pancha Pranas (five life principles). These 
Pancha Pranas are prana, apana, vyana, udana and 
samana. They are the same in everyone. Therefore, you 
are not different from others. Those who are unaware 
of this spiritual principle become victims of ignorance 
and are subjected to delusion. 


Everything in this world is reaction, reflection and 
resound. Where does the resound come from? Here I 
am speaking. Where do My words come from? They 
come from My heart. You think that you hear with your 
ears. But it is not so. All your senses are, in fact, like 
decorations to your body; they cannot function on their 
own without the life principle within you. There is no 
need to search for God. Have faith that God is within 
you. When you have faith in God, you develop love. 
From love emerges peace; peace gives rise to truth. This 
truth is God. Truth does not exist separately. There is 
no need to search for truth. Truth has no form. Truth 
is truth. Who has created peace? Peace is peace. It also 
has no form. Love is love. It is not anybody’s creation. 
Love is God, Live in Love. 


Only Love For God Is True Love 133 


Educare Is The Process Of Bringing Out Latent 
Values 


What are the human values? They are Sathya, 
Dharma, Santhi, Prema and Ahimsa (truth, righteousness, 
peace, love and non-violence). They have no form. 
These formless principles are imprinted on your heart. 
All that we read and write corresponds to physical and 
worldly education. It cannot be called education in the 
true sense of the term. What is true is educare. Educare 
means to bring out our latent values. They are immanent 
in our heart, but we cannot see them. They have to be 
manifested through self-enquiry. True Sadhana lies in 
recognising and manifesting peace, truth and sacrifice 
that are present in our heart. You undertake various 
spiritual practices like meditation and Japa (recitation 
of God’s name). What do you understand by Japa? You 
think Japa means counting the beads of a rosary. But 
it is not so. All these spiritual practices are merely our 
imagination. They are all artificial, not real. Science 
teaches many things. It gives only that knowledge 
which we acquire through our senses. There can be 
no science without senses. We are leading artificial 
and mechanical life by acquiring this knowledge. It is 
not true life. 


First and foremost, you must have faith. You can 
recognise your true form only when you have faith. 
From faith comes peace. Truth emerges from peace. 
This truth is God. God does not have any separate 


134 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


form. God manifests from the truth within you. You 
undertake many spiritual practices. In spite of all 
practices, you are unable to experience truth. Do not 
waste your time in unnecessary pursuits. Time waste 
is life waste. First of all, you should understand that 
truth is your goal. You will have no obstacles when 
truth is on your side. Your senses and mind are very 
strong when you are young. Your intellect is also very 
sharp. Being endowed with such great power, why 
should you feel weak and helpless? 


Love is not your individual property. It is universal 
and belongs to all. Love is in everyone. Love is there 
in you, Me and everyone. We attribute various names 
to this love and try to experience it. You should not 
think otherwise. Today even school children develop 
a tendency for artificial love. But this is not correct. 
This artificial love makes man weak. This weakness 
can cause many diseases. Do not develop such love 
which gives rise to diseases. 


The principle of love is the principle of divinity, 
nothing else. Accept that love which comes from God. 
Do not accept that love which comes from others. 
Your love for God is true love. Whomsoever you love 
other than that, it cannot be called true love. Man 
develops attachment to many people, but he is unable 
to experience true love. True love originates only from 
God. God is the embodiment of love. Love is God. 
Live in Love. You should experience only divine love, 


Only Love For God Is True Love 135 


not worldly love. I will explain to you this principle of 
love in detail later. We have already exceeded the time 
limit. Therefore, I don’t want to cause inconvenience 
to you. 


It is very easy to attain God. If you ask which is 
the easiest thing to attain in this world, it is only God. 
You can attain God in no time without undergoing any 
strain. It is very easy to experience love. Love is very 
powerful. There is nothing in this world which can 
surpass it. When you look at it, love appears to be very 
small. But it is as deep as an ocean and as high as a 
mountain. It is inexhaustible and infinite. You should 
realise this principle of love. Nobody can describe 
the principle of love because of the limitations of the 
circumstances and experiences. 


World Youth Conference, 26-7-2007, 
Prasanthi Nilayam. 


Students, boys and girls, you must get rid of 
this selfishness. You should attempt to promote in 
yourself an attitude of selflessness and divine love. 
If you want to get rid of selfishness, you should 
promote qualities like Sat, Chit, and Ananda. These 


qualities of Sat, Chit, and Ananda are not to be 
acquired from outside. They are naturally present 
in us. The quality of truth is present in us. 


Baba 





136 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


It is not right for us to spend all our time in 
evil thoughts about others. It is always better to 
think of God rather than about others. Thus, the 
three divine qualities of Sat, Chit, and Ananda 
must be promoted. We should examine the manner 
in which we can promote these qualities. We must 
become people with good qualities. Through good 
conduct, such sacred ideas will begin to sprout 
in us. So long as we keep our attachment to the 
created world around us, we cannot get such 
good qualities. The eyes see bad things, the ears 
hear wrong things, the words are such that they 
criticise others. So long as we have such faulty 
vision and faulty talk, we can never develop good 
conduct. On the other hand, if our sensory organs 
are surrendered to God, we may get good conduct 
through the grace of God. While it is not an easy 
thing to acquire, yet by effort, man can achieve 
these qualities. Whether we receive praise or 
blame, gain or loss, sorrow or pleasure, we will 
have to struggle to get the grace of God by our 
good conduct. 


Baba 





13 
Always Be Happy And Peaceful 


The creation emerges from Truth and merges into 
Truth, Is there a place in the cosmos where Truth 
does not exist? Visualise this pure and unsullied 
truth. 

(Telugu poem) 


VERY living being in this world, right from an 

ant to an insect, bird, beast, or an animal has 
emerged from Truth only! Those who realise this truth 
are real yogis. Devoid of Truth, nothing will move in 
this universe. And that supreme Truth is embodied only 
in one person. He is Sathyam (Here Bhagawan Sri 
Sathya Sai Baba materialised a Lingam and showed it 
to all). Who else can manifest such pure consciousness? 
Truth is omnipresent. When you think of it and 
contemplate on it, it can manifest in you also. Hence, 
you constantly contemplate on Truth. Why was this 


138 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


body named Sathya Sai? Truth alone manifests from 
this Sai. Whoever contemplates on Truth, Sathyam is 
present in the heart of that person. Hence, one should 
never forget Truth. Dharma (righteousness) is the 
reaction, reflection and resound of Sathyam (Truth). In 
fact, Sathyannasti paro Dharma (There is no Dharma 
greater than adherence to truth). Today, we are teaching 
several branches of knowledge in secular education. 
But, this is not true education. True education relates 
to the Truth that emerges out of one’s heart. It has no 
name and form. What could be the form of Truth? What 
is the form of Dharma? What is the form of Santhi 
(peace)? Sathya, Dharma, Santhi, Prema and Ahimsa 
(Truth, righteousness, peace, love and non-violence) are 
all formless. One has to manifest these human values 
from out of one’s heart. The kind of divine energy that 
is not present in a human being is not to be found in 
any other living being either. Hence, a human being 
is verily God. He is God in human form. 


Everything In This World Is Divine 


You all consider a human being as a mere human 
being. That is the reason why you are committing so 
many mistakes. You are not merely a human being. 
You are God, verily. You think that you are God and 
you will become God. Yad bhavam tad bhavathi (as 
are the feelings, so is the result). When you think of 
bad, you will get only bad thoughts. All people in 
this world love someone or the other. However, there 


Always Be Happy And Peaceful 139 


are differences in such love. The students love their 
fellow students. The ladies love other ladies. God is 
present in this lady as well as the other lady. Both are 
embodiments of Divinity. The one God is present in 
all bodies. We must love every human being. Love all 
Serve all, since God is present in all human beings. 
There is no place in this universe where God is not 
present. God is present in the sky, in the water, in the 
sound and in the light. Thus, everything in this universe 
is the embodiment of Divinity. 


We forsake such omnipresent Divinity and worship 
God in the form of some idol in a temple. No doubt, 
you can worship those idols. Nothing wrong in that. 
But, you must realise the truth that the same God in 
that idol is present in every human being, nay, in every 
living being. I don’t say it is wrong to worship those 
idols. But, you yourself are God. Consider yourself as 
God first and then begin to see the same God in every 
living being. Your body is a temple. There is divine 
energy in that temple. However, a little discrimination 
is to be exercised in this context. You have to enquire 
whether this energy is God. In fact, the body is also 
God. God is immanent in every atom and every cell 
of the human body. There is no place in this universe 
where God is not present. Hence, you do not entertain 
any doubt about the existence of God. Do not forget 
God. In fact, if you forget yourself, it amounts to 
forgetting God. Hence, do not forget yourself. It is for 
this reason that one is advised, “Always be careful.” 


140 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


You must constantly enquire into yourself, “Am I 
forgetting God?” You must always be aware of your 
true nature and remind yourself, “I am I.” If you are 
firmly established in that truth, there will be no scope 
at all to entertain any evil thoughts about others. Not 
realising one’s own true nature, fools and ignoramuses 
think otherwise. God is present in all human beings. 
All the heads of all human beings in this world are 
God’s own heads, verily. That is the reason why God 
is described as Virataswarupa (embodiment of cosmic 
Divinity). His is the cosmic form. Each one in that 
cosmic form is having a different form. However, 
God is immanent in every form. Krishna declared in 
the Bhagavad Gita, Mamaivamsho jivaloke jivabhuta 
sanathana (the eternal Atma in all beings is a part of 
My Being). I alone am present in each one of you. You 
are not different from Me. Do not entertain any doubts 
or differences of opinion in this regard. Strengthen 
your love, that is the proper sadhana. If only the fruit 
of love in your heart is ripened, the juice of that fruit 
can be shared with one and all. Hence, let that fruit of 
love ripen in your heart first. If only you fill your heart 
with pure love, that love can be shared with all. All 
people then will become embodiments of love. Then, 
there will be no scope at all for hatred and violence 
in the world. 


Today, wherever you see you will find hatred and 
differences of opinion among people. In fact, they are 
not differences in the real sense. They may appear to 


Always Be Happy And Peaceful 141 


be differences in the secular life. But, all are one from 
the spiritual angle. Strictly speaking, all are zeroes and 
only God is the hero. He alone is one. All others are 
zeroes standing next to Him. That is the reason why they 
acquire value. Remove that one, all will be reduced to 
mere zeroes! Hence, God is the only important entity 
in our life. 


Consider The Mind Also As Divine 


The mind alone is responsible for all the sorrows 
and difficulties as well as happiness of the human 
beings. Several people consider mind as very bad and 
call it ‘monkey mind’. In My opinion, it is not monkey 
mind; it is ‘mankind’. It is always kind. It is the mind 
that gives you joy and happiness. It is again the mind 
that causes you worry and sorrow. If only you can 
keep the mind in proper state, nothing can be bad. 
You consider the mind also as divine. Then you will 
always be happy. 


Nitvanandam, Parama Sukhadam, Kevalam 
Jnanamurtim, Dwand-wateetam, Gagana Sadrisham, 
Tattwamasyadi Lakshyam, Ekam, Nitvam, Vimalam, 
Achalam, Sarvadhee Sakshibhutam, Bhava-teetam, 
Trigunarahitam (The Atma is the embodiment of eternal 
bliss, wisdom absolute, beyond the pair of opposites, 
expansive and pervasive like the sky, the goal indicated 
by the Mahavakya Tatwamasi, one without a second, 
eternal, pure, unchanging, witness of all functions of 


142 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


the intellect, beyond all mental conditions and the three 
attributes of Satwa, Rajas and Tamas). 


You call it Atma or mind or consciousness — 
all are one. We ascribe different names to the same 
principle, according to our convenience for reference. 
For example, this body has been given the name Sathya. 
This name is given to the body and not to Me. I am 
not the body. I am not the mind. I am not the intellect. 
I am not the Chitta. I am not imagination. Bhagawan 
is Bhagawan. You must develop such firm faith. It is 
possible that the minds of some people are susceptible 
to some disturbances due to changes in food habits 
and recreation. It is also possible that they may be 
influenced by some friends in this regard. Frequently, I 
will be repeating the saying, “Tell me your company, 
I shall tell you what you are.” Hence, I advise you 
to join the company of noble souls. 


Satsangatwe nissangatwam, 

Nissangatwe nirmohatwam, 

Nirmohatwe nischalatattwam, 

Nischalatattwe jivanmukti. (Sanskrit sloka) 


(Good company leads to detachment; detachment 
makes one free from delusion; freedom from delusion 
leads to steadiness of mind; steadiness of mind confers 
liberation.) 


It is possible that everyone can attain Mukti 


Always Be Happy And Peaceful 143 


(liberation). But, when? The moment you establish 
yourself in the truth “I am Atma”, you will attain 
liberation. Always think, “Swami is in me.” I am in 
Swami.” However, there will be no use if you simply 
repeat, “I am Swami”, | am Swami”, with a fickle mind. 
Develop firm faith, “I am Swami,” Iam God; I am God.” 
It is only when you develop that firm conviction, you 
will attain Divinity which is Nirgunam, Niranjanam, 
Sanathana Niketanam, Nitya, Shuddha, Buddha, 
Mukta, Nirmala Swarupinam (God 1s attributeless, 
unsullied, final abode, eternal, pure, enlightened, free 
and embodiment of sacredness). On the other hand, if 
your mind is polluted with bad thoughts, everything 
will turn out to be bad for you. Nowadays, even water 
is polluted. The human body will be afflicted with 
several diseases on account of this water pollution. It 
is therefore necessary that the physical body is also 
protected to a certain extent. What do you think of the 
purpose for which this body is gifted to you by God? 
It is only to make you realise your own Self. But, you 
forget this purpose and concentrate your mind on the 
physical body. After all, what is there in the physical 
body? 


The body is like a water bubble. 

The mind is like a mad monkey. 

Dont follow the body. 

Dont follow the mind. Follow the conscience. 


If only you learn this simple principle, your life 


144 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


will be sanctified. You need not pay heed to whatever 
people may say. Purity of consciousness is the fruition 
of knowledge. It is only when your consciousness is 
pure that you will attain wisdom. Purity of the mind 
is of utmost importance. Keep your mind pure, free 
from all kinds of pollution. Whenever evil thoughts 
enter your mind, remind yourself, “This is not good; 
this is not mine; not mine,” and drive away those evil 
thoughts. Tell yourself, “These are all not my property; 
my property is good thoughts and good ideas only.” 
Constantly remember the truth that love is God. Live 
in love. If you can cultivate such positive and noble 
thoughts, everything will turn out to be good for you. 
There are several people here who are deluded by 
ephemeral things. No doubt, you are pure at heart. 
You have only pure thoughts. But, certain amount of 
pollution sets in now and then. You must ensure that 
it does not happen. That is sadhana for you. What is 
sadhana? Is it sitting in meditation and doing Japa 
(recitation of God’s name)? No. This is not sadhana. 
What do you think is the meaning of meditation? You 
think it is sitting in a lonely place and contemplating 
on the Lord’s name. Not at all! Contemplate upon the 
pure thoughts in your mind. Contemplate on the Truth in 
you. If you really wish to know the secret of sadhana, 
it can be explained through very simple methods. For 
example, make your mind steady and still for as short a 
period as eleven seconds. You can attain realisation even 
in such a short period. Realisation cannot be achieved 


Always Be Happy And Peaceful 145 


by becoming restless like a clock. Just eleven seconds 
of stillness of mind would be enough. But you don’t 
do even that. You can achieve a lot during this period. 
Hence, do not trouble yourself unnecessarily. You are, 
at present, putting your body to a lot of trouble. You 
are wasting a lot of money too. Time waste is life 
waste. Money waste is an evil. Hence, do not waste 
money and time. Time is God and God is Time. 
Hence, whenever you find time, think of Swami. I 
will certainly appear before you. Not only that, I will 
even talk to you. I am receiving several letters saying 
that Swami has appeared before them and talked to 
them. You can also do such sadhana. Develop such 
unflinching faith in Swami. You will surely succeed 
in your sadhana. Several people have come here as 
devotees. They have, no doubt, deep devotion towards 
Swami. But, what is devotion? What is the hallmark 
of a devotee? This has to be analysed first. First and 
foremost, you have to develop faith. 


Where there is faith, there is love; 
Where there is love, there is truth; 
Where there is truth; there God is. 


Truth is God. You need not have to make any 
special efforts to know Truth. In fact, eleven seconds 
are enough to realise truth. You just contemplate in 
your mind for a period of eleven seconds on Truth 
and you will be able to have God’s darshan. You are 
unnecessarily taxing your body by sitting for hours 


146 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


together in meditation. At the end, you are suffering 
from pain in legs and hands and back ache. Do not 
give scope for such painful joints. You ultimately land 
in a doctor’s clinic who will diagnose your trouble 
as rheumatic pains. They are not rheumatic pains at 
all. They are the result of misguided sadhana. Stick 
to the time schedule of eleven seconds and you will 
have no pain. In addition, you also have timely food. 
With regard to food, you have to know certain subtle 
things and observe some restrictions. You should not 
consume non-vegetarian food like meat and fish. In 
fact, foreigners are used to non-vegetarian food only. 
This type of food causes diseases like cancer. Hence, 
give up such food, totally. Not only that. They also like 
cheese very much. The more you consume cheese, the 
weaker you become. You should not also take milk in 
excess quantity. Too much milk is very bad. It should 
be in limit. The milk should be diluted with water in 
equal proportion. Same is the case with curd. It should 
not be thick. It should be semi-solid. Thus, you have 
to control the food you eat daily. Proper food at proper 
time is very much necessary for contemplating on God. 
If you thus take proper food and observe discipline 
in your habits, you are sure to have God’s darshan 
at that very moment. You need not have to undertake 
rigorous sadhana for months and years. You can always 
be blissful. Bliss is the form of God. 


You desire to have bliss. But, from where do you 
get bliss? From a shop in the market? Or by having 


Always Be Happy And Peaceful 147 


a sumptuous meal with a variety of dishes in a hotel? 
No, not at all! Bliss has to come from within. You are, 
in fact, the embodiment of bliss. You were blissful at 
the time of your birth. But, once you started developing 
attachment with the world, you began crying. Hence, 
you have to reduce your worldly attachments. You are 
at present having a lot of attachment with the world. 
Thereby, you are weakening your body. Ultimately you 
will end up in sorrow. Worry is a very bad quality. 
Hurry, worry and curry — these three together make 
the heart very weak. Hence, keep them at a distance. 
Whenever you are in difficulties, you just assure 
yourself that these are passing clouds and will move 
away and therefore you will not be worried. Whatever 
comes, has to go. They are momentary. Same is the 
case with the human body. Hence, you have to give 
importance to the body only to the extent required. 
The body has to be maintained within proper limits. 
Otherwise, it will decay. You have to be very careful. 
Those who are engaged in sadhana and wish to have 
the darshan, sparshan and sambhashan (vision, touch 
and conversation) with God, must follow My advice 
in this regard. You are sure to have His darshan and 
can even talk to Him. 


Devotion is not merely performing certain forms 
of worship or undertaking religious vows or doing japa. 
Real devotion presupposes unshakeable love towards 
God, devoid of delusion. You have to cultivate such 
steadfast love towards God. Then you will certainly 


148 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


attain Divinity. Since people are at present attached 
to the world, demonic qualities are growing in them. 
Both kama (desire) and krodha (anger) are the worst 
enemies of a human being. You must always be happy, 
smiling and loving. When you are smiling, love will 
automatically develop in you. There are, of course, some 
people who will put up a ‘castor oil’ face. You must 
always be smiling and cheerful. God is always blissful. 
He does not at all worry for anything. Sorrow and worry 
are nowhere near God. You observe Me. I am always 
cheerful and smiling. I have no pain or suffering. I am 
revealing the truth. Sometime ago, I sustained an injury 
to My leg due to a mistake committed by the students. 
My hip bone suffered four cracks. The doctors examined 
Me and decided to put My leg in bandage. I refused. 
I came to the balcony by walk and gave darshan to 
the devotees. Even now, one of My legs is shorter by 
two inches. Several doctors including Dr. Pillay and his 
son from Singapore came and wanted to examine Me. 
They are specialists in the branch of Orthopaedics. Also 
several experts from America and other places came. 
They prayed, “Swami, please spare just five minutes 
for us to examine Your leg.” I told them, “I will give 
you five hours for a spiritual purpose, if you wish. 
But, I don’t give this body even for five minutes for a 
clinical examination.” Even now, the students hold My 
body as I walk. I shout at them saying, “I will not go, 
if you follow Me.” Thus, I give strict instructions to 
the students accompanying Me. I am able to manage 


Always Be Happy And Peaceful 149 


Myself. I have no pain or suffering in the least. I can 
walk in the normal way. I do not fumble while walking 
and can keep My normal pace. 


I am maintaining the same body weight since 
many years. My body weight then was 110 pounds. 
There was neither an increase nor a decrease in the 
body weight even to the extent of half pound. I am 
always hale and healthy. No one need worry about 
My health. I will always be happy. When you look 
at Swami from an external angle, you will think that 
Swami is perhaps suffering from severe pain. Not at 
all! I have no pain, whatsoever. Even if there is some 
pain, your love for Swami will remove that pain. It is 
enough if I look at you; all My pain is gone! I will be 
happy and cheerful. My pain, if at all there is some, 
has to be removed by your love for Swami and not by 
the doctors. What could be the reason for people in 
such large numbers gathering here today? What does 
it connote? I am extremely happy that I am able to 
win the love of so many people. You also be happy, 
wherever you are. I am always happy. I am extremely 
happy to see you all here. This is your good fortune. 
This time, the people have all come here with intense 
love and devotion. That makes Me very happy and 
cheerful. I am very eager to come to the Sai Kulwant 
Hall by walk from tomorrow to give you darshan. 


There is no medicine more efficacious than love. 
Your love is My medicine. That is the most powerful 


150 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


medicine. Equally, My love is a powerful medicine to 
all of you. Always be happy and peaceful. Live like 
members of the same family with love and affection. 
Do not be weighed down by petty difficulties and 
suffering. Do not give scope to any worry. Even if 
your wife or children suffer from any disease, do not 
get perturbed. Go back to your places with firm faith 
that everything will turn out to be good. Lead a happy 
and peaceful life. (Here, Swami, showed the Linga He 
had created earlier to the audience and enquired) Did 
you see this Linga? It is heavy. A much bigger Linga 
will emerge from Swami’s mouth. The Sivaratri festival 
is approaching. 


World Youth Conference (Valedictory) 28-7-2007, 
Prasanthi Nilayam. 


Students, it is great ignorance to give up the 
bird in your hand and go after the bird in the 
bush. God does not exist in some separate place 
outside you. When you make an attempt to turn 
your vision and thoughts inward, you will see 
divinity within yourself. Although we may accept 


external actions as the first step, we should make 
progress to a higher step. On the other hand, if 
we always remain on the first step, when are we 
going to rise higher. It is only when we recognise 
the need to go higher, that our life can become 
purposeful. Baba 





14 


Exemplary Patriotism Of 
Subhas Chandra Bose 


ANY speakers have spoken before Me but 

none has said anything about Subhas Chandra 
Bose, who was endowed with many great qualities and 
capabilities. After passing his ICS, he came to India, 
joined the political movement and made a significant 
contribution to it in many ways. But, unfortunately, he 
had to leave the country as there was no unity among 
the Bharatiyas. Even while staying in overseas countries, 
he played a very important role for the freedom of 
India from the British rule. 


Important Role Of Subhas Chandra Bose In India’s 
Freedom Struggle 


Lalita Bose, the daughter of his brother, once 
came to Puttaparthi. She regretted that her uncle Subhas 
Chandra Bose, having been born in this sacred land of 


152 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


Bharat, had to leave the country. She was happy that 
she was able to live in this country and have Swami’s 
darshan. She came to Brindavan, Whitefield also and 
stayed there for a few days. Later on, she followed 
Me in a car wherever I went. She used to play on 
harmonium and sing bhajans. She came to Ooty and 
Kodaikanal also when I went there. All the time, she 
was chanting ‘Sai Ram’ ‘Sai Ram’ She had no other 
thought except this in her mind. 


Subhas Chandra Bose was endowed with great 
physical, mental and spiritual powers. But he never 
revealed his spiritual powers to anyone. He had a 
burning desire to make India a great and prosperous 
country. No other leader had such a strong aspiration 
for the freedom and progress of the country as Subhas 
Chandra Bose. He was the one who believed in action; 
not merely in speech like many other leaders. There 
are many great leaders in our country even today, but 
what is the use if they do not put into practice what 
they say? They say a million things but do not put 
into practice even one! I am very much pained to see 
that today nobody remembers Subhas Chandra Bose 
who had done so much for the country. He was the 
one who dedicated his entire life to the country. Even 
when he was staying in overseas countries, his love for 
his motherland was uppermost in his mind. Rather, it 
went on increasing day by day. 


Exemplary Patriotism Of Subhas Chandra Bose 153 


He is verily a living corpse who does not declare 
with pride that this is my motherland, this is my 
mother tongue and this is my religion. 

(Telugu poem) 


Subhas Chandra Bose strove very hard to put 
the country on the path of progress and prosperity. 
He demonstrated the ideals of love and forbearance. 
One who does not have love for his country is verily 
a living corpse! Only a person who upholds the good 
name of the country can be called a living person in 
the true sense of the term. 


Attain The Independence Of The Self 


Meanwhile, India attained swatantrata 
(independence). But this was merely ‘Swatantrata’, not 
‘Swaatantrata’. What is swatantrata? It relates to the 
body, mind and intellect, while Swaatantrata is related 
to the atma. Those who follow the atmic principle are 
truly independent. The same is the difference between 
‘swarajya’ and ‘swaarajya’. We should aim at achieving 
‘Swaarajya’, not merely ‘Swarajya’. When we follow 
the atmic principle, everything becomes good for 
us. Not only that, it will lead to the well-being and 
prosperity of the entire world. We should not merely 
be satisfied with political independence; we should 
achieve that independence which relates to the atma. 
Subhas Chandra Bose strived to attain the independence 
related to the Self. Ultimately, he succeeded in his 


154 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


endeavour. Everybody should make efforts to know such 
noble souls. Subhas Chandra Bose was one of the few 
Bharatiyvas of his times who attained ‘Swaatantrata’ 
(independence of the Self) when others were pursuing 
their selfish ends. They harboured narrow considerations 
and differences while Subhas Chandra Bose considered 
the entire country as one. 


The principle of atma is the same in everyone. All 
are endowed with atmic power. Man is the embodiment 
of atma. That is why Krishna declared in the Bhagavad 
Gita, Mamaivamsho jivaloke jivabhuta sanathana (the 
eternal atma in all beings is a part of My Being). 
He said, “All are an aspect of My Divinity.” When 
I consider you as part of My Being, you should also 
consider others as your own self. Love All, Serve 
All. You should not observe any difference between 
individuals, thinking one as a pauper and another, a 
millionaire. There are many millionaires in Bharat. But 
they are engaged in filling their own belly. They are 
not prepared to give even a morsel of food as alms to 
a beggar who stands at their doorstep saying, “Bhavati 
bhiksham dehi (mother, give alms)’. What is the use of 
having such rich men in our country? They are rich only 
for name’s sake but in reality they are the poorest of 
the poor. In spite of so many rich people in our country, 
righteousness and charity seem to have disappeared from 
it. Therefore, people of this country should pursue the 
path of charity and righteousness. Consider others as 
your own brothers and sisters. Rather, consider them 


Exemplary Patriotism Of Subhas Chandra Bose 155 


as thyself. People just address others as ‘brothers and 
sisters’ from the stage, but who is actually putting it 
into practice? None. 


Remember Noble Souls Like Subhas Chandra Bose 


Today wherever you go, you see people hankering 
after money. People are striving to amass wealth but none 
is making efforts to cultivate love and righteousness. 
The earlier three speakers spoke about the world, but 
none of them spoke about the atma. The same principle 
of atma is present in everyone. It is present in you, 
Me and everyone else. Daivam manusha rupena (God 
is in the form of a human being). It is not proper to 
show disrespect to anyone because everyone is the 
embodiment of God. You should lead your life with 
this conviction that all are your brothers and sisters. 
We can attain swaarajya only when we develop such 
broad feelings. Till then, we merely have swarajya 
where ‘swa’ means swartha (selfishness). But we should 
aspire for swaarajya, in which ‘swaa’ is related to the 
spiritual heart (Hridaya). 


You are all performing Grama Seva and serving 
the poor. But first of all, you should achieve true 
swaatantrata. Love, respect and help everyone. Only 
then can you be called a true Sai student. Everything 
can change but not the atma. Even a wicked person or 
a demon cannot bring about any change in the atma. 
Strive to attain such changeless and eternal atmic 


156 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


kingdom. Have self-confidence. Only then can you 
attain the natural state of a human being. This is your 
true and eternal state. I bring My discourse to a close 
with My good wishes and blessings that you may attain 
the kingdom of the Self and earn a good name. 


I spoke only out of My love for Subhas Chandra 
Bose, though none invited Me to speak. Such persons 
like Subhas Chandra Bose should be born in Bharat 
again and again. India should attain its pristine glory 
again. Had Subhas Chandra Bose been alive today, 
he would have attained the highest name in history. 
There would have been no beggars in this country. 
But, unfortunately, the Bharatiyas themselves were 
responsible for his leaving the country. As a result, they 
now face great difficulties. We should love and trust 
such noble souls. Love and trust are our true strength. 
We should never forget Subhas Chandra Bose. His 
teachings were full of noble thoughts and great ideals. 


Unfortunately, people forget such good persons 
and remember the bad ones. It is a great mistake. 
Never forget good people. They are like precious 
jewels. I wish that you should always remember such 
noble souls. I bring My discourse to a close with My 
blessings to you all. 


Sixtieth Anniversary Of India’s Independence, 
15-8-2007, 
Prasanthi Nilayam. 


15 


Discrimination Is The Means To 
Self-realisation 


ODAY’S function is being held to celebrate 

the anniversary of the School of Business 
Management, Accounting and Finance. What is meant 
by business? Does business mean exchange of goods? 
No, it is not so. Truly speaking, the entire world is 
engaged in business. Right from the Prime Minister 
of the country to an ordinary worker, everybody is 
involved in some kind of business or the other and 
is following the working system appropriate to his 
occupation. Knowing fully well this reality, our students 
are making a mark for themselves in all fields of life. 


Never Forsake Your Culture 


Man is endowed with five senses of perception. 
The functioning of the five senses is also a type of 
business in which all the limbs are engaged. All the 


158 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


senses perform their business in the most appropriate 
manner with regard to the limbs they are associated 
with. Those who give proper direction to their senses 
so as to lead them on the right path are truly first 
rankers. Business which is done mainly by reading 
books, business journals and comparing Indian business 
with overseas business cannot be called business in 
the true sense of the term. Indian business should be 
concerned with Indian traditions and values. It should 
keep in view the interest and situation of the country. 
Other countries are making changes in their business 
ventures just to increase their power. We should not 
imitate them in any such manner. We should adopt 
those practices which are appropriate to our culture 
and traditions. 


Taking only money into consideration in business 
is a flaw; culture has to be given utmost importance. 
Along with culture, the interest of the country should 
also be given high priority. True business is that which 
keeps in view, culture and country. Some people today 
ignore their culture due to the influence of modern 
times. You should never forsake culture at any cost. 
What is meant by culture? We should understand and 
follow our ancient traditions and values. We should 
never ignore our culture in our business matters. We 
should enquire into the relationship between culture and 
country. Culture has its existence due to the country. 
True humanness lies in the integration of culture and 
country. Culture is not related to your worldly relations 


Discrimination Is The Means To Self-realisation 159 


and practices. Culture is concerned with the feelings of 
your heart and your power to discriminate between what 
is good and what is bad. Hence, you should develop 
strong power of discrimination. This discrimination 
brings about many changes in the life of man. It is due 
to lack of discrimination that our culture has suffered 
a decline. And because of the decline of culture our 
country has become weak. Wrong cultural practices 
followed by the people are, in fact, the main cause 
for the weakness of a country. Today people do not 
follow the true culture of our country. Consequently, 
the Government also takes to wrong path. As you all 
know, different political parties today follow different 
cultural values and ideologies. But if they all work 
together for a common cause, the results are sure to 
be good. 


Give Up Craze For Fashions 


Once when I was a student, some political leaders 
approached Me and requested, “Raju, We understand 
that You write good poetry. We have arranged a meeting 
in Bukkapatnam where a large number of people are 
expected to come. We request You to please write a good 
song that can inspire the people.” Those were the days 
of the Second World War. Adolf Hitler was marching 
forward to conquer various countries in Europe. He was 
trying to invade Russia. India was then under the rule 
of the Britishers. Taking the situation into account, I 
wrote a small playlet. In that playlet, I kept a rubber 


160 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


doll in a cradle and sang the following song, rocking 
the cradle gently: 


Do not cry, my child, do not cry. 
If you cry, you will not be called a valiant son 
of Bharat. 
Go to sleep, my child, go to sleep. 
Did you get scared because the terrible Hitler 
has invaded the invincible Russia? 
Go to sleep, my child, go to sleep. 
Do not cry, my child, do not cry. 
For the Red Army is marching under Stalin. 
They will put an end to Hitler. 
Then what else is the reason for your crying? 
Is it because the countrymen lack unity? 
All the countrymen will unite and fight to win 
freedom; 
Go to sleep, my child, go to sleep. 

(Telugu song) 


I used to compose songs and make the children 
sing those songs in the village so that people might 
give up their craze for fashions and cultivate noble 
thoughts. The wrist watches had just arrived in those 
days. If anyone in the village wore a wrist watch, he 
was considered to be a great person. Not only that, 
gents used to keep a small moustache under their nose 
as a fashion. I composed a song on these fashions. 


Discrimination Is The Means To Self-realisation 161 


Oh folks! What are these times that have descended 
on us! 


People hang silver medallions from a leather strap 
on their left wrists — and call it fashion! 


Grotesque appearances are made that cannot be 
seen by the eyes — and they call it fashion! 


Long moustaches are cut to tiny patches under 
the nose — and they call it fashion! 
(Telugu song) 


Seeing all these fashions, I asked them, “My dear, 
why have you done this? Your moustache appears like 
two flies sitting on your upper lip. This is not good.” 
New fashions do not become prevalent all at once. These 
are the result of imitation; people see others and start 
imitating them. Gradually, this imitation changes into 
fashion for a particular period of time. See the influence 
of fashion on women! They have given up the use of 
auspicious turmeric and kumkum (vermillion) mark 
on the forehead and have started putting a miniscule 
dot which is hardly visible. All these fashions keep 
changing. How long does a fashion last? It lasts only 
for a few months. Similarly, fashions of youngsters 
and adults undergo change within a short period. 
As you all know, earlier bell bottom pants became a 
fashion for youngsters; these were tight from above 
and loose below like the shape of a bell. This fashion 
lasted only for a short time. After some time, pants of 
the shape of a pipe tightly sticking to the body came 


162 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


into fashion. Recognising that it was not good, people 
thereafter reverted to ordinary dress. In this manner, 
many unnecessary fashions appear from time to time 
like clouds in the sky which come and go. I corrected 
the people when they took to such fashions. Man should 
live like a human being. 


Unnecessary Changes Are Harmful 


Today many changes are being made in the field 
of education also. Many meaningless changes are 
being made in the syllabus. Authorities may thrust 
such changes from above. But, do they prepare the 
teachers who are responsible for putting these changes 
into practice? No, not at all. What can the students 
learn from such teachers? First of all, qualified teachers 
are required. Our university is making great efforts 
to prepare such qualified teachers. If the teachers are 
good, the students will also become good. 


Not only in the field of education, changes have 
now crept in to the area of health also. Earlier, people 
used pitchers, plates and pots made of clay by local 
artisans. After some time, stainless steel utensils replaced 
the clay utensils. But now plastic pitchers, plates and 
pots have come into vogue. These plastic articles have 
exposed man to great dangers. The plastic bags and other 
articles have created enormous waste material which 
is not biodegradable. Even if you bury it underground, 
it does not decompose and remains as it is even after 
many years. Much land is being spoiled by this plastic 


Discrimination Is The Means To Self-realisation 163 


waste. Vegetables grown in such land are harmful to 
man. In this way, many harmful changes have crept 
in to the life of man today. Therefore, we should not 
resort to unnecessary imitation and changes, particularly 
in the field of education. 


Living In The Present Is Most Important 


We should follow our indigenous system and 
experience the happiness of living in the present. Then 
our future will also become happy. Many people are 
worried about their future. Do not brood over the past; 
don’t worry about future. Past is past; forget the past; 
do not think about it. Present, is important. It is not 
ordinary present; it is Omnipresent. Many people worry 
about their past and future and spoil their present. 
We should make proper use of our present. Sathya 
Sai colleges are the only institutions which teach the 
students to make proper use of their present, though 
the environment in these institutions may appear to be 
like that of a rural institution. 


Future does not always bring happiness. And so far 
as the past is concerned, how much happiness have you 
experienced in it? Therefore, live happily in the present. 
Nothing is lost when you lose money. Acquisition of 
good qualities makes your mind steady. A steady mind is 
a good mind. It is the mind that brings about a change 
in the life of man. Even the parents do not know the 
mind of their children. The parents also should live in 
the present. What is the use of thinking about the past? 


164 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


Presently, our students have achieved great progress 
in many fields and set ideals for all. What should we 
do in the present? Follow this maxim in the present: 
Less luggage more comfort makes travel a pleasure. 
We should not worry about the past at all. Thinking 
about the past will not do any good to us. Therefore, 
we should lead our life in the present and achieve all- 
round progress. You should realise the significance of 
the word ‘present’. What does it mean? When you are 
in the class, you are present, otherwise you are absent. 
Absence will reduce your value. In every aspect of 
your life, present is important. 


You achieve good results in all subjects when you 
are present. Therefore, all of you should think about 
only present. Today many elders have fond memories 
of past times, thinking, “Our past time was so good, 
but everything has turned bad in the present time. 
In those days, children respected their elders; they 
conducted themselves with great humility. They revered 
their elders and learnt good things from them. In fact, 
there was no need to go to teachers; the grandmother 
in the house taught many good things to children. In 
ancient times, all led a happy life.” “Old is gold” is 
a proverb. True to this proverb, people in olden times 
were like pure gold. By their teachings, they helped 
the people to take to noble path. But today we have 
damaged this path. Therefore, we should repair this 
damage and restore the path again. 


Discrimination Is The Means To Self-realisation 165 


Love And Serve Your Motherland 


Today, wherever you go you see people fighting 
with one another. There is neither unity nor purity 
anywhere; it is enmity everywhere. Anybody you come 
across, you will see him in anger. You talk to someone, 
he will talk against you. We should therefore drive 
away the evil qualities like anger, jealousy, hypocrisy, 
etc. We should never harm anybody; we should not 
cause pain to anyone. Help Ever, Hurt Never. You can 
achieve anything through unity. Therefore, you should 
always stick to the noble path of unity. Why Subhas 
Chandra Bose had to leave the country? It was nothing 
but enmity. When does enmity arise? It arises when 
selfishness overtakes you. Though he had to leave the 
country, he fearlessly kept serving the people wherever 
he went. Our country is in dire need of such noble 
people. Our professors also said, “Swami, our students 
are very good. They can bring about many good 
changes in society. Many parents today are sending 
their children to overseas countries. But, why should 
they send them out? Instead they can remain in our 
country and bring about changes in the community.” 
Instead of earning 10,000 rupees a month abroad, it 
is better to be satisfied with 1,000 rupees in Bharat. 
In overseas countries, even pure water is scarce. Life 
is full of difficulties. Half of your earning will go as 
house rent. All other things are equally expensive. A 
small banana costs ten rupees! Wherefrom can you get 
so much money? How can you bring up your children? 


166 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


Impossible! In Bharat, your children would be happy 
and satisfied if you give them a simple food of rice and 
chutney. Forgetting this simple life in our own country, 
people want to go to foreign countries undergoing all 
sorts of difficulties. 


I have never visited any foreign country except 
East Africa. Even in East Africa, I spent most of My 
time seeing wild life in the forests and observed the 
good qualities of wild animals. There I saw large herds 
of elephants; they looked very beautiful and majestic. I 
offered bananas to some elephants which they accepted 
very gladly and wanted more of them. Their ears 
were as big as a winnowing pan. When they swished 
their ears, mosquitoes sitting even at a long distance 
would fly away. There were many zebras and giraffes 
also. They were happily moving in the forest. None 
of these wild animals causes any harm to man. They 
will be inimical towards us only when we approach 
them with the intention of harming them. Otherwise, 
they will be friendly with us and follow us like pets. 
I saw a group of lions sitting at one place with their 
young ones. Even when we were very close to them, 
they did not show any feeling of enmity. In this way, 
all the wild animals behaved in a very gentle manner. 
Your evil qualities are reflected in the animals. If your 
feelings are good, the snakes will also not harm you 
even if you were to lie down by their side. Otherwise 
your own pet cow may gore you with its horns. If a 
person is angry with you, what is the reason? It is only 


Discrimination Is The Means To Self-realisation 167 


reaction, reflection and resound of your own feelings. 
It is only the evil qualities of man which bring about 
a change in the gentle nature of animals, birds and 
beasts. Today there is hatred and conflict even between 
two sons of the same mother! What is the reason for 
this mutual hatred? Their evil qualities are responsible 
for this. We should never give room to such qualities. 


Cultivate Unshakeable Faith In God 


You are studying in a good college. You should 
uphold the good name of this college with your good 
conduct. If you want to earn a good name, you should 
join good company. “Tell me your company, I will tell 
you what you are’, it is said. As is your company, so 
you become. Hence, join good company. It is a great 
good fortune to be associated with good company. 
Therefore, you should join such good company and 
try to develop all-round goodness. Yesterday, the talks 
delivered by two of our MBA students were very good. 
Listening to them was a great pleasure to Me. We are 
very happy to have such good boys in our college. These 
two boys stood first in their class and were awarded 
gold medals. But you should not be satisfied with these 
awards and rewards. You should become good boys. 
Even the value of gold may diminish but not the value 
of goodness. Hence, you should cultivate goodness and 
earn a good name which will remain forever. 


First of all, you should develop self-confidence. 


168 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


If you have self-confidence everything will turn out to 
be good for you. Devotees like Dhruva, Prahlada and 
Radha led their lives with sacred feelings. Everything 
became good for them because they had good thoughts. 
Wicked Hiranyakasipu subjected Prahlada to all types 
of sufferings. He attempted to get Prahlada trampled 
by elephants. Prahlada continued to chant the divine 
name of Narayana. He was never afraid of elephants. 
He saw Narayana in elephants also. Hiranyakasipu threw 
him before snakes but he escaped unharmed. When he 
was pushed down from a mountain top and thrown 
into a deep sea, Lord Narayana held him in His arms 
and saved him. In this manner, one with faith in God 
will never be put to harm. Hence, you should develop 
unflinching faith. Your firm faith in God confers on you 
all types of knowledge. Where there is faith, there is 
love. Where there is love there is atma. Atma has no 
specific name or form. Similarly, faith has no form and 
divinity is also formless. Love is God. Live in Love. 
Truth is God, God is Truth. The entire creation has 
emerged from truth. 


The creation emerges from truth and merges into 
truth, 
Is there a place in the cosmos where truth does 
not exist? 
Visualise this pure and unsullied truth. 

(Telugu poem) 


Realisation of truth is sakshatkara (God-realisation). 


Discrimination Is The Means To Self-realisation 169 


Therefore, we should develop faith in this truth. No 
doubt, people do have faith but their faith is wavering. 
As is the faith, so is the result. If you have total faith, 
the results are bound to be good in all respects. When 
you are confronted with difficulties, you tend to lose 
your faith. You may lose anything but not faith. You 
should consider faith as your life. That is the path 
you should follow. You have a strong belief that your 
parents are your parents. Even if a thousand people tell 
you that they are not your parents, you will not agree 
with it. You must have such total faith in God also. 
God will go to any extent to help those who have such 
unshakeable faith in Him. Your faith in God should 
be total. We may have to undergo any number of 
difficulties and hardships, yet, our faith should remain 
firm. Ramadas worked as Tashildar (revenue officer). 
He prayed to Rama, “Swami, whatever revenue I have 
collected I have spent it in your service. He sang thus: 


Oh Ramachandra! I have spent ten thousand gold 
coins to adorn Mother Sita with a gold necklace 
and another ten thousand sovereigns to decorate 
Your brother Lakshmana with a gold belt. That 
crest jewel which adorns You cost me another ten 
thousand gold coins. Unmindful of my travails, 
You are flaunting the jewellery as if You got it 
with Your own money! 

(Telugu poem) 


The compassionate Lord Himself appeared before 


170 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


the king and paid the money due from Ramadas. Later 
on, Ramadas repented and prayed for forgiveness, 
saying, “Unable to bear the hardships of Your test I have 
spoken such harsh words. Oh Lord! Please forgive me.” 


One can achieve anything in life with the help of 
God’s grace. When you face all the tests of God with 
total faith and do your duty, you are sure to succeed. 
Do you know the depth of faith of overseas devotees? 
Many of them come to Puttaparthi and live in small 
hutments. Even then, they are very happy. It is not 
possible for anyone to describe their happiness which 
is the result of their unflinching faith. If you have such 
strong faith in God, He will take care of you wherever 
you are. 


God is your sole refuge wherever you may be, 
In a forest, in the sky, in a city or a village, on 
the top of a mountain or in the middle of deep 
sea. 

(Telugu poem) 


Study To Be Steady 


First and foremost you should develop confidence. 
Mere acquisition of knowledge is not enough. Your 
knowledge may be as vast as an ocean, your common 
sense may be as great as the mighty Himalayas, but 
if you do not have discrimination, then everything is 
useless. It is enough if you have discrimination. Before 
you undertake any task, always enquire, “Is this good 


Discrimination Is The Means To Self-realisation 171 


or bad, is this right or wrong?” You will come up in 
life if you develop this one quality in you. This itself is 
self-realisation. So, it is important to have discrimination 
first. Unfortunately, people use their discrimination to 
suit their self-interest. This individual discrimination 
varies from person to person. The same thing is 
viewed by ten people in ten different ways. You must 
adopt fundamental discrimination which is beneficial 
to society at large. Only fundamental discrimination 
will give you self-satisfaction which in turn will lead 
you to self-realisation. So, proper discrimination is of 
prime importance for self-realisation. 


Students, you are like pure gold. You are all 
very good. But sometimes you encounter waves of 
disturbance and doubts in your lives. Many a time, 
your faith is shaken by some aberrations. Do not pay 
attention to these. They will go as they come. Come 
what may, you must remain fearless and steady. Your 
studies are meant to develop steadiness in you. Study 
to be steady. Keep this always in your mind. Look at 
these two boys. How happy they are! In fact, all the 
MBA students are good. It is not possible to say that 
one is good and the other is bad. Their singing also 
was so good. They are intelligent, virtuous and full of 
vigour. They will be an asset wherever they go. Such 
boys should stay back to serve the institution so that they 
can impart their goodness to others. There is nothing 
great in going abroad and earning a lot of money with 
your academic qualifications. Money comes and goes, 
morality comes and grows. You should develop such 


172 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


morality. It is enough if you have morality. What can 
money do? Can you eat money? Unless you spend 
it to buy something, you cannot satisfy your hunger. 
Hence, money is not important, morality is important. 
Faith comes first, job next. Do not give up your sacred 
culture and love for your motherland. Subhas Chandra 
Bose never forgot his motherland even when he was 
staying in other countries. You should proudly proclaim, 
“This is my motherland.” Do not tarnish the image of 
the sacred culture of your land. Be happy. 


-2Ist Anniversary Of The School Of Business 
Management, 22-8-2007, Prasanthi Nilayam. 


Students should decide for themselves what 
path they would like to take and what destination 
they would like to reach. They should guide their 
own conduct in consonance with that decision. They 
should regard service to the community as their 
main objective. Discipline and adherence to sacred 


work must be promoted by students. Discipline 
is the most important path for the students. They 
should respect their parents and their motherland. 

Baba 





16 


Eternal Truths Should Form The 
Subject Of Books 


LL the former students who are working here 

are discharging their duties with steadfastness 
and devotion. It is because of their hard work that this 
Book Stall has made great progress. It is not enough if 
you merely bring out books; you should put into practice 
what is given in the books. You should understand 
and assimilate all the teachings that are contained in 
the books and practise them. Pustaka (book), mastaka 
(head) and hasta (hand) should be in harmony. 


Reading Without Practising Is Useless 


What the world needs today is service. You should 
love everybody. Love All, Serve All. This is what 
you are supposed to do. Whatever work you may do, 
do it with the feeling that you are doing the work of 
God. There is no place in this world where God is not 


174 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


present. He is all-pervasive. Never doubt that God is 
here and not there. He is everywhere. God is in you, 
with you, above you, below you and around you. 
Whatever happens is only due to the Will of God, and 
not merely by your own efforts. (Bhagawan showing 
His handkerchief) Here you see a cloth. It may appear 
to be a cloth, but in reality it is not so; it is a bundle 
of threads. Further, the threads are made out of cotton. 
So, first cotton, next thread and then cloth. Similarly, 
you are not one person but three: the one you think 
you are, the one others think you are and the one you 
really are. 


With regard to a book also, there are three persons 
involved in it: the one who writes it, the one who prints 
it and the one who reads it. Merely bringing out books 
is not important. It is more important that you should 
bring out good books which broaden the vision of the 
people in the wide world. We should not be narrow- 
minded; we should develop broad feelings. We should 
publish books which are essential for everybody. Money 
is not important; morality is important. Money comes 
and goes, morality comes and grows. We should develop 
morality. Many books are written, many people read 
them, but it is all useless if nothing is put into practice. 
We should put into practice at least one principle given 
in the books we read. There may be many items of food 
in the plate, but our hunger is not satiated by merely 
repeating the names of those items. Take at least one 
item and eat it. A large number of books have been 


Eternal Truths Should Form The Subject Of Books 175 


written on Swami. But, are you putting into practice 
even one principle contained in them? No. What is 
the use of reading books if you do not put anything 
into practice? If you read ten teachings in a book, put 
at least one of them into practice. Only then will you 
derive the necessary strength and capability from your 
reading. 


Writers And Publishers Should Have Purity Of Heart 


Our Rajan is putting in a lot of efforts to develop 
the Book Trust. He is doing much more than what is 
expected of a person of his age. Students are also co- 
operating, thereby creating a congenial environment 
which is conducive for the smooth functioning of the 
Trust. You may consider any workplace, good results 
are possible only through co-operation. What sort of 
co-operation is required? It should be a co-operation 
which is based on heart-to-heart relationship between 
each other. Not only that, you should know each other’s 
mind and develop perfect understanding. 


All are one, be alike to everyone. All should work 
with unity. One may write the book, another may print 
it and yet another may sell it. But all should work in 
perfect harmony. When there is unity, there will be peace 
and harmony. How can you develop purity? Purity is 
not possible when there are negative feelings in your 
mind. First of all, there should be unity. Where there is 
unity, there will be purity. Where there is purity, divinity 


176 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


will manifest there. Therefore, first of all develop unity 
and purity. Then only can you attain divinity. Hence, 
you should all be united. What I see is not the pustaka 
(book) that you print; I see your mastaka (head). Rajan 
brings so many books and other publications to Me that 
are printed by the Trust. But these do not give Me any 
satisfaction. I see the purity of the heart of the person 
who has written the book. The taste of the food will 
be good if it is cooked in a clean vessel. Cleanliness 
of the vessel is very important. So is the purity of the 
heart. Therefore, make your heart pure and sacred. 


Control Your Desires 


Everything may change in the world, but the heart 
does not change. Here I am referring to the spiritual 
heart, not the physical heart. Spiritual heart signifies 
God. God has no specific form. He is referred to as 
atma which is present everywhere. But you cannot see 
it when it is clouded by your thoughts and desires. The 
moon is always present in the sky, but you will not 
be able to see it when it is covered by clouds. You 
cannot deny the presence of the moon just because it 
is covered by clouds. If you want to see the moon, you 
have to wait for some time. You will see it once the 
clouds move away. Chandrama manaso jataha chaksho 
suryo ajayata (the moon was born out of the mind and 
the sun out of the eyes of the Supreme Being). The 
atma is shining like moon in the sky of our heart. But 


Eternal Truths Should Form The Subject Of Books 177 


sometimes, it is covered by the clouds of our thoughts 
and desires. In some seasons, you find thick clouds. 
When there are thick clouds, you are not able to see 
the moon. In the same manner, the atma is immanent 
in everyone. You are unable to see the atma because 
of the thick clouds of your thoughts and desires. So, 
you should control your desires. Less luggage more 
comfort makes travel a pleasure. 


You can experience immense happiness if you 
reduce the luggage of your desires which overshadow 
your happiness. When you reduce your desires, 
everything will become good for you. This is referred 
to as vairagya (renunciation) in vedanta. What is meant 
by vairagya? It means reducing your desires. Do not 
go on increasing your desires day by day. As our body 
grows old, our life-span goes on decreasing with every 
passing day. Hence, it will be very beneficial for us if 
we reduce our desires. You can be always happy when 
you reduce your desires. You may read any number of 
books and listen to all kinds of sacred texts. But first 
and foremost, you have to reduce your desires. Only 
then can you derive benefit from them. Everyone has 
desires, but some are necessary and some are not. When 
we wake up in the morning, what is it that we do? We 
get up from the bed with a lot of desires. 


Oh man! You struggle hard in life merely for the 


178 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


sake of filling your belly. You acquire myriad types 
of knowledge from various fields. Examine and 
enquire for yourself what great happiness have you 
achieved by spending all the time from dawn to 
dusk in acquiring worldly knowledge and earning 
wealth while forgetting God. 

(Telugu poem) 


Develop Steady Devotion 


Whatever you may do will be a mere waste if you 
forget God. Keep God as your highest goal. God is not 
present in a far off land. He is present everywhere. 
People may say anything, you may face any number of 
difficulties, but you should never forget God. Only when 
you have such pure, steady and unwavering devotion 
can you be called a true devotee. You cannot call 
yourself a devotee if you have wavering and unsteady 
devotion. Your devotion should be full and total like 
an ocean which is ever full and does not diminish at 
all. On the one hand, its water keeps evaporating and 
on the other, rivers keep pouring water into it with the 
result it always maintains its fullness. Make your heart 
like an ocean. Do not allow it to be disturbed by the 
waves of your desires. Any number of waves may arise, 
but the ocean maintains its pristine state. Hence, keep 
your heart always pure, steady and selfless. 


Our Rajan is straining hard to bring about changes 
in the publication of books. He brought out many 
good books on 80th Birthday. Do your work without 


Eternal Truths Should Form The Subject Of Books 179 


any expectation. Whatever you do, do it as an offering 
to God. Sarva karma bhagavad preetyartham (do all 
actions to please God). That is true devotion. Do not 
observe differences such as, “This is my work, that 
is Swami’s work and that work pertains to Mandir or 
public.” All work is God’s work. One who writes the 
book, one who prints it and one who reads it, all are 
one. Never entertain any feelings of difference. You 
can develop steady devotion only when you do not 
observe differences. Your devotion should always be 
steady. Devotion that is wavering is of no use. What 
happens when you have a wavering mind? Your entire 
life becomes unstable. Do not give room to unsteadiness 
of your mind. Desires and thoughts may arise. But we 
should use our power of discrimination to determine, 
“Is it good or bad? Is it right or wrong?” When you 
know that something is right, follow it; never leave it. 
Your discrimination is like a signal. Never ignore this 
signal. When your inner self tells you that something is 
right, you should follow it scrupulously, irrespective of 
what others say. Let people talk whatever they want, but 
we should remain steady in our mind. Greatness does 
not lie in bringing out books; understand the essence 
contained in them. Essence is of prime importance. 
There can be no book without matter. Similarly, there 
can be no matter without subject. What type of subjects 
should you select? You should select such subjects 
which are related to the heart. Ignoring those subjects 
will amount to ignoring the voice of the heart. 


180 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


Writers should write good books which are 
beneficial for readers. We should not print substandard 
books which create debasing worldly desires in readers. 
What is the fate of such books? Nobody reads them. 
Eternal truths should form the subject of books, which 
get imprinted on the hearts of readers. We should 
perform actions without deviating from the path of 
Sathya (truth) and Dharma (righteousness). Sathya and 
Dharma are not different from each other. Sathyannasti 
paro Dharma (There is no Dharma greater than 
adherence to Truth). Sathya and Dharma are one and 
the same. Without Dharma, there cannot be Sathya 
and without Sathya, there cannot be Dharma. They 
are interdependent and are like mirror images of each 
other. We can achieve anything when we follow Sathya 
and Dharma. When we make Sathya and Dharma as 
our goal, we will certainly achieve the object of our 
life. Today it is not possible to explain this subject 
in detail due to time constraint. I wanted to tell you 
something related to publication of books only. What 
type of books should you publish? You should publish 
only good books. You have listened to many discourses 
and read many books. Treasure all that you have heard 
in your heart and try to put them into practice. 


Discourse In Sri Sathya Sai Books And 
Publications Trust Office, 24-8-2007, 
Prasanthi Nilayam. 


17 


All Avatars Are Embodiments Of 
Pure Consciousness 


The creation emerges from truth and merges 
into truth, 
Is there a place in the cosmos where truth does 
not exist? 
Visualise this pure and unsullied truth. 

(Telugu poem) 


NE has to realise what is meant by Suddha 

Satwa (pure consciousness). You have 
witnessed the creation of Hiranyagarbha Lingas several 
times by Me. That Hiranyagarbha Linga 1s a symbol of 
pure consciousness. It is omnipresent. (Swami created 
a Hiranyagarbha Linga and showed it to all present.) 
Look, this is verily Suddha Satwa (pure consciousness). 


There is no human being in this world, who is 


182 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


free from desires. Every human being has some desire 
or the other. There is no place in this universe where 
this pure consciousness is not present. It is therefore 
a mistake to limit that omnipresent pure consciousness 
to a particular form. All are embodiments of pure 
consciousness. It is present in all human beings in a 
miniscule form like an atom. The pure consciousness 
assumes different forms in different ages as avatars. It 
manifested as Narasimha, Vamana, etc., in the Kritha 
yuga. The same pure consciousness assumed the form 
of Sri Rama in Treta yuga and Sri Krishna in Dwapara 
yuga. Sri Rama was accompanied by Sita in Treta Yuga, 
who led the life of an ideal wife and set an example 
to mankind in chastity. Sita, in spite of the great 
difficulties she encountered while living in exile and 
spending ten long months in captivity in Lanka, never 
lost her poise. She steadfastly held on to Ramanama 
with single-minded devotion. She never wavered even 
for a moment. She gave up food and sleep totally and 
constantly contemplated on Ramanama. She could not 
visualise any other form except that of Sri Rama, who 
was Ekatma sarva bhutantaratma (one atma that dwells 
in all beings). Even in birds and beasts, she was seeing 
only the form of Sri Rama. That one atmic principle 
is referred to as Hiranyagarbha, which is pure gold. 
Pure gold is always referred to as 24 carat gold. 


God is always said to manifest 16 facets. Hence, 
He is referred to as Purna Tatwa (Embodiment of 


All Avatars Are Embodiments Of Pure Consciousness 183 
fullness). 


Poornamadah poornamidam, 
Poornat poornamudachyate, 
Poornasyapoornamadaya, 
Poornamevavashishyate. 


(That is full, this is full. When the full is taken out of 
the full, what remains is again the full.) 
(Sanskrit sloka) 


Desires Keep One Away From Divinity 


During the period of Rama’s exile in the forest, 
Mareecha, the demon, donned the form of a golden 
deer to entice Sita. Sita knew very well that a golden 
deer could not be found in the world. However, keeping 
with her role in the Divine drama of Ramayana she 
expressed a desire to possess the golden deer and 
requested Sri Rama to capture it for her. Rama then 
had to run after that golden deer, in order to make her 
happy. When Sita thus developed a desire for a worldly 
object, the very next moment she was separated from 
Rama, the Divinity. It is common knowledge that the 
more you develop desires for worldly things, the greater 
you become distant from Divinity. Less luggage more 
comfort, makes travel a pleasure. Therefore, we have 
to reduce our luggage of desires. Sita had all along 
reduced her desires in order to be in close proximity 
to Rama. But the moment she developed a desire for 
golden deer, Rama moved away from her. She could 


184 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


not bear the agony of that separation. Day in and day 
out, she was contemplating only on Rama and none 
else. No other thought developed in her mind. That 
is how she became a great pathivratha. Finally when 
Rama killed Ravana and released her from captivity, 
He subjected Sita to a test, before taking her back 
into His fold. He directed her to enter the fire and 
come out unscathed. The god of fire appeared before 
Rama and testified, “Sita is a great pathivratha. She 
does not at all think of any other matter but constantly 
contemplates on Your name.” Why did Rama put Sita 
to such a test? It is only to make the world know about 
her chastity. Later, when Rama returned to Ayodhya 
and started ruling His kingdom, a washerman engaged 
in a quarrel with his wife commented, “Sri Rama took 
back His wife Sita who lived for ten months in Lanka 
in the captivity of Ravana. I am not so foolish.” The 
news reached Rama. Again Rama put Sita to test by 
forsaking her. He knew that she was a great pathivratha, 
but he took decision to make the world know about her 
chastity. There is no other individual who can equal 
the chastity of Sita. Rama wanted to prove the chastity 
and devotion of Sita to the world. 


Krishna Was A Man Of Character 


In the Dwapara yuga that followed, Sri Krishna 
performed several /eelas. But, none was able to 
recognise His Divine nature. The gopikas were much 
older in age to Sri Krishna. At the time when Krishna 
was performing Divine /eelas in the company of gopikas, 


All Avatars Are Embodiments Of Pure Consciousness 185 


He was a young lad of seven years. How can anyone 
attribute any bad motive or impropriety to such /eelas? 
He played with them just as any boy of seven years 
would play with his mother. Unable to realise this truth, 
people created several misapprehensions and branded 
Krishna as ‘gopikalola’ (one who indulged in pranks 
with the gopikas, the milkmaids). They tried to insult 
Him, attributing bad motives to His actions. In fact, 
Lord Krishna too manifested His divinity on several 
occasions through His /eelas and established ideal 
humanness, like the earlier avatar. Sri Krishna always 
maintained His humanness. The gopis and the eight 
consorts like Sathyabhama were all meant to declare 
the divinity and glory of the Divine /ee/as to the world. 
They are not to be taken as ordinary women. Krishna 
Himself was a man of exemplary character and noble 
qualities. 


God incarnates in several forms for the purpose of 
protecting His devotees and transforming their minds. In 
Dwapara yuga, He incarnated as Krishna in answer to 
the prayer of Devaki and Vasudeva. He grew up in the 
house of Nanda and Yashoda and constantly protected 
them. He destroyed the demon Kamsa and fulfilled the 
yearning of Kuchela, his childhood friend and devotee. 
Kuchela, though a childhood friend of Lord Krishna, 
suffered acute poverty. He could not provide even a 
square meal to his wife and children. He, therefore, 
approached Lord Krishna on the advice of his wife 
to seek relief from poverty. But, the moment he saw 


186 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


Krishna he forgot the purpose of his visit and told Him 
“Oh Krishna! I don’t need anything. I am aware that 
you protect not only me, but the entire universe. You 
incarnated for the purpose of establishing Dharma and 
protecting mankind.” He began extolling Lord Krishna 
thus: 


You are beyond all description and human 
comprehension. Is it possible to estimate Your 
glory and splendour? I have been waiting for Your 
grace. Oh Lord! Listen to my prayer and redeem 
me. You are the one who brought back to life the 
dead son of Your preceptor. You are the one who 
suppressed the serpent Kaliya, freed Vasudeva and 
Devaki and saved Droupadi from humiliation. You 
fulfilled Kuchela’s desires, You made ugly-looking 
Kubja beautiful. You protected the Pandavas and 
saved the 16,000 Gopikas. You are beyond all 
description and human comprehension. Krishna, 
it is not possible for even Brahma to describe 
Your glory. I have been praying for Your grace. 
(Telugu song) 


Do Not Confine God To One Name And Form 


God is Ekatma Swarupa (embodiment of one 
Divine Principle, which is indivisible). There is no 
parallel to Him. He dons all forms and He permeates all 
bodies. Easwara sarva bhutanam (God is the indweller 
of all beings). Jsavasyam idam jagat (the entire world 
is permeated by God). In fact, it is the weakness of 


All Avatars Are Embodiments Of Pure Consciousness 187 


human beings to confine Him to a particular name and 
form and start describing Him in many ways. Let us 
take, for example, the story of that Divine principle that 
incarnated as Sri Rama. ‘Dasaratha’ was the name of 
the father of Rama. What is the inner meaning of this 
name, Dasaratha? It means a human body comparable 
to a chariot, having ten indrivas (senses) as horses. 
Kausalya was the first wife of King Dasaratha. He 
had two other wives, Sumithra and Kaikeyi. Kausalya 
gave birth to a female child, named Santha, who was 
given in adoption to a king. She had no further issues. 
The family custom in those days was that a husband 
cannot marry for a second time without the consent 
of the first wife. Dasaratha therefore took permission 
from Kausalya to take Sumithra as his second wife. 
The name Sumithra implies a good friend to one and 
all. She had a pure heart. She too could not bear a son 
for him. He therefore approached the King of Kekaya 
Kingdom with a request to give his daughter Kaika 
in marriage to him. The King of Kekaya kingdom, 
however, insisted on a promise from Dasaratha that 
the son born to Kaika shall be crowned as the King of 
Ayodhya. He asked, “Oh Dasaratha, You already have 
two wives. Now you wish to marry for a third time. 
For what purpose? Is it not for begetting a son who can 
tule the kingdom? Then, can you make a promise that 
the son born to my daughter will be made the king of 
Ayodhya?” Dasaratha hesitated to give a promise. He 
replied that he would come back to him after sometime. 
He straightaway went to his two wives and consulted 


188 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


them enquiring, “Will you both agree to the condition 
that the son born to Kaika whom I wish to marry now 
should be made the King of Ayodhya?” Will you both 
agree for this condition?” Kausalya and Sumithra readily 
agreed for the same. They informed King Dasaratha, 
“We will be happy if you beget a son who can rule 
the kingdom.” Dasaratha then conveyed their consent 
to the King of Kekaya and married his daughter Kaika. 
He returned to his kingdom along with Kaika. 


King Dasaratha subsequently performed the 
Puthra Kameshti Yaga, seeking to be blessed with a 
son. The Yajna Purusha who emerged from the Yajna 
Kunda handed over a vessel containing the sacred 
payasam (sweet pudding) as prasadam to be partaken 
by Dasaratha’s wives. He instructed King Dasaratha to 
distribute the payasam equally between his three wives. 
He did so in consultation with the Pundits. Kausalya 
and Kaikeyi felt very happy to receive the payasam. 
Kausalya was the eldest wife of King Dasaratha and 
it was but natural that a son born to her should be 
the King of Ayodhya. Kaika too had a claim to the 
kingdom as a result of the promise made by the King 
to her father before marrying her, that her son would 
be the future king. However, Sumithra had no such 
claims. She took her share of the payasam and kept it 
on the parapet wall of the open terrace of her residence. 
She wanted to partake of it after drying her hair, as 
she just had a head bath. There were no electric fans 
or dryers in those days, as of now. Meanwhile, an 


All Avatars Are Embodiments Of Pure Consciousness 189 


eagle descended from the sky with great speed and 
took away the cup containing her share of payasam. 
The eagle dropped the cup containing payasam on a 
mountain where Anjana Devi lived. She picked up that 
cup and consumed the payasam happily. As a result, 
Hanuman was born to her. 


Sumithra was very unhappy that she lost her cup 
of payasam. She went down and informed Kausalya 
about the incident. Kausalya counselled her saying, 
“Oh! Dear younger sister! You need not feel sorry. I 
will give a part of my share of the payasam.” Kaika 
too promised to give a part of her share. Such was the 
love between the wives in those days. Kausalya and 
Kaikeyi then poured some payasam from their cups 
into one of Sumithra. All the three then went to the 
Purohit (chief priest) to seek his blessings. The Purohit 
blessed the three queens saying, “This is the most 
auspicious moment for you to partake of the payasam.” 
The three queens partook of the payasam as directed 
by the Purohit. King Dasaratha’s first wife Kausalya 
gave birth to a son, who was named Rama. Kaikeyi 
too gave birth to a son and he was named Bharatha. 
Sumithra, however, had two sons, born out of the share 
of payasam given to her by the two queens Kausalya 
and Kaikeyi. She realised soon the reason for having 
two sons. 


True to her name, Sumithra was a woman of noble 
qualities. She then decided that the son born out of the 


190 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


share of payasam given to her by Kausalya, namely, 
Lakshmana should always follow Rama. Similarly, the 
other son born out of the share of payasam given by 
Kaikeyi, namely, Sathrughna should serve Bharatha. 
Sumithra called her two sons to her side and instructed 
them accordingly. From then onwards, Lakshmana 
became a constant follower of Rama, while Sathrughuna 
followed Bharatha, with the blessings of their mother. 
Thus, all the four brothers were happily spending their 
time. Lakshmana could not leave the company of Rama 
even for a moment; so was Sathrughna’s, yearning for 
Bharatha’s company. 


When Rama started to leave for the forest as per 
the command of King Dasaratha, Lakshmana was the 
first person to accompany him on his own volition. 
Bharatha and Sathrughna were not present in Ayodhya 
then. Once when Rama and Lakshmana were walking 
in the Dandakaranaya, Lakshmana suddenly felt dejected 
and told Rama “Dear elder brother, Why this exile in 
the forest for us! Why should we leave Ayodhya and 
undergo so many difficulties in this forest? Come, let us 
get back to Ayodhya and lead a comfortable life there.” 
Realising the reason for Lakshmana’s strange behaviour, 
Rama held the hand of Lakshmana lovingly and said, 
“Lakshmana, do not be hasty in your conclusions. 
Come, come along with Me.” So saying, He brought 
him out of that place by walking some distance. Then 
Lakshmana regained his poise. He realised his mistake 
and begged Rama to pardon him. Then Rama pacified 


All Avatars Are Embodiments Of Pure Consciousness 191 


Lakshmana saying, “Look, these are not really your 
thoughts. This is the effect of the place through which 
we passed just now. Several Rakshasas (demons) tread 
this forest. Their demonic qualities entered you. I know 
very well that your heart is very sacred and pure.” 


Once when Rama, Lakshmana and Sita were 
living in the forest by the side of a river in a beautiful 
Parnasala surrounded by fruit-bearing trees, a golden 
deer started moving in the vicinity. Sita was enchanted 
by its beauty and developed a desire to possess that 
golden deer and keep it under her care. She requested 
Rama to catch that deer and bring it to the Parnasala. 
Rama obliged her request and went after the deer, 
leaving behind Lakshmana to guard her. The deer played 
hide and seek with Rama and took Him deep into the 
forest. When Rama found that the deer was eluding 
Him, He shot an arrow at it. The golden deer was none 
other than Mareecha, who assumed that form to draw 
Rama away from Sita. While dying, Mareecha, imitating 
the voice of Rama, cried loudly, “Ha! Lakshmana! 
Ha! Sita!” Sita heard these words and became agitated 
and asked Lakshmana to go and find out what had 
happened to Rama. Lakshmana tried to explain and 
convince Sita that no danger had befallen Rama and 
that He was safe. But, Sita was not convinced. She 
implored, Lakshmana to go immediately in search 
of Rama. She even used harsh words saying, “Oh! 
Lakshmana! Perhaps you wish to make me your wife 
when Rama dies.” Unable to bear the words uttered by 


192 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


Sita, Lakshmana decided to go in search of Rama. But, 
before leaving, he drew a line around the Parnasala 
and told Sita, “Oh Mother, I am going in search of 
Rama. Both Rama and myself will not be available 
in the ashram to protect you. I therefore request you 
not to cross this line under any circumstances.” She 
agreed to it. The moment Lakshmana left that place, 
Ravana came there and begged for food saying he was 
very hungry. Sita felt very sorry on hearing the word 
‘hunger’. She decided that it was her duty to offer 
food to a hungry person. She therefore invited him to 
come in. But, Ravana was very much afraid to cross 
the Lakshmana Rekha. He dared not cross the line, 
but started shouting ‘hungry, hungry’. Then Sita was 
constrained to cross the Lakshmana Rekha and come out 
to offer food to Ravana. Immediately, Ravana abducted 
Sita and took her away in his chariot. 


By the time Rama and Lakshmana returned to the 
Parnasala, Sita was not to be found there. Rama then 
asked Lakshmana why he left Sita alone and came in 
search of Him. Lakshmana replied, “Oh elder brother, 
she talked very bad words to me. I could not bear those 
abuses. She accused me that I was entertaining the 
idea of taking her as my wife in the event of Rama’s 
death.” When Rama heard about these harsh words 
uttered by Sita, He was deeply hurt. He could not 
believe that Sita whom Lakshmana was treating as his 
own mother could hurl such abuses on him. He realised 
that Lakshmana could not bear such insinuations and 


All Avatars Are Embodiments Of Pure Consciousness 193 


only for that reason he left her alone in the ashram 
and came in search of Him. In fact, after Lakshmana 
left the ashram, Sita too was deeply distressed at her 
own behaviour towards Lakshmana, She wailed, 


Oh! Lakshmana! My brother-in-law dear! 
I spoke bad words about you. Oh! Man of noble 
qualities! 
Unable to bear those words and deeply hurt 
Did you move away from me? 

(Telugu song) 


She begged to be pardoned for her unbecoming 
behaviour. But, alas! What had happened had already 
happened. The damage had already been done. Ravana 
abducted Sita and took her along with him. 


Subsequently, Rama waged a battle against Ravana 
to retrieve Sita from his captivity. A fierce battle was 
going on. One day, during the battle, Lakshmana fell 
unconscious. Hanuman then went on his mission to bring 
the Sanjivini herb, so that the life-restoring herb could 
revive Lakshmana. He could not locate the particular 
herb on the mountain and therefore he lifted the entire 
mountain and started returning to the battlefield. He had 
to pass over the city of Ayodhya on his way to Lanka. 
The residents of that city wondered who could be that 
monkey carrying the whole mountain? Bharatha was 
at that time pining alone, worried about his brother 
Rama and his life in the forest. He saw Hanuman 


194 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


moving with the mountain in his palm in the sky and 
inferred that it must be a Rakshasa proceeding on a 
wicked mission. Seizing his bow, he shot an arrow 
aimed at Hanuman. Immediately, Hanuman fell down 
with a shrill cry ‘Rama’! Bharatha ran towards him 
and learnt about the story of Hanuman’s mission and 
its urgency. He informed Bharatha, “Oh noble one! 
Rama is engaged in a battle against Ravana, to release 
Sita from his captivity. Lakshmana fell unconscious 
in that battlefield. In order that he may be revived I 
am carrying this Sanjivini mountain to that place, as 
per the command of Rama. Since I could not locate 
the particular life-restoring herb, I am carrying the 
mountain itself.” Bharatha repented for his hasty act 
and Hanuman set on his mission once again. 


Sumithra, the mother of Lakshmana came to 
know about the incident. Though it saddened her for 
a while, she quickly regained her composure. Sumithra 
was a noble lady. No one has attempted to describe 
her qualities so far in the Ramayana. Not only she 
comforted herself, but she also counselled Kausalya 
saying, “Oh elder sister, You need not feel sorry that 
Rama is engaged in a battle against Ravana. Sri Rama 
is not an ordinary person. He is a great warrior, who 
can conquer the entire world and rule over it. Hence, 
Rama Himself will protect Lakshmana.” Meanwhile, 
Lakshmana’s wife Urmila also came to know about 
the incident and she was happy that her husband was 
under the divine care and protection of Rama. Urmila 


All Avatars Are Embodiments Of Pure Consciousness 195 


too was a noble and courageous woman. At the time 
when Lakshamana started to accompany Rama to the 
forest, she offered her pranams to Lakshamana and 
advised, “You do not waste your time thinking about 
me. You engage yourself in the service of Rama all the 
while. Do not neglect your duty in the least.” At that 
time she was painting a sketch of Rama’s coronation. 
Such was the nobility of Urmila. Thus, Sumithra, the 
mother, and Urmila, the wife of Lakshmana were all 
great and noble women. It is only because of such noble 
women, the four brothers Rama, Lakshmana, Bharatha 
and Sathrughna were happy and safe. 


Hanuman took leave of Bharatha and the people 
who had gathered there saying, “Very soon Ravana 
will be defeated in the battle and we will all return 
to Ayodhya safely.” Bharatha spread the news of the 
whereabouts of Rama, Lakshmana and Sita to all the 
people of the city of Ayodhya. Everyone was happy 
that Rama, Lakshmana and Sita were safe and they 
thanked Hanuman who brought the news. 


Soon, Hanuman appeared in the sky over the 
battlefield carrying the Sanjivini mountain on his 
upraised palm. He touched the ground and with the help 
of the life-restoring plants, Lakshmana was revived. 
Thereafter Rama, Lakshmana and the Vanara chiefs 
assembled on the battlefield and discussed the strategy 
for defeating Ravana and his army. 


196 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


During the battle, Ravana’s son Meghnath too 
fought valiantly, but was killed later. Then came the 
turn of Ravana. On the advice of Vibhishana, Rama 
shot an arrow right below the navel of Ravana and he 
breathed his last, within two minutes. That was the end 
of the great Rama-Ravana battle. 


The news of the fall of Ravana was conveyed to 
Sita by Hanuman. As per the command of Sri Rama, she 
was brought to the presence of Rama with all respect 
and reverence, by the vanaras. The vanaras had no 
opportunity to see her before. Hence, they were jumping 
over the shoulders of one another to have a glimpse 
of her. They prostrated before her and felt very happy. 
Now, it was time for her to meet her beloved Lord. She 
walked slowly towards Rama. When she came within 
a short range, Rama declared that she had to enter the 
fire and come out unscathed before she could be taken 
into His fold. As per Rama’s command, the vanaras 
collected dry sticks and fuel for lighting and feeding 
the fire for the rite. The fire was lit. Sita went round 
the fire and before leaping into it took a vow saying, 
“Oh Receiver of sacred offerings! By thought, word 
and deed I have not dwelt in my mind on anyone other 
than Rama, my Lord. I am the daughter of earth and 
the chaste wife of Rama. If that be so, may I come 
out of this fire unscathed.” So saying, she entered the 
fire. Immediately, the fire god appeared there along 
with Sita and offered her at the feet of Rama, saying, 
“Oh Rama, You are the omniscient Lord. You know 


All Avatars Are Embodiments Of Pure Consciousness 197 


very well the pure heart of Sita. How then could you 
not recognise her purity?” Rama declared, “It is true 
that I am aware how pure and chaste Sita is. Yet, I 
have a responsibility to make her purity known to the 
world. It is only to prove her unblemished character 
to the world that I ordered her to enter the fire and 
come out unscathed.” 


When Sita came out of fire unscathed, the gathering 
of vanaras and others there and the gods above 
expressed their joy by loudly clapping and sounding 
heavenly drums and trumpets. Sita bowed in reverence 
to one and all. Rama walked a few steps and brought 
her near Him by holding her hand. Thereafter, an aerial 
chariot (Vimana) by name Pushpaka was brought. 
Bharatha made Rama, Sita, Lakshmana, Sugriva and 
Vibhishana seated in the Vimana and brought them 
to Ayodhya. The people of Ayodhya were extremely 
happy to welcome their dear Lord Rama and loving 
Sita, whom they did not see for 14 long years. They 
brought garlands to welcome them, but they were 
confused in locating Rama. Bharatha sitting in front 
as the charioteer resembled Rama in all respects, since 
for fourteen long years he constantly contemplated on 
Rama. Yad bhavam tad bhavati (as 1s the feeling, so is 
the result). Immediately, Bharatha drew their attention 
to the real Rama. The people of Ayodhya garlanded 
Rama profusely and welcomed Him to the city. They 
danced and sang in ecstasy, singing the song, “Rama! 
Kodanda Rama !” 


198 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


Finally, Sri Rama was crowned the King of 
Ayodhya. This is the story of Ramayana. The essence 
of Ramanama (the holy name of Rama) is unparalleled 
and unique. This is the only truth. Rama never went 
back on His word. His word is truth. His word and the 
path that He tread were very auspicious. The people of 
Ayodhya conscientiously followed the word of Rama 
and tread the path shown by Him and made their lives 
sanctified. You all know that the story of Rama dates 
back to thousands of years. In spite of passage of such 
a long time, people still chant Ramanama. There is no 
village in Bharath where there is no temple for Rama 
or the Ramanama is not chanted. The Ramanama is 
no ordinary name. It is so sacred. 


Dear students! You might have read several stories. 
They are all stories only! But, the story of Rama is 
very sacred. Hence, you all chant Ramanama at all 
times. This is the gift I would like to hand over to 
you today. Today is the holy Krishnashtami day. The 
chanting of Ramanama is very important on this day 
also. The divinity of Rama and Krishna Avatars is not 
different. Both the Avatars represent the same Divine 
Principle. Hence, you may take any name and chant 
that name constantly. You can also chant ‘Ramakrishna’. 
Or, you can chant ‘Sai Rama’ or ‘Sai Krishna’, with 
love for Swami (Bhagawan Sri Sathya Sai Baba). You 
may pursue any type of education and acquire high 
academic degrees; yet, you should not give up chanting 
the divine name. You should not forget the divine name. 


All Avatars Are Embodiments Of Pure Consciousness 199 


The mere chanting of the divine name is enough. It will 
take you across the ocean of samsara. It will relieve 
you of all the sorrows and difficulties. The Nama is 
like a bridge, crossing which you can go to any place. 


Krishnashtami, 4-9-2007, 
Prasanthi Nilayam. 


Control of the senses is most important. In 
fact, this is the basic difference between a man 
and an animal. Only if man can control his senses, 
can he be better than an animal. One should not 
let his mind go uncontrolled. One should control 
and train the mind in such a way that it will be 
subservient to him. For the process, an amount of 
Yoga is necessary. Students like you should promote 


a healthy and sacred mind. Only if you are able to 
do this, will our country be able to move along a 
prosperous path. If you go along the wrong path, 
the motherland will suffer a thousand times more 
than what your parents suffer when you do not 
progress in your education. Every student should 
shape himself as an ideal example. 


Baba 





200 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


It is not easy for man to live his life 
satisfactorily in this world. When a student is in 
a school, there will be a new lesson each day, 
and a new class each year. It will not happen that 
he will sit in the same class in all the years and 
learn the same lesson at all times. In the same 
manner, every sadhaka on the spiritual path should 
introspect and find out if his Sadhana is correct 
and improving day after day. If not, he should 
change his ideas and attitudes and improve himself. 


A sadhaka should not always remain on a 
dual path. As the first step, we should move on 
from a dual path to one which we call qualified 
non-dualism. This is the duty of every sadhaka. To 
worship God with flowers and to offer incense to 
him is only the first step in Sadhana. A sadhaka 
who has good qualities and a sacred mind, will 
always grow in his spiritual stature as he moves 
along the spiritual path. It is the duty of every 
sadhaka to keep on improving from his first step. 
A sadhaka should not spend all his life in doing 
worldly puja to God and remain a beginner. He 
should strive to improve his mental attitude. 


Baba 





18 


Make Sathya And Dharma Your 
Steadfast Companions 


ODAY is the festival of Vijayadasami. All 

people celebrate this festival with great joy 
and enthusiasm. However, for some people this day 
brought sorrow, for, it was on this day that Sai cast 
off His ‘old body’. The human bodies are, of course, 
merely material. Once a long-time devotee Lakshmibai 
approached Baba. Baba gave her two gold coins and told 
her, “Lakshmi, keep these two coins with you. Preserve 
them carefully.” The date of Baba’s departure from this 
mortal world was imprinted on the two coins. (Swami 
at this point created two gold coins with His Divine 
hands). Showing them to the devotees sitting in the 
Sai Kulwant Hall), Swami said, “Look, here are those 
two coins.” The two gold coins gifted by Shirdi Baba 
to Lakshmibai represent Sathya (Truth) and Dharma 
(Righteousness) that help the spiritual progress of human 


202 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


beings. Swami frequently exhorts the devotees, “Lead 
your life’s journey with the help of human values. Let 
your daily life be suffused with Sathya (truth), Dharma 
(righteousness), Santhi (peace) and Prema (love). Truth 
is atma. Dharma is the duty that we have to perform. 
Hence, discharge your dharma with truth. These two 
are in fact the sadhanas you have to undertake. These 
two only will protect you in every way. They alleviate 
all sorrows and difficulties. No human being, during 
the course of his or her life’s sojourn in this physical 
world, should give up Sathya and Dharma (truth and 
righteousness). Truth has to be experienced in one’s 
heart, while righteousness has to be reflected in one’s 
deeds. These two are enough. No other sadhanas 
are required. The names Rama, Krishna, Govinda or 
Narayana are only names ascribed to God; but Divinity 
has no particular name or form. Truth comes first and 
righteousness next. If righteousness follows truth, all 
sorrows and difficulties will be removed. There are 
millions of people living in this world. But, the Divinity 
present in all is only one. This has been described in 
the Gita as Mamaivamsho jivaloke jivabhuta sanathana 
(the eternal atma in all beings is a part of My Being). 
There may be any number of people, but they represent 
only the number. Only one Divinity is present in all of 
them. And, that Divinity is the only truth. You may call 
Divinity by any name — Rama, Krishna, Govinda, Allah 
or Jesus — but God is one and only one. Hence, realise 
the oneness of Divinity; contemplate on that truth; 
consider that truth as God and spread that truth to one 


Make Sathya And Dharma Your Steadfast Companions 203 


and all. What we are expected to do is not giving alms 
or charity. Whatever activity we undertake, it must be 
suffused with truth. When people follow such a path, 
all will be happy. The entire universe represents only 
one truth. But, people express it in different ways. Ekam 
sath viprah bahudha vadanti (truth is one, but the wise 
refer to it by various names). Truth alone is permanent 
in this world; all other things are ephemeral like the 
passing clouds. Names and forms are not permanent. 
Truth alone is permanent. It is the changeless principle. 
Keeping such an eternal truth in your heart, whatever 
you do becomes Dharma. 


Do Not Give Undue Importance To The Body 


I must tell you one thing in this context. There 
are many youths in this assembly. They should not 
take it amiss. In the name of modernism, many youths 
are taking to perverted ways of living these days. This 
permissiveness is not limited to a particular country or 
society. It has become a global phenomenon, irrespective 
of caste, community, religion or country. Right from the 
primary school children to boys studying in graduate 
and post-graduate courses are afflicted with this mental 
aberration. 


Love is God. Whatever activity you undertake 
with love, it becomes a success. Unfortunately, today, 
the term ‘Love’ is highly misused and misplaced and 
often misunderstood as relating to the body. No, this is 
not true love. It is fleeting and ceases with the bodily 


204 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 
relationship. True love is heart to heart. It is changeless. 


The body is made up of five elements and is bound 
to perish sooner or later, but the indweller has 
neither birth nor death. The indweller has no 
attachment whatsoever and is the eternal witness. 

(Telugu poem) 


The body is not permanent. Hence, do not give 
importance to the deha (physical body). The dehi 
(Indweller) is important. He alone is the embodiment of 
Truth. It is a serious mistake to ignore such an indweller. 
When you repose confidence in the Indweller and rely 
upon Him, He by himself will look after everything. 
We should never forget the dehi (Indweller), who is 
niramaya (free from all ailments). 


When Shirdi Baba left His physical body, it was 
Vijayadasami day. During His last moments Baba 
told the people around Him, “Do not rely upon this 
physical body. It will fade away and whither out in 
a few minutes. Why do you treat such an ephemeral 
body as Truth? None should shed tears on this occasion. 
This is but natural in the case of physical body. Enjoy 
this physical body as long as it is alive. Thereafter, 
treat the passing away of this body as a dream.” The 
physical body will retain its shape for a short period 
after death. Hence, people around the body of Baba 
kept it as it is for sometime, with the hope that Baba 
might come back to life as it happened on an earlier 


Make Sathya And Dharma Your Steadfast Companions 205 


occasion. Meanwhile, one of the devotees, Abdullah, 
came there and reminded them, “We are forgetting all 
that Baba had told us. Baba’s word is Truth. We have 
to follow it. Accordingly, we have to perform His 
obsequies, which is our duty.” Thus, all the devotees 
discussed among themselves what was needed to be 
done and came to a conclusion. They shifted the body 
to the Wada (a stone structure built by a devotee called 
Booty) and buried (Samadhi) it there. Thus, the bodies 
are impermanent however long a person might live. The 
physical body is subject to certain limits. This body 
as well as all other bodies are bound by certain limits. 
Each body has its own limit. None can cross that limit. 
As the days progress, the limit approaches fast. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Please, therefore, treat love as your foremost 
concern. Establish Truth in your heart firmly. Whatever 
activity you undertake, do it with dharma (righteousness). 
It is truth that sustains dharma and dharma in turn will 
protect truth. It is for this reason that Lakshmibai kept 
with her the two gold coins given to her by Baba. 
She felt, “These coins are given to me by Baba. 
These are gold coins. These coins are very valuable; 
more valuable than diamonds. There can be nothing 
greater than these coins. I do not need anything else. 
These two coins represent Sathya (truth) and Dharma 
(righteousness).” 


206 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


Truth Is Your Very Breath 


Truth and righteousness alone protect the world. 
We are undertaking several types of sadhanas in order 
that the world is protected. But, they are all pompous 
sadhanas only! You must install these two values in 
the heart and follow them at all times, day in and day 
out. Presently, you are just chanting these words by 
mouth. This is not enough. When you practise these 
values with all the sincerity at your command, you will 
achieve the desired results. There is no use repeating 
these words like a parrot. Even record player does 
such an exercise. One has to develop conviction in 
these values with all sincerity. Only then will they be 
imprinted in your heart forever. They always remain in 
you, with you. You have to put forth efforts to achieve 
such type of sadhana. 


One day the daughter of Lakshmibai approached 
her and requested, “Mother, please hand over to me 
those two coins which Baba had given you sometime 
back.” But Lakshmibai refused, saying, “No, I cannot 
pass on these coins to you. They have to reach the 
same Person who gave them to me and none else. I 
have no authority to deliver them to you. They will 
reach Baba, the embodiment of Truth and Dharma.” 


Stick To Truth And Righteousness Always 


You may chant any number of names; any number 
of mantras; you may perform any number of yajnas 


Make Sathya And Dharma Your Steadfast Companions 207 


and yagas. But, what ultimately remain are sathya and 
dharma. Follow these two. You are not separate from 
Me. You are all My amsas! (parts), as declared in the 
Bhagavad Gita. Sathya and Dharma are following you 
since several births. Today, you are undertaking several 
sadhanas. In the end, they are all going waste. You chant 
the Ramanama saying, “Ram, Ram, Ram.” The japamala 
in your hand is rotating, but your mind is not turning 
towards Rama. It is only when your mind is fixed on the 
name you chant, your japa becomes fruitful. Whatever 
activity you undertake, let it be truthful. Adhere to 
Truth always and under all circumstances. In fact, 
Truth is your very life principle. It is your swasa (life 
breath). Devoid of truth and righteousness, any number 
of discourses, Upanishads, Gita chanting, reading of 
spiritual texts, etc., will become a futile exercise. They 
may be useful for passing your time. Such exercises 
cannot sanctify your life. Truth and righteousness are 
the two most important sadhanas that will liberate you 
from this mundane world. You should always remember 
that you are an amsa of God. You should realise your 
relationship with God. This is the only relationship that 
will last forever; you may belong to any country or 
religion. But do not entertain any differences on that 
basis. All religions teach the same truth and will lead 
to the same God. Not a single religion (Matham) is 
bad, provided your mathi (intellect) is good. Hence, 
you have to keep your intellect in good condition. You 
have to understand religion in its proper perspective. 
Your mind may be changing constantly, but the matham 


208 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


(religion) does not change. Hence, do not give scope 
for doubt in every aspect. Do not entertain any doubts. 
Keep only one thing in mind — truth and love. Truth 
is atma. What is the meaning of the word ‘Myself?’ It 
means atma. Follow your atma. That is your dharma. 
If you do this, you will not encounter any calamity. 
Everything will merge into this divine atma. Realise 
the Truth. Then your life will be sanctified. 


Embodiments of Love! 


May you all hold on to the two principles of 
Sathya (Truth) and Dharma (righteousness). Dharma 
does not mean charity. You have to follow the dictates 
of your conscience, which is based upon truth and 
righteousness. You are all embodiments of Truth! You 
are all embodiments of Sathya Sai! Remember this truth 
and march forward in your life’s journey. Often times 
you worry, “Swami did not talk even once during these 
Dasara days.” Today is Vijayadasami day. It was the 
day when Sai shed the old body. Today, Sai who has 
donned a new body is narrating to you incidents that 
happened while He was in the old body. 


You should not join the bad company of friends. 
If you do so, you will also become bad. You must 
always move in good company. What is meant by 
good company? sathya and dharma. Hence, you should 
always move in the company of truth and righteousness. 


Make Sathya And Dharma Your Steadfast Companions 209 


If you hold on to these two values steadfastly, your life 
will go on happily and smoothly. 


Very soon, the entire country will become one, 
shedding once for all, all divisive tendencies. In fact, the 
whole world will become one; shedding the differences 
of nation, religion, caste, etc., and all the people will 
experience Divinity. All people will move like brothers 
and sisters. You address each other as ‘brother’ and 
‘sister’. You say ‘hello’ to one another. But, of what use 
it is if there is hollowness inside. You should always 
greet each other with a pleasant smile on your face. 
You should never exhibit your feelings with a wild 
laugh saying, ‘Ahaha ...” You should put on a sweet 
and soft smile on your face. That is the real laughter. 
If you make a loud noise while smiling, it amounts 
to insulting others. You are very fortunate to be here. 
I have explained the real meaning of the two gold 
coins gifted by Shirdi Sai Baba to Lakshmibai. Several 
people tried their best to snatch those coins from her. 
But, she did not oblige anyone. She returned them to 
Baba saying, “These coins belong to You. I am giving 
them back to You. Neither my children nor anyone else 
has anything to do with them.” The children are born. 
The relationship between a husband and wife comes 
only after marriage. If there is no bond of marriage, 
neither is there a wife nor a husband. If the husband 
and wife are not there, there is no scope at all for the 
child to be born. Thus, no one is related to the other. 
Each one is for himself or herself only! That is the 


210 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


message conveyed in the famous “Bhaja Govindam”’ 
song composed by Adi Sankara. 


Vijayadasami,2 1-10-2007, 
Prasanthi Nilayam. 


Chit represents awareness. We use this 
awareness on several occasions to distinguish 
good from bad. If this awareness is not present, 
we will not be able to enquire into anything at 
all. Thus, this quality of Chit is also present 
in us in a latent form. Ananda or bliss is also 
present in us. This is evident from the fact 
that we sometimes feel happy. The sun and the 
moon are brightly shining at all times but when 
there is a thick layer of clouds, we will not be 
able to see the sun or the moon. In the same 
manner, in the sky of our heart, divine qualities 
like Sat, Chit, and Ananda are always present, 
but when bad qualities like selfishness and ego 
are present, they act like the clouds and hide 
the good qualities. We should promote divine 
qualities like Sat, Chit, and Ananda. 

Baba 





19 


Akhanda Bhajan — Continuous 
Namasmarana Is The Goal 


NE has to understand what is meant by 

“Akhanda Bhajan’. There are two kinds of 
Bhajans - one is Khanda Bhajan and the other, Akhanda 
Bhajan. Khanda Bhajan is for a specific time, for 
example, the Bhajans held for a limited period either 
in the morning or evening. On the other hand, Akhanda 
Bhajan involves constant contemplation on God in the 
morning, evening or even during the night time. It is 
constant contemplation on God during all the three 
states - the waking, dream and deep sleep. It is “sarvada 
sarvakaleshu sarvathra Harichintanam.” Suppose you 
are watching a clock. There are three hands in the clock, 
namely, the second hand, the minute hand and the hour 
hand. The second hand is the longest; the minute hand 
is slightly shorter and the hour hand is the shortest of 
the three. When the second hand crosses sixty spaces, 


212 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


the minute hand moves forward by one space. When 
the minute hand crosses sixty spaces, the hour hand 
moves forward by one space. Which one of these three 
hands is important? Undoubtedly, the hour hand is 
important. On the same analogy, doing namasmarana 
and bhajan only in the morning and evening is like 
the second hand. The divine name is highly potent. 
Each one of the several names of God has one type 
of power specific to it. If you wish to make good use 
of this power and derive lasting benefit out of it, you 
have to participate in Akhanda bhajan. 


The Uniqueness Of Ramanama 


Once sage Narada approached Lord Vishnu and 
prayed, “Oh Lord! People speak very highly about the 
efficacy of Ramanama. Will you kindly explain?” Lord 
Vishnu wished to demonstrate the efficacy of Ramanama 
by an illustration. He therefore advised Narada, “Oh 
Narada” You go to a crow and utter the word ‘Rama’. 
Let the crow repeat the name.” Nararada went to a 
crow and said, “Oh crow, Your entire body is black, 
without a trace of whiteness. Hence, you chant the 
Ramanama just once.” The crow uttered ‘Rama’, and 
immediately it fell down dead. Narada was sad that the 
crow died just by its chanting the Ramanama once. He, 
therefore, went to Lord Vishnu and informed Him of 
the crow’s death. Lord Vishnu then told him, “Don’t 
worry. This time you go to the beautiful peacock that 
is just born and ask it to chant Ramanama once.” As 
per the instructions of Lord Vishnu Narada went to the 


Akhanda Bhajan — Continuous Namasmarana Is The Goal 213 


newly born peacock and said, “Oh Peacock, Your beauty 
and grace are enchanting to the entire world. You are 
very lovable and attractive. Please utter the word ‘Rama’ 
just once.” The moment it uttered ‘Rama’, it also fell 
down dead. Narada again went to Lord Vishnu and 
reported about the death of the peacock after chanting 
Ramanama just one time. Lord Vishnu again advised 
Narada, “Oh Narada, there is a cow in the shed nearby, 
which has just given birth to a calf. You please go to that 
new-born calf and ask her to chant Ramanama once.” 
Narada did accordingly. As soon as the new-born calf 
heard the word ‘Rama’, it also dropped down dead. 
When Narada informed the matter to Lord Vishnu, He 
again instructed him, “Oh Narada, this time you go to 
the King’s palace where a baby boy is just born. You 
ask him to chant the Ramanama once.” Narada was 
very much afraid to approach the newly born prince, 
since the crow, peacock and the calf died earlier just 
by listening to the word ‘Rama’ once. He pleaded with 
Lord Vishnu to spare his life, since the King would put 
him to death if something happened to the new-born 
baby by chanting Ramanama. But, Lord Vishnu insisted 
that Narada should obey His command. Narada went 
to the palace and asked the newly born prince to chant 
Ramanama once. The prince saluted sage Narada and 
informed him that by the mere chanting of Ramanama 
just once, he was transformed from a crow to peacock, 
from a peacock to a calf and from a calf to a human 
being as a Prince. He expressed his gratitude to sage 


214 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


Narada for initiating him into Ramanama. Thus, Nama 
confers a human birth, which is considered to be a 
rare gift. 


The human being is an embodiment of Divinity. 
You see any picture of God. All forms of God are 
portrayed with a human face. That is why it is said 
“Daivam manusha rupena.” (God assumes human form). 
It is only the divine name that confers human birth on 
a being. It is evident from the illustration narrated 
above that the birds and animals were able to get a 
human birth by listening to the holy name just once. 
Unfortunately, no transformation is taking place in the 
human beings in spite of repeating the divine name 
several times. You should chant the divine name whole 
heartedly with full faith. Faith develops love towards 
God and that love towards God confers human birth. 
No doubt, man today is repeating the holy name; but 
not with love and steady faith. He is more concerned 
with how others are singing and whether their sruthi and 
raga are in order, etc. He is doing the namasankirtana 
with a wavering mind. There can be no transformation 
in him by such fickle minded namasankirtan, inspite 
of doing it for hours together. Namasankirtan has to 
be done with absolute concentration and steady faith 
like a yogi. It is said “Sathatham yoginah”. One can 
achieve great transformation if the mind is steadily 
fixed on the divine name. 


When a lead singer is singing a particular bhajan 


Akhanda Bhajan — Continuous Namasmarana Is The Goal 215 


song, other singers think of the next song that they are 
going to lead. Thus, their attention is distracted, with 
the result, they remain as ordinary singers or listeners 
only. The devotional singing of Bhajans will have no 
effect on them. It cannot transport them to a higher 
realm of Divinity. No doubt, the contemplation on God 
will sanctify a person to a certain extent. In order to 
attain purity, it is not enough if chanting of the divine 
name is confined to a limited period. It has to be a 
continuous spiritual exercise throughout one’s life. Then 
only the divine name gets imprinted on one’s heart. 


Do Every Act As An Offering To God 


You may attend to your daily routine. But, while 
attending to your duties in your own house or in the 
outside world, you must constantly remind yourself 
that “whatever I do, think or speak, everything belongs 
to God.” The proper attitude should be, ‘sarva karma 
Bhagavath preethyartham’. Take for example, the 
process of cooking. You add different ingredients to the 
items being cooked, in definite proportions and try to 
make them tasty. But the real taste comes only when 
the job of cooking is done as an offering to God. The 
food becomes divine when it is offered to God. On the 
other hand, if the various items are cooked with the 
attitude, ‘I am doing this job as a routine; I am cooking 
these items for my family members to partake’, it does 
not reach God. Hence, whatever work you undertake, 
do it as an offering to God chanting the name ‘Ram’, 


216 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


‘Ram’, ‘Ram’. Even while you are walking, think that 
it is God who is making you walk since Divinity is 
present in a subtle form in every atom and cell in this 
Universe. Unable to recognize this truth, people think, 
‘I came by walk, I walked so many miles’ etc. Such 
work comes under the physical realm, not spiritual. 
Hence, whatever you think, speak or do, consider it 
as God’s command, God’s work. With such an attitude 
it is enough if you chant the divine name ‘Rama’ just 
two times - morning and evening. Not only the name 
“Rama”, any name you can take for chanting. Chant 
any divine name wholeheartedly at least once. That 
would be all right. 


There is no use counting seconds and minutes 
while doing namasankirtan thinking, ‘I have done 
namasankirtan for so many seconds so many minutes. 
It is enough if you chant the divine name just once, 
wholeheartedly. That is like the hour hand in a clock 
which carries certain value. Such heartfelt singing has 
become rare today. Some people participating in Bhajan 
say, “Today I am not well. I have a sore throat due 
to cough and cold. I am not able to sing.” True, you 
may be suffering from cold and cough. But, you can 
sing within yourself, surely. Do it. That will give you 
sufficient strength. The divine name is very sacred. If 
you repeat it just once, even the dead will come back 
to life. Savithri lost her husband. But, by her soulful 
prayers she could bring back her husband to life. Those 
who could bring back the dead to life are to be found 


Akhanda Bhajan — Continuous Namasmarana Is The Goal 217 


only in the country of Bharath and nowhere else. Though 
divine power is spread everywhere and is omnipresent, it 
manifests in a high degree only in Bharath. Those who 
are pure in their heart will always succeed. Whatever 
work you undertake, do it conscientiously. Develop 
purity of mind. If you undertake the work with that 
purity of mind and then pray to God, surely you will 
achieve the result. Meera did the same thing. She prayed 
to the Lord, “Swami, I delved deep into the ocean and 
could get the pearl of your divine name. Let not this 
valuable pearl slip from my hand and drop back into 
the ocean. Having been born in this world, let me sing 
the glory of the divine name constantly and make my 
life sanctified.” 


The Gita says, “Mamaivamso jeevaloke jeevabhutas 
sanatanah”’. You are all part of My Divinity. Hence, 
you all should follow Me. My love is divine and sacred. 
So shall be your love. If you follow this principle, you 
will automatically achieve purity. Where there is purity, 
there Divinity is. Everything is reflection, reaction 
and resound. Since ancient times, you all are My own 
amsa (part). Do not ever forget this truth. If only you 
develop faith in this Truth, it will amount to reading 
the entire Bhagavad Gita. 


Every human being follows dharma. From where 
did this dharma come? It has come from bhava (feeling), 
which in turn emanated from viswasa (faith). It is only 
when viswasa is there, dharma is born. That faith is 


218 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


truth. dharma is verily the embodiment of divinity. 
“Truth is God; Faith is God; Love is God; Live in 
Love.” If only you cultivate these three, you can achieve 
anything. You may encounter any number of losses and 
difficulties in life. You may undergo a lot of suffering. 
But, you should never give up truth, faith and love. 
Loss, suffering and difficulties are like the waves in the 
ocean of life. They just come and go. But, the water 
in the ocean remains permanently. Hence, develop the 
faith of ‘water’, 1.e., divinity. Your thoughts are like 
the passing clouds. Hence, keep your faith firmly fixed 
on God. If you develop love and faith towards God, 
there is nothing in the world that you cannot achieve. 
By faith and love, you can even change the earth into 
sky and the sky into earth. 


The power of divine name is unparalleled. People 
often take it lightly. That is a mistake. One should not 
mistake a shining glass piece to be a diamond. The real 
diamond is altogether different. What is that diamond? 
‘Die mind’. God’s name is the real diamond. Keep it 
safe and secure. Do not ever be bothered by pain and 
suffering, losses and difficulties. They just come and 
go. That is not your real nature. Your innate Self is 
strong, eternal and real (sat). You should not follow 
the fleeting and unreal waves, forsaking your own true 
and eternal nature. Unfortunately today people are 
following only the unreal and passing waves. If you 
hold on to such fleeting and unreal things, you will 
always be deceived. Once you seek refuge in the lotus 


Akhanda Bhajan — Continuous Namasmarana Is The Goal 219 


feet of God, you should never give up. Wherever you 
go, the divine feet will protect you. If you install the 
divine name firmly in your heart, your life will become 
sanctified. That is bhakti (devotion). That is your sakti 
(power). That is mukti (liberation). 


It is only for making people realise this truth that 
the sadhana of akhanda bhajan has been prescribed for 
devotees at least once in a year. The word ‘akhanda’ 
implies chanting the divine name non-stop for 24 
hours. But people will be just coming and going while 
the Akhanda Bhajan is going on. Such a Bhajan can 
be termed only as Khanda Bhajan. It is a piecemeal 
Bhajan. It is difficult to maintain continuity of the divine 
vibrations in such a Bhajan. You should ensure that there 
is no gap in between. During Akhanda Bhajan you may 
go home for any purpose, for example, to take food. 
But, you continue to do namasmarana while attending 
to any work in your house. God does not wish that 
you should not attend to your personal and domestic 
chores. You may attend to all your needs, but constantly 
remember God while doing so. That is the essence of 
Lord Krishna’s message in the Gita, “Maamanusmara 
yuddhyacha” (keep Me ever in your mind and fight till 
the end). In other words, He advised Arjuna that he 
must engage himself in the war, constantly remembering 
Him. War in this context does not imply merely killing 
one another by shooting arrows or with missiles. That 
is not a sign of greatness. There you discharge your 


220 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


duty in the battlefield. If you do so, those who are 
destined to die will die. 


You should always attend to your duties with 
a pleasant and smiling face. What is required is a 
smiling face. There is no use putting a ‘castor oil face’. 
“Happiness is union with God.” That is real Divinity. 
When you are confronted with some difficult situations, 
do not get upset constantly worrying, “Oh! How do I 
cross this situation?” For example, young people are 
often confronted with a “marriage worry”. Such worry 
will only worsen the situation. Repose your faith in 
God. Think that it is not marriage, but ‘my raise’, i.e., 
an opportunity for your betterment. If you develop such 
an attitude, your life will be sanctified. Whoever does 
namasmarana, whatever be the name he takes and 
wherever he is, his life will be sanctified. He will be 
free from sin. You need not be too much concerned 
with raga and thala (tune and rhythm). There is only 
one Raga, that is Hridayaraga (the raga arising out 
of one’s own heart). That is ‘So....... ham’, ‘SO... ... 6066 
ham’. Let your life be tuned to this raga of ‘Soham’. 
Then, whatever activity you undertake, it becomes a 
SUCCESS. 


You are most fortunate to participate in this 
Akhanda Bhajan. During normal days, Bhajans are held 
in this hall both in the morning and in the evening. This 
is a great opportunity. Do not lose the opportunity of 


Akhanda Bhajan — Continuous Namasmarana Is The Goal 221 


participating in the Bhajan. If only you make good use 
of it, your life will be sanctified. The global Akhanda 
Bhajan is held only for this purpose every year. 


Akhanda Bhajan, 13-11-2007, 
Prasanthi Nilayam. 


The essence of good qualities, good ideas, 
and love should be offered to God as fruits grown 
by your own Sadhana. The world itself will be 
benefited by an individual who has good conduct. 
[If fire starts on one tree in a forest, that fire will 
not stop after burning that particular tree. It will 
spread and burn out the entire forest. In the same 
manner, if there is one individual who has bad 
qualities, he will spoil the entire community in 
addition to ruining himself. On the other hand, if 
there is a tree which is full of good flowers, it will 
fill the entire area with good fragrance and spread 
it. In the same manner, if there is an individual 
with a high code of conduct, he will not only 
improve himself but will also improve the entire 
society around him through his good conduct. 

Baba 





222 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


Our discipline should be connected with our 
whole life and not with one place and one time. 
To whatever place you may go and whatever the 
situation may be, you must maintain discipline. This 
kind of faith is true faith. Just as our breath always 
keeps going in and out, so also our discipline 
should become our breath and be with us wherever 
we go and whatever we do. Many people come 
and talk about God as if it is for exhibition. In 
reality, so long as your heart is not clean, God 
will have no place in your heart... 


Thus external show is not important. Whatever 
you want to do, you must do it from the depths 
of your heart. From ancient times, such external 
devotion in the form of ritual was promoted; and 
we are unable to show the real strength of inner 
devotion. Bhakti does not consist of having a 
photo for worship and giving it Arati everyday 
or shouting Baba, Baba. True Bhakti means that 
there must be a transformation in your behaviour. 
God is within you, around you, and in you. He 
is omnipresent. Recognising this truth, you must 
arrive at the result that you and God are one. 
This is the truth that you must realise. 

Baba 





20 


Oneness With God Is True 
Education 


ROM the time one gets up from the bed till he 
goes to bed again, why should one waste all 
his time in earning money? 


Embodiments of Love! 


It is not good to waste one’s time and energy in 
vain pursuits without attending to one’s ordained duties. 
Time is sacred and valuable. ‘“‘ Time waste is life waste”’. 
You are all students who have to lead others in future. 


Every individual has some desires. But, students 
especially have to control their desires. This is their 
duty. No doubt desires crop up in your mind endlessly 
one after the other. But, it is the foremost duty of 
a student to control those desires. The word ‘vidya’ 


224 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


(education) has its root in the word ‘vid’, meaning 
light. It means that education shows us light. Education 
illumines our path to progress. 


Understand The Higher Purpose Of Education 


Dear Students! 


You must stand as an ideal to everyone. It is only 
with this hope that we are bringing you up with great 
love. You all know that the educational institutions in 
the outside world charge money for everything. But, 
we are not collecting any money from our students 
towards fees. Education in the Sathya Sai institutions 
is totally free from K.G. to P.G. In fact, Education, 
Medical and Water Supply projects undertaken by 
the Sathya Sai Organisation are not revenue earning 
departments. On the other hand, we ourselves are 
incurring huge expenditure on students’ education. Also, 
we are helping a number of destitute children in so 
many ways by providing them material support, free 
education, financial help, etc. You must realise this truth. 
Education is your property. Education is not merely to 
help make a living in the world. It is not merely for 
making a decent living in the material world. Even the 
uneducated are able to live well in the material world. 
Then, of what use are your degrees like M.Sc., M.A., 
M.B.A., etc., This is not the purpose of education. 
Education may help one to earn a decent living in the 
outside world to a certain extent. But, that is not the 
be-all and end-all of life. There is a higher purpose 


Oneness With God Is True Education 225 


to education - providing an inner life based the five 
human values, namely, Truth, Righteousness, Peace, 
Love and Non-violence. These human values provide 
a secure, real and meaningful life to us. Sathya (truth) 
is the basis for everything in the Universe. 


The creation emerges from truth 
and merges into truth, 
Is there a place in the cosmos 
where truth does not exist? 
Visualise this pure and unsullied truth. 
(Telugu poem) 


God is the creator of all living beings right from a 
tiny ant to a mighty elephant. Nothing in this universe 
will move without His Divine Will. Even tiny ants that 
you see are born out of God’s will. The same truth 
has been explained in Saint Tyagaraja’s famous Kirtan 
“Cheemalo Brahmalo Siva Kesavaadulalo Prema Meera 
Velasi Unde Birudhu Vahinchina Rama Nannu Brovara”’ 
(Oh Rama, in Your pure and unsullied form of love, 
You indwell in all beings from an ant to Brahma as 
also in Siva and Kesava. Please be my protector too). 
No doubt we are aware of it, but once an ant bites us, 
we immediately kill it. On the other hand, when Lord 
Brahma appears before us we offer our pranams to Him 
with folded hands. Though the names and forms are 
different, the same atma permeates all living beings. 
One who develops faith in this Truth will not hasten 
to cause any harm to any living being. 


226 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


Every individual develops desires to satisfy himself. 
He always chants ‘self, self, self’. Every individual 
repeats ‘this is my body; this is my mind; this is my 
head’, etc. who is ‘my’? When you say ‘this is my 
body’, perhaps it may be true for today or tomorrow. 
But, where is your body day after tomorrow? What 
happens to it then? You are nourishing this body with 
great love and care. But, this body is not yours. It is 
a gift of God. In fact, everything in this universe is 
God’s gift. For instance, this is a handkerchief. From 
where did it come? Has it fallen from the sky? No. It 
has come from cotton. From cotton came the thread 
and the thread is woven into a cloth. Hence, there 
can be no thread without cotton and no cloth without 
thread. Thus, everything in this universe has a basis 
and a source. Unfortunately today we are forgetting 
this fundamental principle. That is the reason why we 
are experiencing several difficulties. 


When you hear the word ‘God’ repeatedly, you 
are tempted to enquire ‘where is God?’ God is with 
you, in you, around you, behind you. In fact, “you are 
God!” Develop that firm faith. The same God as atma 
thatwa permeates all the millions of human beings in 
this world, nay, every living being in the world. We 
are witnessing millions of living beings with different 
names and different forms in this Universe. Though the 
names and forms are different, the atma tatwa in them 
is only one. Ekam sath viprah bahudha vadanthi (truth 
is one, the wise say it in different ways). Gold is one, 


Oneness With God Is True Education 227 


the jewels are many. When the different ornaments are 
melted, what remains ultimately is gold only! Hence, 
Oh embodiments of Love! You try to realise the source 
and sustenance for all objects in this universe. You 
consider you are different from your father and mother. 
Again, you treat your mother as different from your 
father. No, this is not correct. Both father and mother 
are one. You are part of them. Hence, the question 
of difference does not arise. A man with dual mind 
is half blind. You should not have a dual mind. All 
the education you pursue is not for you only. It is for 
helping your fellow human beings, fellow living beings 
like birds, animals and insects. Then only the education 
you have acquired becomes meaningful. 


Whenever you come across a person whom you 
consider as your enemy, say “hello”. You must love 
everyone. Never hate anybody. You might have noticed 
that no one hates Swami and all people love Him. You 
may ask Me whether there are people who really do 
not deserve Swami’s love. I wish to emphasise that all 
people deserve Swami’s love. I love everyone. I do not 
hate anybody. I do not cause trouble to anyone. I do not 
offend anyone. Since the feeling of ekatma bhava (one 
atma permeating all living beings) is so strong in Me, 
so many people love Me. The whole world loves Me 
and I love all. My word, My song and My divine leelas 
are all dedicated to your welfare. You must therefore 
try to understand My real nature. You develop faith 
in the atma tatwa. From faith comes love. When faith 


228 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


and love go together thus, your desires will be fulfilled. 
Both faith and love are most important for a human 
being. All others are like passing clouds which just 
come and go in between. You should not attach much 
importance to them. In fact, faith is the reflection of 
love. And love is the very form of God. Hence, Love 
is God, Live in Love. Truth is truth for all times - past, 
present and future. It will never change. That is why it 
is said “Truth is God”. We should not think that God 
is present somewhere in a distant place. God is not 
separate from us. The entire universe is an embodiment 
of Divinity. You should therefore constantly contemplate 
on that Divinity who is none other than Unity. 


Recognise The One God Immanent In All 


Dear Students! 


You read several books. However, all those books 
have been written with the help of only 26 letters. There 
are a number of lawyers. They carry books which are 
very bulky in size. But, all those books contain only 
letters ultimately. Health, wealth, happiness and bliss 
- the source and sustenance for all these things is only 
God. Good or bad, everything is God. You cannot find 
bad anywhere separately. Wherever you see, it is only 
good. But, you are not able to realise that good. You are 
confused. The bad, if any, is only a manifestation due 
to the difference of time. Today we partake a variety 
of tasty dishes. But, the next day they are transformed 
into excreta. Today’s phala (fruit) is transformed into 


Oneness With God Is True Education 229 


mala (excreta) tomorrow. Divinity is present in all things 
- both good and bad. There is no place or object in 
this world where God is not present. No one can say 
with any authority that God is “nowhere or only here”. 
Several names and forms are ascribed to that Divinity 
and a lot of confusion is created thereby. The reason 
for this confusion is based on how one relates himself 
to God at the individual level. We should therefore try 
to set aside this individual relationship at least to a 
certain extent. It is only for this purpose that we are 
pursuing many types of education. The moment the 
individual relationship merges into a feeling of oneness 
with God, what remains is only Divinity everywhere. 


Religions are many but goal is one. 
Clothes are many but yarn is one. 
Beings are many but breath is one. 
(Telugu poem) 


There are several jeevas (individuals) sitting here. 
They have different bodies, but there is only one God 
immanent in all the bodies. Hence, whomever you 
see consider him or her as God. Whomever you love, 
consider them as embodiments of Divinity. You are all 
encountering several difficulties due to deha bhranthi 
(identification of the self with the body) and differences 
in feelings. You alone are the root cause for these 
difficulties. Both good and bad are the products of 
your mind. You may learn many subjects and acquire 
several degrees; but consider the atma tatwa as one 


230 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


and only one. The same Truth has been explained in 
the aphorisms Ekameva adwitheeyam Brahma (God is 
one without a second) and Ekam sath viprah bahudha 
vadanthi (truth is one; the wise say it in different ways). 
You must preserve this truth in your heart safely and 
securely. You consider someone as your enemy. No, no; 
this is not true. It is only a change in your attitude and 
love towards him that made him your enemy. There 
is no change in him at all. Everything in this world 
is reaction, reflection and resound. However, reality 
is only one. If you develop such an attitude, you can 
experience any amount of happiness. You think “Swami 
is always cheerful and smiling. How is it possible?” 
Yes. I am always smiling. The reason being I treat 
all people as one. The happiness of all of you is My 
food. Hence, you also develop that attitude. The other 
day, the children put up a playlet. I felt very happy 
on witnessing that playlet. The children put up the 
show unitedly. We use the words ‘I’ and ‘We’. From 
where did the word ‘we’ come? It has come from 
‘Tl’. Without ‘I’, there can be no ‘we’. Thus, ‘I’ is the 
one and only one entity. It is like a vertical wooden 
pillar. When another piece of wood is nailed across in 
the middle horizontally, it becomes a cross. It means 
that when ‘I’ (ego) is broken, it becomes a cross. We 
must always endeavour to keep ‘I’ as only one. You 
consider all people as your brothers and sisters. These 
brothers and sisters are not separate entities. All are 
one. If you thus make an enquiry, everything in this 
universe represents only the principle of oneness. If 


Oneness With God Is True Education 231 


you establish this truth firmly in your heart, the same 
feeling will reflect everywhere. Suppose you love a 
girl. Who is that girl anyway? Yourself only. It means 
you loved yourself! The girl is not separate from you. 
When you treat her as separate, you refer to her as 
‘wife’. On the other hand, when you treat her as one 
with you, you become one. You realise this unity. What 
could be the reason for such great diversity in the living 
beings in the world? They are a manifestation of the 
divine principle Ekoham bahusyam (the one Divinity 
manifested as many). 


Embodiments of Love! Dear students! 


You must all become ideal men and women. It 
is only when you lead an ideal life, the whole society 
will become ideal. Do not entertain any differences of 
those people and these people. All are one; be alike 
to everyone. This you must remember always. Then 
only can you become ideal students. Otherwise, you 
remain merely as educated people. Who is an educated 
person in the real sense? One who has realised that 
all are one. Education implies only learning. On the 
other hand, Vidya is one that symbolises oneness. Vidya 
spreads the light of oneness with God. If you lose this 
enlightenment, you have to live in darkness. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Let your love be diverted towards God and it will 
confer bliss upon you. If you direct it towards worldly 


232 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


objects and persons, it is likely to change every now 
and then. Whomsoever you come across, develop the 
feeling that they are all your brothers and sisters. Once 
a gentleman was addressing a meeting. He started his 
speech with the address “Dear brothers and sisters”. 
But, he made an exception in the case of only one lady. 
Someone enquired why? He replied that the lady was 
his wife. Strictly speaking, no exception need be made 
since he addressed all people as brothers and sisters. 
But, once he married her, she became his wife. If there 
is no marital relationship between them, all are one. I 
exhort you once again to lead your lives with a feeling 
of oneness and a sense of sharing. 


Arjuna among the Pandava brothers won Droupadi 
in the swayamvara. When Pandavas returned along with 
Droupadi and told their mother that they brought home 
a fruit, instantaneously mother Kunthi advised them to 
share it equally among the five of them without being 
aware of the fact that they were referring to Droupadi. 
Accordingly, she became the chaste wife of the five 
Pandavas. Even Lord Krishna testified to her chastity 
thus: 


Droupadi dutifully obeyed the command of her 
husbands. She would never say to any one of 
them that she had no time to serve him. She was 
satisfied with whatever she got in life. She was 
the supreme example of chastity and none could 
match her in this respect. (Telugu poem) 


Oneness With God Is True Education 233 


The Pandavas shared and cared for each other and 
led a life of discipline and control. 


Students Only Can Transform The Society 


I am quite well. No one need worry about My 
health; not only My body, everything is all right. My 
mind does not waver. I have a steady and ever alert 
mind. The body may undergo some changes; but I am 
always My own Divine Self. People enquire, “Swami, 
You are always smiling! Did you not ever encounter 
sorrow?” No. Not at all Sorrow is nowhere near Me. 
Whatever has to happen will happen. If you go on 
worrying about it, will it be warded off? That will lead 
to much more worry. Hence, one should not give scope 
for worry at all. Once your mind starts worrying, it 
will never end. You worry, “Examinations are nearing; 
Oh God! How do I prepare myself’ What is all this 
worry about? Why do you fear to write answers for 
those questions which you already know? Surely you 
will fare well in the examinations. Do not develop any 
fear of examinations. 


No one can measure the distance of the sky 
from the earth. That is the reason why it is said that 
the sky is blue. Similarly, none can describe the form 
of Divinity. In order to portray God, artists started 
using the colour of blue. In fact, God has no colour 
at all. If God were to be born with a blue colour, He 
would have been put in an exhibition as an object of 
wonder. Divinity cannot be changed. You may change; 


234 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


but your Atma will never undergo any change. It is 
Nirgunam, Niranjanam, Sanathanam, Nikethanam, 
Nithya, Suddha, Buddha, Mukta, Nirmala Swarupinam 
(God is attributeless, unsullied, final abode, eternal, 
pure, enlightened, free and embodiment of sacredness). 
That is why it is said Buddhi grahya matheendrivam 
(the atma is beyond the ken of the senses and can be 
understood only by the intellect). 


You earn a name for yourselves as good boys. 
Bring honour to your parents. Also, let the society be 
proud of you. If the society is to be transformed into a 
good society, it can happen only through the students. 
Today wherever our students be, the people say they 
are very good. I am getting the news. You try to live 
up to that name. I don’t aspire for anything else. I 
will give you whatever you want. In fact, I have given 
Myself to you. May you all be happy! Do not quarrel 
with anybody. Do not abuse anyone. May you all live 
like brothers and sisters! That is the fruit of education. 
That is real education. In spite of his education and 
intelligence, a mean-minded person will not give up 
his evil qualities. 


You must always conduct yourselves as good boys. 
First and foremost, make your parents happy. If you 
cannot make your parents who brought you up happy, 
how can you make Me happy? Hence, you all go to 
your homes and live happily with your parents. Then, 
I will also be happy. When people praise you that so 


Oneness With God Is True Education 235 


and so is a student of Sri Sathya Sai University, it is 
a matter of pride to you as well as to the Institution. 


The University Grants Commission in New Delhi 
did not recognise several educational institutions in the 
country for a long time, whereas the Sri Sathya Sai 
Institute of Higher Learning was conferred the status 
of a Deemed University within the second year of its 
inception. Dr. Madhuri Shah was the Chairperson of 
the University Grants Commission then. She visited 
Puttaparthi then and put forward a proposal to make our 
Institute into a Deemed University. Several objections 
were raised to her proposal on the ground that it was 
still a nascent Institute in its second year and it would 
not be proper to confer the status of a University on 
it in such a short time. Dr. Bhagavantham was with 
us at that time translating My speech. He confidently 
said “this is impossible; impossible”. I told him very 
emphatically that it was possible. The U.G.C. committee 
visited our Institution thereafter in the second year itself 
and unanimously recommended to confer the status of a 
Deemed University on Sri Sathya Sai Institute of Higher 
Learning. As per the committee’s own admission, “This 
is the first college” to be conferred a Deemed University 
status within the second year of its starting. Later, 
Dr. Madhuri Shah came here to formally inaugurate 
the Deemed University. She openly said in a meeting 
“Dr. Bhagavantham, you said it is impossible to make 
it into a University in such a short time. How has it 
been possible now?” The Sri Sathya Sai Institute of 


236 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


Higher Learning, a Deemed University, has since been 
made into a full-fledged University with the combined 
efforts of all people. 


All our students are men of noble character. 
They are well behaved and well educated. You may 
not perhaps know how famous is our Sri Sathya Sai 
University all over the world, especially in the United 
States of America. There are about 180 past students 
now working in America in different fields. Recently, 
they all came here in a group. They prayed to Swami, 
“Swami, we do not wish to go to our homes here. We 
will go back direct to America from here, after this 
visit.” Such was their love and dedication to Swami 
and Sri Sathya Sai University. 


26th Convocation, 22-11-2007, 
Prasanthi Nilayam. 


Vairagya does not mean giving up your wife 
and children and running away to a forest. The 
removal of the bad qualities in you is the true 


meaning of vairagya. If you really want to get 
rid of the bad qualities in you, you must make 


an effort. 


Baba 





21 
Love Is God; Live In Love 


Embodiments of Love! 


EOPLE think there are many troubles, 

difficulties and sorrows in this world whereby 
they are filled with anxiety and worries. But in fact 
there is nothing like this; it is bliss everywhere. 


Brahmanandam,Parama Sukhadam, Kevalam 
Jnanamurtim, Dwandwateetam,Gagana Sadrisham, 
Tattwamasyadi Lakshyam, Ekam, Nitvam, Vimalam, 
Achalam, Sarvadhee Sakshibhutam, Bhavateetam, 
Trigunarahitam (Atma is the embodiment of divine 
bliss, wisdom absolute, beyond the pair of opposites, 
expansive and pervasive like the sky, the goal indicated 
by the mahavakya tat twam asi, one without a second, 
eternal, pure, unchanging, witness of all functions of 
the intellect, beyond all mental conditions and the three 
attributes of satwa, rajas and tamas). 


238 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


God And You Are One 


The world is the creation of God. Right from man 
all living beings including animals, birds and even 
insects are the creation of God. As they are the creation 
of God, all of them have their origin in bliss. All these 
difficulties and troubles are only the imagination of man. 
Pleasure is an interval between two pains. There cannot 
be happiness without difficulties. These difficulties are 
meant to give you happiness, and not to make you 
miserable with more sorrows. Hence, whatever comes 
to us, we should consider it as God’s gift and be happy. 
We should not consider that it has been given to us to 
make us suffer. Suppose you have pain in the stomach. 
What will the doctor do? If he performs an operation, it 
is not for causing pain to you. The pain that the doctor 
causes is to remove your suffering. Hence, one should 
bear difficulties and overcome his sorrows. 


There are millions of living beings in this world. 
All of them have originated from God. Therefore, 
the same God is present in all of them. People give 
many names to God as Rama, Allah, Jesus, etc., but 
God is only one. Atma is another name of God; it is 
the same in everyone. The real name of atma is love. 
Love is only one, but it is present everywhere and can 
alleviate all sufferings. One who is endowed with love 
is free from all sufferings. All of you have come from 
such a distant place like America. What for? You have 
come because you have love for Me (loud applause). 


Love Is God; Live In Love 239 


You can attain anything if you have love. God has no 
specific name. He is present in man in the form of 
atma. What does atma mean? It means love only. It 
is love that unites all. If you imbibe this principle of 
unity, then all will become one. When you attain this 
unity, you will have purity. When you have purity, 
then atma tatwa (principle of the Self) will manifest in 
you. Therefore, you must have unity to attain divinity. 
I and you are one. God and you are one. God is not 
anywhere separate from you. You should develop the 
feeling that you yourself are God. When you say, ‘I’, 
it represents unity. You cannot estimate the bliss that 
is derived from unity. All are one. It is the fickle mind 
that is unsteady and wanders arbitrarily. 


Only one thing is steady. That is love, love, love. 
Love is God. Live in love. This is what we have to 
learn today. Same love is present in everyone. Mother 
loves her children due to this feeling of love. All are the 
children of God. Therefore, God loves all. He has no 
hatred. He is not the cause for your pain and suffering. 
God is not separate from you. Wherever you may be, 
God is present there. God does not forsake you. There 
is no place where there is no God. Wherever you see, 
God is present there. (Swami pointed to different things 
and said) This is God. This is God. You are all the 
embodiments of God. You have two eyes but you can 
see a large number of people with them. Similarly, God 
is one, but He can see all. Where is God? He is in you, 
with you, above you and below you. There is no need 


240 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


to search for Him. It is because our vision is limited 
to physical level, that we see differences. We should 
not rely on the physical body. Body is like a water 
bubble; mind is like a mad monkey. In one moment the 
mind is here and in the next moment it flies away to 
another place. Manas, buddhi, chitta, ahamkara (mind, 
intellect, mind-stuff, ego) - all these are temporary like 
passing clouds. Only one thing is permanent. That is 
you. Where is God? You should develop the feeling 
that you are God. This is the correct answer to the 
question, where is God. You may perform any number 
of spiritual practices like bhajans, japa and tapa, but 
love should form the undercurrent of all these practices. 
In fact, if you have love, there is no need to perform 
any spiritual practices. There is no use of performing 
all spiritual practices, if you do not have love. Fill 
your mind with love. “Prema mudita manase kaho 
Rama Rama Ram...”’ (recite the Name of 
Rama with your heart full of love). Hence, give highest 
importance to love. Love is important. Love is God. 
Live in love. This is the spiritual practice that we have 
to undertake. Worldly relations are temporary. They are 
impermanent like passing clouds which come and go. 
They are your mental reaction, reflection and resound. 


(Swami showing His handkerchief) What is 
this? This is a cloth. It is not merely a cloth, it is 
a combination of threads, it is not thread even, it is 
cotton, which is the creation of God. Everything has 
emerged from God like threads. You weave the threads 


Love Is God; Live In Love 241 


as per your liking. But it is not your liking that is 
important; what is important is what God likes. There 
can be changes in the body and the mind. But love 
is changeless. It is permanent. Everything has birth 
and death but there is no birth or death for love. The 
birthless and deathless love is only one. It comes from 
truth. Truth is one. Truth is God. This God in the form 
of love is present everywhere, wherever you see. 


Treasure Love In Your Heart 


God is present in man in his breath. When you 
breathe, where does the breath come from? It comes 
from within. The breath itself is your God. What is its 
form? It is present in man in the form of Soham, which 
reveals your divine identity. ‘So’ means ‘that’, “Ham’ 
means ‘I’. Therefore ‘Soham’, means ‘that I am’. ‘That’ 
refers to God who is present in man in the form of love. 
Therefore, man should treasure love in his heart safely. 
Other thoughts come and go like passing clouds. Only 
love is permanent and eternal. You should perform every 
task with love. Even if you come across your enemy, 
you should love and greet him saying, ‘Hello, Hello’. 
Then he will also respond saying ‘Hello, Hello’ to you. 
This 1s the reaction, reflection, resound of your feelings. 
Whatever good or bad you experience is the result of 
your own actions. Everything comes from within you. 
Hence, you should always remain immersed in love. If 
you have love, you can achieve anything and perform 
any task. It is love that is responsible for the entire 


242 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


creation and its functioning in this world. There is no 
greater God than love. Love is God. Whatever you do 
without love is a futile exercise. Hence treasure love 
in your heart. Everybody will be attracted towards 
this love. It bestows everything on you. It is love that 
creates, sustains and destroys. When you look at the 
world with your physical eyes, you see diversity in 
creation. But, in fact, everything is love. It does not 
change. You should be filled with such love. If you 
follow this principle of love, it will give you the fruit 
of all the spiritual practices. 


People call God by many names such Rama, 
Krishna, Jesus, Allah, etc. But all names refer to the 
same God. If you call Him Allah, He responds. Similarly, 
if you call Him Jesus, or Zoroaster, or Rama, He will 
respond. All these names have been given by man. God 
is not born with these names. Original name of God 
is only love. You may refer to any dictionary; love is 
only one and not two. Man may have many physical 
relationships. You may consider someone as your 
husband, someone as your son and someone as your 
daughter. They are all physical and worldly relations. 
Who has established these relationships? It is you only. 
Since these are relationships acquired by you, they are 
subject to change. But love remains the same. With 
such love you may chant any name such as Rama, 
Krishna, Govinda, Narayana, Jesus or Allah. All these 
names refer to the same divinity. You may grind rice 
and prepare various dishes such as Dosa, Idli, etc. You 


Love Is God; Live In Love 243 


may mix rice with sugar and prepare payasam (sweet 
pudding). But rice is the same in all these dishes. In 
the same way, only one God is present in the entire 
creation, and that is love. You should perform each and 
every task with love. 


We call others as ‘brothers and sisters’. At physical 
level they are separate. These relationships are of your 
own making. But never observe diversity. Brothers, 
sisters and all other relationships are one. You see an 
old man or a child, both are essentially divine. God is 
beyond all ages and all forms. Only love is His true 
form. The same love is present in all forms that you 
see. Hence everyone of you should develop love. You 
may call God as Rama, Krishna or Sai. But it is only 
a difference in names. God is only one (loud applause). 
Love everyone wholeheartedly. Then only can you 
experience bliss. So long as you have love, you will 
not be devoid of bliss. 


People today observe individual differences. There 
are three aspects of an individual. 1. The one you think 
you are. 2. The one others think you are, 3. The one 
you really are. At physical level you may be identified 
with your name, form and village. But in reality, you 
are only one. This is what you should realise. Recognise 
the unity of entire creation. Your worldly relations will 
also have some value when you recognise this unity. 
You may add any number of zeros with one, the value 
will go on increasing. If you remove one, there is no 


244 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


value. In the same manner, you may chant any name 
realising the oneness of God. Ekam sath viprah bahudha 
vadanthi (truth is one, but the wise refer to it by various 
names). The vedas authenticate the same truth. With 
love in your heart, you may go to any country, chant 
any name, perform any spiritual practice. Do not hate 
anybody. Help Ever, Hurt Never. This is what the 
devotees are supposed to do (loud applause). When 
you call yourself a devotee, you should not observe 
any differences “You are not mine, he is mine”. This 
is not good. It amounts to hating God. You should 
think “God is in me, with me, around me, above me 
and below me”. Wherever you see, the same God is 
present there. Develop this feeling of oneness. Then 
you will attain highest bliss. 


You have come from different countries and you 
have different names and forms. But having come here, 
you are all one (loud applause). From today onwards, 
may you always remain in bliss for ever and ever. People 
say, “Today is my birthday.” What is the meaning of 
birthday? It is the day of the birth of the body. Today 
it is born, tomorrow it may die. But you are eternal. 
You have no birth, no death. Be always happy. This is 
what I desire. Do not allow the differences of mine and 
thine come near you. All of you have sung the glories 
of the Lord in one voice. This unity is divinity. Where 
there is lack of unity, there is diversity. Hence develop 
unity. Where there is unity, there is purity. It is purity 
that attracts God. The white dress that you have put on 


Love Is God; Live In Love 245 


symbolises purity. Differences are seen when you put on 
dresses of different colours. You should not give room 
to differences. Not only in dress, you should observe 
unity and purity in your mind, feelings and thoughts. 
All are one. On returning to your respective places, 
lead your lives with unity, love and bliss. Your bhajan 
has made Me happy. 


Consider bhajan as your bhojan (food) which 
satiates your spiritual hunger. You should partake 
the food of bhajan every moment, day in and day 
out. Right from the morning till night, you should 
constantly do bhajan in your entire waking time. This 
is Swami’s teaching to you. Perform all your tasks, 
while contemplating on the name of God within you. 
God is within you, without you, beyond you, below 
you and behind you. Very happy. 


Divine Discourse, 15-12-2008, 
Prasanthi Nilayam. 


Whatever God does, it is always for our own 
good. All His actions are intended for our good. 
It is necessary for us to recognise this truth and 


conduct ourselves accordingly. 
Baba 





246 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


Young students, both boys and girls, should be 
prepared to enter the society and do the right kind 
of service. In the very first instance, you must try 
and understand the sacred nature of your country. 
As soon as one is born, one recognises his father 
and mother. So also, we should regard the dharma 
or righteousness and sacredness of our country. 
We should regard the history and culture of our 
country as our father and mother... 


Truly, one’s motherland is more important 
than even the parents who gave birth to you. 
Students should recognise that the body is only a 
reflection of the country. The society is in a very 
degraded state. The sacredness of our culture is 
becoming tarnished. Students should come forward 
to revitalise the sacredness of the country. 


Baba 





22 


Anything In Life Can Be 
Achieved With Faith In God 


A man with anger cannot achieve anything 
He commits mistakes and indulges in sinful deeds 
He is despised by everyone 
Love is God and God is love 
Devoid of love, humans cannot exist. 
(Telugu poem) 


T is lack of love that is responsible for all the 

differences, arguments and conflicts in the world, 
especially in the present times. Many people say that 
the world is afflicted today with sorrow, losses and 
difficulties. I do not subscribe to this view. I tell you, 
they are all our illusion only. In fact, there is no unrest 
or sorrow in this world. I just see peace, peace and peace 
only everywhere. When there is peace in our heart, we 
will be able to witness peace all round. Unrest, sorrow, 
anger, etc., are the reaction, reflection and resound of 


248 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


the state of our inner being. Sorrows and difficulties, 
anger and unrest are of our own making and creation. 
They are not natural phenomena in the world. 


Brahman 1s Our Real Name 


When someone enquires your name, you give 
some name. (Swami at this point enquired the name 
of one student sitting in front of Him. The boy replied 
“Vikas”). In fact, that is not his real name. Similarly, 
you enquire from each one and they give different 
names. However, if God were to mention His name, 
He will say Aham Brahmasmi (1 am Brahman). In 
fact, all of us should repeat the same name since we 
are all embodiments of Divine Self. All our names are 
given to us by our parents. We are not born with any 
particular name. Those who cannot realise this truth 
cannot lead a happy life. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Actually love is another name of Brahman. In 
fact, love, atma, prema, aham or brahman — all these 
names carry the same meaning. There is nothing in 
this world except love. But, unfortunately we are not 
able to understand what love is. We consider Love as 
relating to the world. We consider it to be physical. In 
fact, it does not at all relate to the physical realm. It is 
truth, verily. “You are not one person, but three - the 
one you think you are; the one others think you are 
and the one you really are. “What others think is all 


Anything in Life Can Be Achieved With Faith In God 249 


imagination. The Self within you is the only truth. Who 
is this Self? That is “I. This “I” is the same in all. The 
Christians worship the Cross (+). The cross is a symbol 
exhorting people to get rid of ego. No one is different 
from you. Hence, you must always bear the truth that 
all are one (1). Those that are born out of karma, grow 
and perish ultimately (namely the physical bodies) are 
unreal. Hence, you are always Brahman in accordance 
with the Vedic declaration Aham Brahmasmi (1 am 
Brahma). It is only when you consider yourself to be 
Brahman that you can realise this truth. Till then, you 
will be confined to the different names like Ramanna, 
Krishnananna, etc., that have been given to you by 
your parents for the purpose of identification. Surely, 
you did not come into this world with any name. When 
someone enquires from the parents about the name of 
their newly born child, they may reply that no name 
has been given to the child yet. It is thus clear that all 
the names given to us are by someone only and not 
innate. They are for the purpose of identification of the 
concerned individuals. There are millions and millions 
of people inhabiting this world, but none seems to have 
realised the truth that they are God. Unfortunately, 
today we are leading our lives with names given to 
us by someone. 


What is Brahman? “T’. Brahman is neither born nor 
has it ‘death’. That is the only truth, other events come 
and go. For example, I have Willed to create this chain 
(Swami with His Divine hand created a gold chain). 


250 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


This has been created by My Divine will. It was not 
there earlier. Thus, all things and beings in this world 
are born out of sankalpa (will). Hence Divine sankalpa 
is the cause for all creation. In addition, the maya also 
plays its role. When Maya and Truth come together, 
creation takes place. Without maya, there can be no 
creation. The maya is like a shadow to a human being. 
But, this shadow deludes us. At sunrise, our shadow 
is long. As the sun gradually rises, the shadow falls 
under our feet at mid-day. Thus, the shadow grows and 
shrinks. We should not therefore mistake the shadow 
as our basis. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Love is the foremost quality of a human being. 
And faith is the basis for that love. The spelling of the 
world love is LOVE. Here ‘L’ stands for ‘Lord’. Thus, 
Love is born out of the Lord (God). The entire creation 
is a manifestation of God’s love, be it a tiny ant or a 
mighty elephant. Everything is the creation of God. 


Not even a blade of grass will move without 
divine Will, 
People who do not realise this truth, get 
carried away by their pride of intelligence and 
discrimination. 
But no one, however great may be, knows what 
lies ahead for them in future. 

(Telugu poem) 


Anything in Life Can Be Achieved With Faith In God 251 


God Is The Source And Cause For Everything 


How did this blade of grass come into existence? 
It is nothing but God’s will! Similarly, every human 
being is born out of Divine will only. There can be 
no creation without God. When you look at the earth 
during summer it looks parched. But, with the onset of 
rainy season, the earth looks green with various plants. 
From where did they come? From the rain. The rain 
came from the clouds. The clouds are caused by the 
sun. And, the sun itself originated from God. Thus, 
the entire creation has its origin in God. There can be 
no air, sun, rain or plants without God. Knowing this 
truth, we still tend to forget God. On the other hand, 
we remember everything else. This is not correct. You 
should never forget God. If you forget God, it amounts 
to forgetting everything. For, God is the source and cause 
for everything. Unfortunately today, we are forgetting 
the fundamentals or root cause for the entire Universe. 
If there is no foundation, there can be no walls. If there 
are no walls, there can be no roof. You cannot live in 
a house that has no roof. Hence, first and foremost the 
foundation is very important. Based on the foundation, 
the pillars are raised and finally the roof is laid. Based 
on this analogy, self-confidence is the foundation, self- 
satisfaction is the wall, self-sacrifice is the roof and 
finally self-realisation is life. Thus, there should be a 
foundation for everything. That is fundamental truth. 
We are forgetting this fundamental truth. 


252 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


Jesus was the son of Joseph and Mary. When 
Mary was carrying him in her womb, Joseph and Mary 
were required to travel to Bethlehem to take part in a 
census ordered by the Roman Emperor. They had to 
travel all the way riding on a donkey. It was an arduous 
journey. When they finally reached Bethlehem, it was 
night. There was no place for them to rest and they 
were tired. Joseph searched and searched for a resting 
place, but could not find any. Finally, he went to a 
cattle shed and knocked at the door. He explained to 
the inn keeper that Mary was about to give birth to a 
child. The inn keeper reluctantly gave them a place in 
a corner to spend the night. The same night, Mary gave 
birth to a baby boy. A makeshift bed was arranged for 
the newly born child with some old clothes and dry 
leaves. 


The boy was named Jesus. He was happily growing 
under the loving care of mother Mary. When he grew 
up as a boy, Joseph and Mary had to travel to Jerusalem 
to participate in a festival. Jesus got lost in the crowd 
and could not be traced inspite of an intensive search. 
The parents were very worried. At last, Jesus returned 
to his parents. When enquired where he had gone, he 
replied that he went to hear the discourse of a priest in 
a nearby temple. The priest had taught him “You alone 
are the truth; remember this.” Constantly contempla- 
ting on this teaching, Jesus thereafter wandered and 
wandered alone for a long time and later came near 
a river, where some boatmen were sitting. The first 


Anything in Life Can Be Achieved With Faith In God 253 


among them seen by Jesus was Peter. Jesus asked 
him, “What is your name?” He replied, “My name is 
Peter. He is my father” (pointing to an old man sitting 
nearby). The old man was making fishing nets. Jesus 
made friendship with Peter. Peter complained to Jesus, 
“We went in search of fish for the whole of yesterday, 
but could not find even one.” Jesus then told him, 
“You go to such and such place. You will find fish in 
plenty.” Jesus also accompanied the boatmen in this 
exercise. As foretold by Jesus, they could catch plenty 
of fish. The boatmen wondered, “How great Jesus is! 
He knows everything.” From then on, they treated Jesus 
as their preceptor. 


Though he was young in age and form, he was old 
enough in wisdom. Hence, all of them were meticulously 
following his words. The entire community of fishermen 
there treated Jesus as their Master, with great reverence. 
Even great Masters appear to be ordinary human beings 
in the first instance. As they gradually reveal themselves, 
people will realise their true nature and flock round 
them in large numbers. Same was the case with Jesus. 
The fishermen could become rich with a bounty of fish, 
with the help and guidance of Jesus. As they became 
rich, jealousy grew among the others. They vied with 
each other in seeking his help and guidance. Some 
people, however, became jealous of Jesus’ popularity 
and considered him as their enemy. They reported to the 
chief priest that Jesus had no miraculous powers and 
that he was deceiving people. Jesus was summoned and 


254 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


questioned, “How did you acquire these powers?” Jesus 
replied, “All this is Divine Will”. Jesus was moving 
about with his disciples preaching his doctrine of love 
and moral principles. Jesus was questioned, ““Who are 
you?” He replied, “I am Jesus.” 


Vexed with the attitude and teachings of Jesus, a 
death sentence was passed against him. He was to be 
crucified. The Governor, a kind-hearted person, however, 
did not want Jesus to be awarded a death sentence. He 
lamented that Jesus was a great and noble man and he 
was being crucified for no fault of his. He told Jesus, 
“You are a great man. These stone-hearted people are 
trying to kill you without any reason.” Jesus replied 
“T am happy that at least you have realised that I am 
a good person.” 


Finally, at the time of his crucifixion, his mother 
Mary came near him and started shedding tears. Jesus 
consoled her saying, “Why do you cry, mother? The 
body is like a water bubble. Let them do whatever they 
wish with this body. You think these people are trying 
to kill me. I have no death. None can kill me.” Mary 
then told him, “Are you not the son of this body?” 
Jesus replied, “Of course! I am related to you at the 
physical level, as a son. But, ‘I am I’ only. You are 
all like children to me. You are all embodiments of 
Divinity.” 


Thus, Jesus attained the highest level of spirituality, 


Anything in Life Can Be Achieved With Faith In God 255 


having gone through all tests. Jesus was not merely a 
human form. He was the Embodiment of Divine Self, 
verily. But, some people could not realise his Divinity, 
as at present. Even now some people only have faith in 
Divinity while others do not have. Some extol Divinity, 
whereas some others criticise Divinity. All depends upon 
their faith. If you consider a stone as God, it becomes 
God automatically. Jesus underwent several trials and 
tribulations during his time. He became the Saviour 
and Messiah of the poor and forlorn. He helped them 
in many ways. Once while he was crossing the desert, 
a poor woman approached him begging for food. He 
gave her bread saying, “Take this.” When someone 
enquired where bread came from, Jesus replied that it 
was Divine will. There is nothing greater than Divine 
Will. Everything is God’s will. The foremost duty of a 
human being is to realise the will of God and submit 
himself to that Divine will. Those who developed faith 
in the will of God were protected, while others were 
not. Hence, faith is the basis for everything. People 
today are blind, having lost their both eyes of faith. 
Faith is the basis for all creation. Where there is faith 
and love, everything else will be added unto such a 
person. Hence, first and foremost, one has to develop 
faith. Many people have faith, but they lack love. Faith 
devoid of love has no use. Love and faith must be 
together like mutually attractive magnetic poles. 


Preserve Your Faith 


256 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


Embodiments of Love! 


First and foremost, develop faith. There can be 
no life without faith. Sometimes faith is also termed 
‘Self’. Without Self, you cannot help others. Only when 
there is faith can you achieve anything in life. Even 
now, there are several people who have progressed in 
life with firm faith in Jesus. Some people develop faith 
when their desires are fulfilled. If their desires are not 
fulfilled, they lose faith. This type of attitude is not 
good. Keep your faith firm, irrespective of whether 
your desires are fulfilled. Preserve your faith carefully. 
Faith can work wonders. It can make a blind person 
see; a dumb speak. Do not at all doubt the power of 
faith. Some incidents happening in this world may shake 
your faith in God. But, if you hold on to your faith 
firmly you can boldly face any situation. Even now 
some people consider this body (referring to Himself) 
as an ordinary man. If that were to be so, how could 
all these superhuman tasks be achieved? No, no; it is 
a mistake to think so. ‘This’ body may appear to be a 
mere physical entity to you. It is the fault of your own 
vision; not Mine. There is something wrong in your 
perception. It is a mistake of your vision, not Mine. 
Hence, correct your vision, develop right perception. If 
you are allright, I will be allright (loud applause). You 
are all in Me. This is the fundamental truth. 


I am getting some things done, making you as My 
instruments. For, I require some instruments to carry 
on My mission. Hence, I am moulding you as those 


Anything in Life Can Be Achieved With Faith In God 257 


instruments (loud applause). By imparting education, 
knowledge and wisdom, I am developing you all as My 
instruments. Hence, may you all lead purposeful lives 
with firm faith in God! You think that education and 
academic degrees have helped you to come up in life. 
This view is not at all correct. How many educated 
people are there in this world? Of what use are they 
to the world? In fact, the world is not benefited by 
the educated class. More harm is done to the world 
than good, by such people. More than education, the 
spiritual life will protect a person in every way. Devoid 
of spiritual outlook, all your education and academic 
degrees are a mere waste. Their value is zero. Hence, 
fill your lives with devotion to God and develop the 
outlook “I am not this body. This is a vesture taken 
upon by Me. There is God inside who is conducting 
my life.” God is “in you, with you, around you, above 
you, below you” (loud applause). Develop full faith in 
Divinity. Then you can achieve anything in life. 


Dear students! 


You are like fully ripened fruits. But, the fruits 
must contain sweet juice. Without that sweet juice, it 
cannot be a fruit. You must all have the sweet juice of 
love. If there is no sweet juice, people will just bite the 
fruit and throw it away. Hence, fill your hearts with the 
sweet juice of love. Whatever be the name and form, 
develop faith in God. God has many names; but God 
is only one. The ornaments may be many, but gold 


258 SATHYA SAI SPEAKS, Volume 40 


is one. Do not lose sight of the gold. Without gold, 
you can not make ornaments. Develop faith as your 
foremost quality, irrespective of whether it brings you 
the desired results. Add love to that faith. “I am you 
and you are Me; I and you are one” (loud applause). 
Ekoham bahusyam (the One willed to become many). 
Whoever realises that oneness, achieves total bliss. 
Every student should develop faith in God. I am sure 
that students have joined this Institution not merely 
for acquiring education and academic degrees. They 
came here to learn Swami teachings. If you follow the 
teachings with firm faith in Swami, you will achieve 
success in all your endeavours. You should have faith 
in Swami s teachings; love them, adore them and follow 
them. (Bhagawan sang the bhajan “Hari bhajan bina 
sukha santhi nahi ...” and continued His discourse.) 


When you do bhajan, you experience peace and 
happiness. Hence constantly do namasmarana in your 
heart. You may not be able to do japa, dhyana or 
yoga; but do namasmarana. There is no easier path 
than namasmarana to be in communion with God. 
Children, adults or elderly people - all can do it. Hence, 
continue to do namasmarana throughout your life. You 
may study and acquire degrees; but do bhajan also. 
Do not consider Jesus as an ordinary mortal. See God 
in Him. You often refer to someone and say “He is a 
man” or “she is a lady”. No, no. This is not the correct 
way of identification. Gents or ladies - “all are one; be 
alike to everyone.” Lord Krishna in the Bhagawad Gita 


Anything in Life Can Be Achieved With Faith In God 259 


declared, Mamaivamso jeevaloke jeevabhuta sanathanah 
(the eternal atma in all beings is a part of My Being). 
You are all parts of Me. I and you are one. You are 
not different from Me. I am in you, with you, above 
you, below you and around you. Develop that spirit of 
oneness and lead your life. I hope I have made Myself 
clear. The moment you go to your places, do not think 
that Swami is there, while I am here. Always develop 
the feeling “He is with me, in me, around me, above 
me and below me.” All are one (loud applause). 


Christmas Message, 26-12-2007, 
Prasanthi Nilayam. 


Truly, the essence of the right type of 
education is that it should give you the ability 
to stand on your own legs. Good education is to 
enable you to get rid of servitude in all aspects. 
The very object of correct education should be to 
enable you to have a vision of your divine self. 
When man loses his ability to sacrifice and his 


ability to conduct himself in a selfless manner, 
the education he receives will become utterly 
useless. So long as we depend only on economic 
prosperity, this will be our fate. What cannot be 
achieved through work, what cannot be achieved 
through wealth, can be achieved through sacrifice. 


Baba 





