THE ARYABHATIYA • 
of 
ARYABHATA • 
An Ancient Indian Work on Mathematics and Astronomy 
TRANSLATED WITH NOTES BY 
WALTER EUGENE CLARK 
Professor of Sanskrit in HaNJard Uni1Jersi.ty 
THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS CHICAGO, ILLINOIS 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comTHE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 
CHICAGO, ILLINOIS 
THE BAKER & TAYLOR COMPANY 
NEW YORK 
THE CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS 
LONDON 
THE M.ARUZEX·KABUSHIKI·.KAISHA 
TOKYO, OSAKA, KYOTO, PU.KUO.KA, SENDAI 
THE COMMERCIAL PRESS, LIMITED 
S!BNGilAI 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com"ebPYiHGHT 1930 BY THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO 
A.LL RIGHTS RESERVED. PUBLISHED JULY 1930 
COMPOSED AND PRINTED DY THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PH:ESS 
CHICAGO,. ILLINOIS,. U~S-A .. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPREFACE 
In 1874 Kern published at Leiden a text called the 
)f.ryabhatiya which clain1s to be the work of ... ~rya­
bhata, and which gives (III, 10) the date of the birth 
of the author as 476 A.D. If these claims can be sub­stantiated, 
and if the \vhole work is genuine, the 
text is the earliest preserved Indian mathematical and 
astronomical text bearing the name of an individual author, the earliest 
Indian text to deal specifically 
vvi.th mathematics, and the earliest preserved astro­nomical text from the 
third or scientific period of 
Indian astronomy. The only other text which might dispute this 
last claim is the S-aryasiddhanta (trans­
lated with elaborate notes by Burgess and v\7hitney 
in the sixth volmne of the Journal of the A..rnerican 
Oriental Society). The old Sfiryasiddhanta undoubt­edly preceded 
... lryabhata,, but the abstracts from it 
given early in the sixth century by V arahamiliira in 
his Pancasiddhantd.,;a show that the preserved text 
has undergone considerable revision and may be later 
than Aryabhata. Of the old Paulisa and Romaka 
Siddhantas, and of the transitional Vasi?tha Si­
ddhanta, nothing has been preseryed except the short 
abstracts given by Varahamihira. · The names of sev­eral astronomers who preceded 
~~ryabhata, or who were his 
contemporari~s, are known, but nothing has been preserved from 
their writings except a few brief fragments. 
The Aryabha(iya, therefore, is of the greatest im-
v 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comvi PREFACE 
portance in the history of Indian mathematics and 
astronomy. The second section, which deals with mathematics (the 
GaJJ,itapada), has been translated 
by Rodet in the Journal asiatique (1879), I, 393-
434, and by Kaye in the Journal of the Asiatic Society 
of Bengal, 1908, pages 111-41. Of the rest of the work no translation 
has appeared, and only a few of the 
stanzas have been discussed. The aim of this work is to give a complete translation of 
the Aryabhafi,ya with references 
to some of the most important parallel passages which 
may be of assistance for further study. 
The edition of Kern II¥Lkes no pretense of giving a really critical 
text of the Aryabhafiya. It gives merely 
the text which the sixteenth-century commentator Paramesvara 
had before him. There are several un­certainties about this text. Especially noteworthy is 
the considerable gap after IV, 44, which is discussed 
by Kern (pp. v-vi). The names of other commenta­tors have been noticed 
by Bibhutibhusan Datta in 
the Bulletin of the Calcutta Mathematical Society, 
XVIII (1927), 12. All available manuscripts of the 
text should be consulted, all the other commentators should be studied, 
and a careful comparison of the 
Aryabhafi,ya with the abstracts from the old si­ddhantas 
given by Varahamihira, with the Suryasi­
ddhanta, with the Si[fyadh'ivrddhida of Lalla, and with 
the Brahmasphutasiddhanta and the Kha?J,r/,akhadyaka 
of Brahmagupta should be mad.e. All the later quota­tions from 
Aryabhata, especially those made by the 
commentators on Brahmagupta and Bhaskara, should 
be collected and verified. Some of those noted by 
Colebrooke do not seem to fit the published Arya-
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPREFACE vii 
bhafiya. If so, were they based on a lost work of 
Aryabhata, on the work of another Aryabhata, or 
were they based on later texts composed by followers of 
Aryabhata rather than on a work by .Aryabhata 
himself? Especially valuable would be a careful study 
of Prthiidakasvamin or Caturvedacarya, the eleventh­
century commentator on Brahmagupta, who, to judge from 
Sudhakara's use of him in his edition of the 
Brahmasphutasiddhanta, frequently disagrees with 
Brahmagupta and upholds Aryabhata against Brah­
magupta's criticisms. 
The present translation, with its brief notes, makes no pretense 
at completeness. It is a prelimi­
nary study based on inadequate material. Of several passages no translation 
has been given or only a ten­
tative translation has been suggested. A year's work 
in India with unpublished manuscript material and 
the help of competent pundits would be required for 
the production of an adequate translation. I have 
thought it better to publish the material as it is rather 
than to postpone publication for an indefinite period. 
The present translation will have served its purpose 
if it succeeds in attracting the attention of Indian 
scholars to the problem, arousing criticism, and en­couraging 
them to make available more adequate 
manuscript material. There 
has been much discussion as to whether the 
name of the author sJ;ould be spelled Aryabhata or 
Aryabhatta. 1 Bhata means "hireling," "mercenary," 
1 See especially Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, 1865, pp. 392-93; 
Journal asiatique (1880), II, 473-81; Sudhakara Dvivedi, 
Gat1,akatarangit1,t, p. 2. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comviii PREFACE 
"warrior," and bhatta means "learned man," "schol­
ar." Aryabhatta is the spelling which would natural­ly be expected. However, all the metrical evidence seems to favor the spelling with one 
t. It is claimed by some 
that the metrical evidence is inclusive, that 
bhata has been substituted for bhat(a for purely metrical reasons, and does not prove 
that .A.rya­
bhata is the correct spelling. It is pointed out that 
Kern gives the name of the commentator whom he edited as 
Paramad.Isvara. The name occurs in this form in a stanza 
at the beginning of the text and in another 
at the end, but in the prose colophons at 
the ends of the first three sections the name is given as Paramesvara, and this doubtless is 
the correct form. However, until more definite historical or 
m,etrical 
evidence favoring the spelling Aryabhatta is produced I prefer to keep the form 
Aryabh,a ta. 
The Aryabha{iya is divided into four sections which contain 
in all only 123 stanzas. It is not a com­plete and detailed working manual 
of mathematics 
and astronomy. It seems rather to be a brief descrip­tive work intended to supplement matters and proc­esses which were generally known and agreed upon, to give only the most distinctive features 
of .A.rya­
bhata' sown system. JVIany commonplaces and many 
simple processes are taken for granted. For instance, there are 
no rules to indicate the method of calculat­ing the 
aharga1J,a and of finding the mean places of the planets. 
But rules are given f~r calculating the true places from 
the mean places by applying certain cor­rections, although even here there is 
no statement of 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPREFACE IX 
the method by which the corrections themselves are to be calculated. 
It is a descriptive summary rather 
than a full working manual like the later kara?J,a­
granthas or the Suryasiddhiinta in its present form. 
It is questionable whether .A.ryabhata himself com­posed another treatise, a 
kara?J,agrantha which might 
serve directly as a basis for practical calculation, or whether his methods were confined to oral 
tradition 
handed down in a school. Brahmagupta
1 implies knowledge of two works by 
.A.ryabhata, one giving three hundred savana days in 
a yuga more than the other, one beginning the yuga 
at sunrise, the other at midnight. He does not seem to 
treat these as works of two different Aryabhatas. 
This is corroborated by Paflcasiddhantika, XV, 20: 
".A.ryabhata maintains that the beginning of the day 
is to be reckoned from midnight at Lanka; and the 
same teacher [sa eva] again says that the day begins from sunrise 
at Lanka." Brahmagupta, however, names only 
the Dasagitika and the Aryfifltasata as the 
works of .A.ryabhata, and these constitute our Arya­
bhafi,ya. But the word audayikatantra of Brahma­sphutasiddhanta, 
XI, 21 and the words audayika and 
ardharatrika of XI, 13-14 seem to imply that Brahma­
gupta is distinguishing between two works of one 
.A.ryabhata. The published Aryabhafiya (I, 2) begins 
the yuga at sunrise. The other work may not have been named or criticized 
by Brahmagupta because of 
the fact that it follo.;-ed orthodox tradition. Alberuni refers 
to two .A.ryabhatas. His later 
1 Brahmasphutasiddhiinta, XI, 5 and 13-14. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comX PREFACE 
.Aryabhata ( of Kusumapura) cannot be the later 
.Aryabhata who was the author of the M ahiisiddhiinta. 
The many quotations given by Alberuni prove con­clusively 
that his second .Aryabhata was identical with the author 
of our .A.ryabhatiya (of Kusumapura 
as stated at II, 1). Either there was a still earlier 
.Aryabhata or Alberuni mistakenly treats the author 
of our .A.ryabhatiya as two persons. If this author really composed two works which represented two slightly different points 
of view it is easy to explain Alberuni' s mistake.
1 
The published text begins with 13 stanzas, 10 of .. 
which give in a peculiar alphabetical notation and in a very condensed form the most important numerical elements 
of Aryabha~a's system of astronomy. In 
ordinary language or in numerical words the material would have occupied 
at least four times as many stanzas. This section is named 
Dasagitikasutra in the concluding stanza 
of the section. This final stanza, which is a sort 
of colophon; the first stanza, which is an invocation and which states the name 
of the author; and a 
paribhii~ii stanza, which explains the peculiar alphabetical notation which is to be em­ployed in the following 
10 stanzas, are not counted. I 
see nothing suspicious in the discrepancy as Kaye 
does. There is no more reason for questioning the authenticity 
of the paribha~ii stanza than for ques­tioning 
that of the invocation and colophon. Kaye • 
1 For a. discussion of the whole problem of the two or three Aryar bbatas 
see Kaye, Bibliotheca mathematica, X, 289, and Bibhutibhusan 
Datta, BuUetin of the Calcutta M athf!lm.aticaJ, Society, XVII (1926), 59. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPREFACE xi 
would like to eliminate it since it seems to furnish evidence for 
Aryabhata's knowledge of place-value. Nothing is gained 
by doing so since Lalla gives in 
numerical words the most important numerical ele­ments of 
Aryabhata without change, and even with­
out this paribhti?ti stanza the rationale of the alpha­betical notation 
in general could be worked out and 
just as satisfactory evidence of place-value furnished. Further, Brahmagupta 
(Brahmasphutasiddhanta, XI, 
8) names the Dasagitika as the work of Aryabhata, 
gives direct quotations (XI, 5; I, 12 and XI, 4; XI, 
17) of stanzas 1, 3, and 4 of our Dasagitika, and XI, 
15 (although corrupt) almost certainly contains a quotation of stanza 5 
of our Dasagitika. Other stanzas are clearly ref erred 
to but without direct quotations. Most 
of the DasagUika as we have it can be proved to be earlier 
than Brahmagupta (628 A.D.). 
The second section in 33 stanzas deals with mathematics. 
The third section in 25 stanzas is called 
Kalakriya, or "The Reckoning of Time." The 
fourth section in 50 stanzas is called Gola, or "The 
Sphere." Together they contain 108 stanzas. 
The Brahmasputasiddhiinta of Brahmagupta was composed in 
628 A.D., just 129 years after the Arya­
bhat"iya, if we accept 499 A.D., the date given in III, 
10, as being actually the date of composition of that 
work. The eleventh chapter of the Brahmasphuta­
siddhanta, which is ~alled "Tantraparik~a," and is devoted to severe criticism 
of previous works on 
astronomy, is chiefly devoted to criticism of Arya­bhata. 
In this chapter, and in other parts of his work, 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comxii PREFACE 
Brahmagupta refers to Aryabhata some sixty times. Most 
of these passages contain very general criticism 
of Aryabhata as departing from smrti or being igno­
rant of astronomy, but for some 30 stanzas it can be shown 
that the identical stanzas or stanzas of iden­tical content were known 
to Brahmagupta and ascribed to 
Aryabhata. In XI, 8 Brahmagupta names the 
Arya?tasata as the work of .Aryabhata, and XI, 
43, janaty ekam api yato naryabhato garJ,itakalago­
lanam, seems to refer to the three sections of our 
Ary~tasata. These three sections contain exactly 
108 stanzas. No stanza from the section on mathe­matics has been quoted or criticized 
by Brahma­
gupta, but it is hazardous to deduce from that, as Kaye 
does,1 that this section on mathematics is spurious and is a much later addition. 
2 To satisfy the conditions demanded 
by Brahmagupta's name A..rya­
~tasata there must have been in the work of Arya­
bhata known to him exactly 33 other stanzas forming a more primitive and less developed mathematics, or these 33 other stanzas must have been astronomical in character, either forming a separate chapter or scattered through the present third and fourth sec­tions. This seems to be most unlikely. I doubt the validity 
of Kaye's contention that the GarJ,itapada was later 
than Brahmagupta. His suggestion that it is by 
the later Aryabhata who was the author of the 
M ahasiddhanta (published in the "Benares Sanskrit ,., 
1 Op. cit., X, 291-92. 
2 For criticism of Kaye see Bibhutibhusan Datta, op. cit., 
XVIII (1927), 5. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPREFACE xiii 
Series" and to be ascribed to the tenth century or even later) is impossible, as a comparison 
of the two texts would have shown. I feel justified in assuming 
that the Aryabhafi,ya 
on the whole is genuine. It is, of course, possible that 
at a later period some few stanzas may have been changed in wording or even supplanted 
by other stanzas. Noteworthy 
is I, 4, of which the true reading 
bhulJ,, as preserved in a quotation of Brahmagupta, has been changed 
by Paramesvara or by some pre­ceding commentator to 
bham in order to eliminate 
.Aryabhata' s theory of the rotation of the Earth. 
Brahmagupta criticizes some astronomical mat­
ters in which .Aryabhata is wrong or in regard to which 
.Aryabhata's method differs from his own, but his bitterest and most frequent criticisms are directed against points 
in which .Aryabhata was an innovator 
and differed from smrti or tradition. Such criticism would 
not arise in regard to mathematical matters 
which had nothing to do with theological tradition. 
The silence of Brahmagupta here may merely indicate 
that he found nothing to criticize or thought criticism unnecessary. Noteworthy is 
the fact that Brahma­
gupta does not give rules for the volume of a pyramid _. 
and for the volume of a sphere, which are both given incorrectly 
by Aryabhata (II, 6-7). This is as likely 
to prove ignorance of the true values on Brahma­
gupta' s part as laten~s of the rules of Aryabhata. 
What other rules of the Ga'f},itapada could be open to 
adverse criticism? On the positive side may be pointed 
out the very close correspondence in termi-
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comxiv PREFACE 
nology and expression between the fuller text of 
Brahmagupta, XVIII, 3-5 and the more enigmatical text of 
Aryabhafi,ya, II, 32-33, in their statements of 
the famous Indian method (kuttaka) of solving inde­terminate equations of the first degree. 
It seems prob­able to me 
that Brahmagupta had before him these two stanzas 
in their present form. It must be left to the mathematicians to decide which 
of the two rules 
is earlier. The only serious internal discrepancy which I have been able to discover 
in the .if ryabhafi,ya is the follow­ing. Indian astronomy, 
in general, maintains that the 
Earth is stationary and that the heavenly bodies revolve about it, 
but there is evidence in the Arya­
bhafiya itself and in the accounts of Aryabhata given 
by later writers to prove that Aryabhata maintained 
that the Earth, which is s\ituated in the center of 
space, revolves on its axis, and that the asterisms are stationary. 
Later writers attack him bitterly on this point. 
Even most of his own followers, notably Lalla, refused to follow him 
in this matter and reverted to 
the common Indian tradition. Stanza IV, 9, in spite 
of Paramesvara, must be interpreted as maintaining 
that the asterisms are stationary and that the Earth 
revolves. And yet the very next stanza (IV, 10) seems to describe a stationary 
Earth around which the asterisms revolve. Quotations 
by Bhattotpala, the Va­
sanavarttika, and the Marici i:q.c:licate that this stanza was known in its present form from the eleventh cen­
tury on. Is it capable of some different interpreta­tion? 
Is it intended merely as a statement of the 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPREFACE xv 
popular view? Has its wording been changed as has been done 
·with I, 4? I see at present no satisfactory solution 
of the problem. Colebrooke
1 gives caturvirhsaty arhsais crtkram 
ubhayato gacchet as a quotation by Munisva.ra from the 
Arya?tasata of Arya.bhata. This would indicate a knowledge of a libration 
of the equinoxes. No such statement is found in our 
Aryii?tasata. The quotation should be verified in 
the unpublished text in order to determine whether Colebrooke 
was mistaken or whether 
we are faced by a real discrepancy. The 
words are not found in the part of the lv1arici which has already been published 
in the Pandit. 
The follovv'ing problem also needs elucidation. Al-
though Brahmagupta (XI, 43-44) 
janaty ekam api yato naryabhato ga]).itakalagolanam I 
na maya proktani tatal). prthak prthag dii~al).any e~am II 
aryabhatadii~al).anam samkhya vakturit na sakyate yasmat I 
tasmad ayam uddeso buddhimatanyani yojyani 11 
sums up his criticism of Aryabhata in the severest possible way, 
yet at the beginning of his KharJ,rJ,a­
khadyaka, a karaJJ,agrantha which has recently been edited 
by Babua Misra J yotishacharyya (University 
of Calcutta, 1925), we find the statement vak?yami 
kharJ,<J,akhadyakam acaryaryabhatatulyaphalam. It is curious 
that Brahmagupta in his KharJ,r/,akhadyaka 
should use such respect£ ul language and should follow 
the authority of an author who was damned so un­mercifully 
by him in tlfe Tantrapar~k?fi of his Brahma­sphutasiddhanta. 
Moreover, the elements of the Kha1J,-
1 Miscellaneous Essays, II, 378. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comxvi PREFACE 
g,akhadyaka seem to differ much from those of the 
Aryabhafiya. 1 Is this to be taken as an indication 
that Brahmagupta here is following an older and a dif­
ferent Aryabhata? If so the Brahmasphutasiddhanta 
gives no clear indication of the fact. Or is he fol­lowing 
another work by the same Aryabhata? Ac­cording 
to Dik~it, 2 the Kharp:J,akhadyaka agrees in all essentials 
with the old form of the Suryasiddhanta 
rather than with the Brahmasphufasiddhanta. Just as 
Brahmagupta composed two different· works so 
.Aryabhata may have composed two works which represented two different 
points of view. The second work 
may have been cast in a traditional mold, may 
have been based on the old Si7ryasiddhanta, or have 
formed a commentary upon it. 
The M ahasiddhanta of another .Aryabhata who lived 
in the tenth century or later declares (XIII, 14): 
vrddharyabhataproktat siddhantad yan mahakalat I 
pathair gatam ucchedani vise~itarn tan maya svoktya II 
But this M ahasiddhanta differs in so many particulars from 
the Aryabhafiya that it is difficult to believe that 
the author of the Aryabha(iya can be the one referred 
to as V:rddharyabhata unless he had composed an­
other work which differed in many particulars from 
the Aryabhafi,ya. The matter needs careful investiga­tion.3 
1 Cf. Pancasiddhantika, p. xx, and Bulletin of the Calcutta Mathe­
matical Society, XVII (1926), 69. 
2 As reported by Thibaut, Astronom,:e, Astrologie und M athematik, 
pp. 55, 59. 
3 See Bulletin of the Calcutta Mathematical Society, XVII (1926), 
66-67, for a brief discussion. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comPREFACE xvii 
This monograph is based upon work done with me 
at the University of Chicago some five years ago by 
Baidyanath Sastri for the degree of A.lVI. So much 
additional material has been ~dded, so many changes 
have been made, and so many of the views expressed 
would be unacceptable to him that I have not felt 
justified in placing his name, too, upon the title-page 
as joint-author and thereby making him responsible 
for many things of which he might not approve. 
HARVARD UNIVERSITY 
April, 1929 
While readin-g the final page-proof I learned of 
the publication by Prabodh Chandra Sengupta of a 
translation of the Aryabhat,iya in the Journal of the 
Department of Letters (Calcutta University), XVI 
-(1927). Unfortunately it has not been possible to 
make use of it in the present publication. 
April, 1930 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comDownloaded from https://www.holybooks.comTABLE OF CONTENTS 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS . XXVll 
I. DASAGiTIKA OR THE TEN GiTI STANZAS 1 
A. Invocation . 1 
B. System of Expressing Numbers by Letters of 
Alphabet . 2 
1. Revolutions of Sun, J\foon, Earth, and Planets 
ma yuga . 9 
2. Revolutions of Apsis of Moon, Conjunctions of 
Planets, and Node of Moon in a yuga; Time 
and Place from vVbich Revolutions Are To 
Be Calculated 9 
3. Number of Manus in a kalpa; Number of yugas 
in Period of a Manu; Part of kalpa Elapsed up 
to Bharata Battle 12 
4. Divisions of Circle; Circumference of Sky and 
Orbits of Planets in yojanas; Earth Moves One 
kalii in a prii'IJ,a; Orbit of Sun One-sixtieth 
That of Asterisms 13 
5. Length of yojana; Diameters of Earth, Sun, 
Moon, Meru, and Planets; Number of Years 
ma yuga . 15 
6. Greatest Declination of Ecliptic; Greatest Deviation 
of Moon and Planets from Ecliptic; 
Measure of a nr . 16 
7. Positions of Ascending Nodes of Planets, and 
of Apsides of Sun and Planets . 16 
8-9. Dimensions of Epicycles of Apsides and Con­
junctions of Pl.1D.ets; Circumference of Earth-
Wind . 18 
10. Table of Sine-Differences 19 
C. Colophon . 20 
XlX 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comXX TABLE OF CONTENTS 
II. GA~'l:TAPA.DA OR MATHEMATICS . 21 
1. Invocation 21 
2. Names and Values of Classes of Numbers Increas-ing 
by Powers of Ten 21 
3. Definitions of Square (varga) and Cube (ghana) 21 
4. Square Root . 22 5. Cube 
Root 24 6. Area of Triangle; Volume of Pyramid 26 
7. Area of Circle; Volume of Sphere ·. 27 
8. Area of Trapezium; Length of Perpendiculars from Intersection of Diagonals to Parallel Sides 
27 
9. Area of Any Plane Figure; Chord of One-sixth Cir-cumference 
Equal to Radius 27 
10. Relation of Circumference of Circle to Diameter 28 
11. Method of Constructing Sines by Forming Tri-angles and Quadrilaterals 
in Quadrant of Circle . 28 
12. Calculation of Table of Sine-Differences from 
First One . 29 
13. Construction of Circles, Triangles, and Quadri­laterals; Determination of Horizontal 
and Per-pendicular 30 
14. Radius of khavrtta (or svavrtta); Hypotenuse of Right-Angle Triangle Formed 
by Gnomon and 
Shadow 31 
15-16. Shadow Problems . 31-2 17. Hypotenuse 
of Right-Angle Triangle; Relation of Half-Chord to Segments of Diameter Which Bisects Chord . 34 
18. Calculation of sampatasaras When Two Circles Intersect . 34 19-20. Arithmetical Progression . 
35-6 
21. Sum of Series Formed by Taking Sums of Terms 
of an Arithmetical Progressi<J-11 . 37 22. Sums of Series Formed 
by Taking Squares and 
Cubes of Terms of an Arithmetical Progression . 37 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comTABLE OF CONTENTS xxi 
23. Product of Two Factors Half the Difference be­
tween Square of Their Sum and Sum of Their Squares 
38 
24. To Find Two Factors When Product and Differ-ence 
Are Known . 38 25. 
Interest 38 
26. Rule of Three (Proportion) . 39 
27. Fractions . 40 
28. Inverse Method . 40 
29. To Find Sum of Several Numbers \Yuen Results Obtained by Subtracting Each Number from Their Sum Are Known . 
40 
30. To Find Value of Unknown When Two Equal Quantities Consist 
of Knowns and Similar Un-knowns 
41 
31. To Calculate Their Past and Future Conjunctions from Distance between Two Planets . 
41 
32-33. Indeterminate Equations of First Degree 
(kuttaka) . 43 
III. .KALAKRIYA OR THE RECKONING OF Tn.IE . 51 
1-2. Divisions of Time; Divisions of Circle Corre-spond . 
51 
3. Conjunctions and vyafipatas of Two Planets in a 
yuga 51 
4. Number of Revolutions of Epicycles of Planets; Years 
of Jupiter . 51 
5. Definition of Solar Year, Lunar Month, Civil Day, and Sidereal Day . 
.- 52 
6. Intercalary Months and Omitted Lunar. Days . 52-3 
7-8. Year of Men, Fathers, and Gods; yuga of All 
the Planets; Day of Brahman . 53 
9. Utsarpir.J,'i, avasarpirJ,'i, sw;ama, and dU??ama as 
Divisions of yuga , . 53 
10. Date of Writing of Aryabhatiya; Age of Author at 
Time. M 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comxxii TABLE OF CONTENTS 
11. Yuga, Year, Month, and Day Began at First of 
Caitra; Endless Time Measured by Movements of 
Planets and Asterisms 55 
12. Planets Move with Equal Speed; Time in Which They Traverse Distances Equal to Orbit 
of Aster-isms and Circumference 
of Sky . 55 
13. Periods of Revolution Differ because Orbits Differ 
in Size . 56 
14. For Same Reason Signs, Degrees, and Minutes Differ 
in Length . 56 
15. Order in Which Orbits of Planets Are Arranged (beneath the Asterisms) around 
Earth as Center 56 
16. Planets as "Lords of Days" (of Week) 56 
17. Planets Move with Their Mean Motion on Orbits and Eccentric Circles Eastward from Apsis and Westward from Conjunction 
57 
18-19. Eccentric Circle Equal in Size to Orbit; Its Center Distant from Center 
of Earth by Radius 
of Epicycle 58 
20. Movement of Planet on Epicycle; When ahead of 
and When behind Its Mean Position . 58 
21. Movement of Epicycles; Mean Planet (on Its 
Orbit) at Center of Epicycle 59 
22-24. Calculation of True Places of Planets from Mean Places . 
60 
25. Calculation of True Distance between Planet and Earth . 
61 
IV. GOLA OR THE SPHERE 63 
1. Zodiacal Signs in Northern and Southern Halves 
of Ecliptic; Even Deviation of Ecliptic from Equator 
63 
2. Sun, Nodes of Moon and Planets, and Earth's Shadow Move along 
Eclipti~ . 63 
3. Moon, Jupiter, Mars, and Saturn Cross Ecliptic 
at Their Nodes; Venus and Mercury at Their Conjunctions . 
63 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comTABLE OF CONTENTS xxiii 4. Distance from Sun 
at Which 1\foon and Planets Become Visible . 
63-4 
5. Sun illumines One Half of Earth, Planets, and 
Asterisms; Other Half Dark 64 
6-7. Spherical Earth, Surrounded by Orbits of 
Planets and by Asterisms, Situated in Center of 
Space; Consists of Earth, Water, Fire, and Air . 64 
8. Radius of Earth Increases and Decreases by a 
yojana during Day and Night of Brahman 64 
9. At Equator Stationary Asterisms Seem To Move Straight Westward; Simile 
of Moving Boat and 
Objects on Shore . 64 
10. Asterisms and Planets, Driven by Provector Wind, 
J\'1ove Straight Westward at Equator-
Hence Rising and Setting 66 
11-12. Mount Meru and Vaq.aviimukha (North and South Poles); Gods 
and Demons Think the Others beneath 
Them 68 
13. Four Cities on Equator a Quadrant Apart; Sun­rise 
at First Is Midday, Sunset-1\'.Iidnight at 
~~- I ~ 
14. Lanka (on Equator) 90° from Poles; Ujjain 22½0 
North of Lanka . 68 
15. From Level Place Half of Stellar Sphere minus 
Radius of Earth Is Visible; Other Half plus Radius 
of Earth Is Cut Off by Earth . . 68-9 16. 
At Meru and Vaq.avamukha Northern and South­ern Halves 
of Stellar Sphere Visible Moving from Left 
to Right or Vice Versa. 69 
17. At Poles the Sun, after It Rises, Visible for Half­
y ear; on Moon the Sun Visible for Half a Lunar 
Month. 69 
18. Definition of Prime Vertical, Meridian, and 
Horizon ' 69 
19. East and West Hour-Circle Passing through Pole~ 
( unmarpJ,ala) . 69 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comxxiv TABLE OF CONTENTS 
20. Prime Vertical, Meridian, and Perpendicular from Zenith to Nadir Intersect at Place Where Observer Is . 
70 
21. Vertical Circle Passing through Planet and Place Where Observer Is 
(drnmarJ,c/,ala); Vertical Circle Passing through 
N onagesimal Point (drkkf;epa-
ma?J,c/,ala) . 70 
22. Construction of Wooden Globe Caused To Re­volve 
So as To Keep Pace with Revolutions of Heavenly Bodies 
70 
23. Heavenly Bodies Depicted on This; Equinoctial Sine (Sine 
of Latitude) Is Base; Sine of Co­latitude 
(sahku at Midday of Equinoctial Day) Is 
koti (Perpendicular to Base) . 70 
24. Radius of Day-Circle 71 
25. Right Ascension of Signs of Zodiac 71 26. 
Earth-Sine Which Measures Increase and De-crease of 
Day and Night 71 
27. Oblique Ascension of Signs of Zodiac . . . 72 
28. Sanku of Sun (Sine of Altitude on Vertical Circle Passing through Sun) 
at Any Given Time 72 
29. Base of sanku (Distance from Rising and Setting Line) . 
73 
,30. Amplitude of Sun (agra) 73 
31. Sine of Altitude of Sun When Crossing Prime Vertical 
74 32. 
Midday sanku and Shadow. 74 33. 
Sine of Ecliptic Zenith-Distance (drkk~epajya) 74 34. 
Sine of Ecliptic Altitude (drggatijya); Parallax 75 35-36. 
Drkkarman (akl}a and ayana) 76-7 
37. Moon Causes Eclipse of Sun; Shadow of Earth 
Causes Eclipse of Moon . 78 
38. Time at Which Eclipses Occur . 78 
39. Length of Shadow of Earth ~ . 78 
40. Diameter of Earth's Shadow in Orbit of Moon 79 
41. Sthityardha (Half of Time from First to Last Contact) . 
· 79 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comTABLE OF CONTENTS 
42. Yimardardha (Half of Time of Total Obscuration) 
43. Part of l\Ioon \Vhich Is Not Eclipsed . XXV 
79 
79 
44. Amount of Obscuration at Any Given Time . 
45. Yalana. . 79-80 
80 
81 46. Colar of Moon at Different Parts of Total Eclipse 
47. Eclipse of Sun :Not Perceptible if Less than One­
eighth Obscured . 48. 
Sun Calculated from Conjunction (yoga) of Earth 
and Sun, :Moon from Conjunction of Sun and 
J\,foon, and Other Planets from Conjunction of 
Planet and J\Ioon 
49-50. Colophon 
GENERAL INDEX 
SANSKRIT l:NDEX 81 81 81 
83 
89 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comDownloaded from https://www.holybooks.comLIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 
Alberuni ................... Alberuni's India. Translated by 
E. C. Sachau. London, 1910. 
Barth (CEuvres) ............. (Euvres de Auguste Barthe. 3 vols. 
Paris, 1917. 
BCMS ................... . Bulletin of the Calcutta Ma.the-
matical Society. 
Bhaskara, Ga7J,ittidhyaya ..... Edited by Bapu Deva Sastri; re­
vised by Ramachandra Gupta. 
Benares (no date). 
Bhaskara, Goladhyiiya ....... Edited by Bapu Deva Sastri; re-
vised by Ramachandra Gupta. 
Benares (no date). Edited by 
Girija Prasad Dvivedi. 
Lucknow: Newul Kishore Press, 
1911. 
Bhattotpala ... : ............ The Brhat Sa1hhita by Varaha-
mihira with the commentary 
of Bhattotpala. "Vizianagram 
Sanskrit Series," Vol. X. Be­
nares, 1895-97. 
Bibl. math .................. Bibliotheca mathematica. 
Brahmagupta .............. Refers to Brahmasphutasiddhiinta. 
Brahmasphutasiddhanta ...... Edited by Sudhakara Dvivedin in 
the Pandit (N.S.), Vols. XXIII­
XXIV. Benares, 1901-2. 
Brennand, Hindu Astronomy .. W. Brennand, Hindu Astronomy. 
London, 1896. 
Brhat Sarhhita .............. The Brhat Sarhhita by Varahami-
hira with the commentary of 
Bhattotpala. ''Vizianagram. San­
skrit Series," Vol. X. Benares, 
1895-97. 
xxvii 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comxxviii LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 
Colebrooke, Algebra ......... H. T. Colebrooke, Algebra, with 
Arithme~ic and Mensuration, from 
the Sanscrit of Brahmegupta and 
Bhdscara. London, 1817. 
Colebrooke, Essays .......... Miscellaneous Essays (2d ed.), by H. T. Colebrooke. Madras, 
1872. 
Hemacandra, Abhidhiina- Edited by Bohtlingk and Rieu. 
cintamar:ii..... . . . . . . . . . . . St. Petersburg, 1847. 
IA ........................ Indian Antiquary. 
IHQ ...................... Indian Historical Quarterly. 
JA ........................ Journal asiatique. J 
ASB ..................... Journal and Proceedings of the 
Asiatic Society of Bengal. 
JBBRAS .................. Journal of the Bombay Branch of 
the Royal Asiatic Society. 
JBORS ................... .Journal of the Bihar and Orissa Research Society. 
JIM S ..................... Journal of the Indian Mathematical Society. 
JRAS ..................... Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society. 
Kaye, Indian Mathematics ... G. R. Kaye, Indian Mathematics. 
Calcutta, 1915. 
Kaye, Hindu Astronomy ..... "Memoirs of the Archaeological Survey 
of India," No. 18. Cal­cutta, 
1924. 
KharJ4akhadyaka ........... . By Brahmagupta. Edited by Babua Misra Jyotishacharyya. University 
of Calcutta, 1925. 
Lalla ...................... The Si?yadhivrddhida of Lalla. Edited by 
Suclhakara Dvivedin. Benares 
(no date). 
M ahasiddhanta ............. By A.ryat>hata. Edited by Suclha-
kara Dvivedin in the "Benares Sanskrit Series." 
1910. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comLIST OF ABBREVIATIONS xxix 
l\Iarici. .................... The Ga1J,itadhyaya of Bhaskara's 
SiddhantasiromaJJi with Vasana­
bh~ya, Vasanavarttika, and 
Marici. Pandit (N.S.), Vols. 
XX...-X-XXXI. Benares, 1908-9. 
Paiicasiddhantika ........... G. Thibaut and Sudha.kara Dvi-
vedi, The Pancasiddhantika. The 
Astronomical Work of Varaha 
2\,f ihira. Benares, 1889. 
Sudhakara, Ga7Jakatarangi1J'l .. Benares, 1892. 
Suryasiddhanta ............ . Edited by F. E. Hall and Bapu 
Deva Sastrin in the Bibliotheca indica. 
Calcutta, 1859. 
Translated by Burgess and Whit­
ney, Journal of the American 
Oriental Society, Vol. VI. 
Vasanavarttika .............. The GarJ,itadhyaya of Bhaskara's 
SiddhllntasiromarJ,i with Vasa­
nabha~ya, Vasanavarttika, and 
Marici. Pandit (N.S.), Vols. 
XX...-X-XX..'X.I. Benares, 1908-9. 
Z D MG .................... Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgen-
liindische:n Gesellschajt. 
I, II, III, and IV refer to the four sections of the .A.ryabhafi,ya. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comDownloaded from https://www.holybooks.comCHAPTER I 
DASAG!TIKA OR THE TEN 
GlTI STANZAS 
A. Having paid reyerence to Brahman, who is one (in causal­
ity, as the creator of the universe, but) many (in his manifesta­
tions), the true deity, the Supreme Spirit, Aryabhata sets forth 
three things: mathematics [gat,iita], the reckoning of time 
[kiilakriya], and the sphere [gola]. 
Baidyanatb suggests that satya devatii may denote Sarasvati, the goddess 
of learning. For this I can find no support, and therefore 
follow the commen­tator Paramesvara in translating "the true deity," 
G_od in the highest sense of the word, as referring to Prajapati, Pitamaha, Svayambhu, the lower indi­vidualized Brahman, 
who is so called as being the creator 
of the universe and above all the other gods. Then this 
lower Brahman is identified with the higher Brahman 
as being only an individualized manif esta­tion 
of the latter. As Paramesvara remarks, the use 
of the word kam seems to indicate that .A.ryabhata 
based his work on the old Pitamahasiddhanta. Sup­port for this 
view is found in the concluding stanza 
of our text (IV, 50), aryabhat'iyarh namna purvarh 
svayambhuvarh sada sad yat. However, as shown by 
Thibaut 1 and Kharegat, 2 there is a close connection between 
Aryabhata a:e.d the old Suryasiddhanta. At 
1 Pancasiddhantika, pp. xviii, xxvii. 
2 JBBRAS, XIX, 129-31. 
1 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com2 ARYABHA TIYA 
present the evidence is too scanty to allow us to specify the sources from which 
.Aryabhata drew. The stanza has been translated 
by Fleet. 1 As 
pointed out first by Bhau Daji, 2 a passage of Brahma­gupta (XII, 43), 
janaty ekam api yato naryabhato 
garJ,itakalagolilnam, seems to ref er to the GarJ,itapada, 
the Kalakriyapada, and the Golapada of our Arya-~ 
bhatiya (see also Bibhutibhusan Datta). 3 Since Brahmagupta (XI, 
8) names the Dasagitika and the 
Aryaf$tasata (108 stanzas) as works of .A.ryabhata, and since the three words of 
XI, 43 refer in order to the last three sections 
of the Aryaohafi,ya (which contain exactly 
108 stanzas), their occurrence there in this order seems 
to be due to more than mere coincidence. 
As Fleet remarks, 4 Aryabhata here claims specifically as his work only three chapters. 
But Brahmagupta 
(628 A.n.) actually quotes at least three passages of 
our Dasagitika and ascribes it to .Aryabhata. There is 
no good reason for refusing to accept it as part of 
.Aryabhata's treatise. 
B. Beginning with ka the varga letters (are to be used) in the 
varga places, and the avarga letters (are to be used) in the avarga 
places. Ya is equal to the sum of na and ma. The nine vowels (are to be used) 
in two nines of places varga and avarga. N avantya­
varge va . 
.A.ryabhata's system of expressing numbers by 
means of letters has been discussed by Whish, 5 by 
1JRA8, 1911, pp. 114-15. 8 BCMS, XVIII (1927), 16. 
2 Ibid., 1865, p. 403. "'4 JRAS, 1911, pp. 115, 125. 
5 Transactions of the Literary Society of Madras, I (1827), 54, 
translated with additional notes by Jacquet, JA (1835), II, 118. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comTHE TEN GiTI STANZAS 3 
Brockhaus, 1 by Kern, 2 by Barth, 3 by Rodet, 4 by 
Kaye,5 by Fleet, 6 by Sarada Kanta Ganguly,7 and by Sukumar Ranjan Das.
8 I have not had access to the 
Prthivir I tihasa of Durgadas Lahiri. 9 
The words varga and avarga seem to ref er to the Indian method 
of extracting the square root, which 
is described in detail by Rodet 10 and by A vadhesh Narayan Singh.
11 I cannot agree with Kaye' s state­
ment12 that the rules given by .A.ryabhata for the extraction 
of square and cube roots (II, 4-5) "are perfectly general (i.e., algebraical)" and apply to 
all 
arithmetical notations, nor with his criticism of the foregoing stanza: "Usually the texts give a verse explaining this notation, 
but this explanatory' verse is not Aryabhata's."
13 Sufficient evidence has not been adduced 
by him to prove either assertion. The 
varga or "square" places are the first, third, fifth, etc., counting from the right. The 
avarga or 
"non-square" places are the second, fourth, sixth, etc., counting from the right. The words 
varga and 
avarga seem to be used in this sense in II, 4. There is 
no good reason for refusing to take them in the same sense here. 
As applied to the Sanskrit alphabet the 
varga letters referred to here are those from k to m, 
1 Zeitschriftfur die Kunde des Morgenlandes, IV, 81. 
2 JRAS, 1863, p. 380. 8 IHQ, III, 110. 
a <Euvres, III, 182. 
4 JA (1880), II, 440. 
6 J ASB, 1907, p. 478. • 
8 Op. cit., 1911, p. 109. 
7 BCMS, XVII (1926), 195. 9 III, 332 ff. 
10 Op. cit. (1879), I, 406-8. 
11 BCMS, XVIII (1927), 128 
12 Op. cit., 1908, p. 120. 
11 Ibid., p. 118. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com4 ARYABHA TIYA 
which are arranged in five groups of five letters each. 
The avarga letters are those from y to h, which are 
not so arranged in groups. The phrase "beginning with 
ka'' is necessary because the vowels also are divided into 
vargas or "groups." Therefore 
the vowel a used in varga and avarga 
places with varga and avarga letters refers the varga 
letters k to m to the first varga place, the unit place, multiplies them 
by 1. The vowel a used with the 
avarga letters y to h refers them to the first avarga 
place, the place of ten's, multiplies them by 10. In 
like manner the vowel i refers the letters k to m to the second 
varga place, the place of hundred's, multi­plies 
them by 100. It refers the avarga letters y to h 
to the second avarga place, the place of thousand's, multiplies them 
by 1,000. And so on with the other seven vowels 
up to the ninth varga and avarga places. From 
A.ryabhata's usage it is clear that the vowels to be employed are 
a, i, u, r, ?, e, ai, o, and au. No distinction is made between long and short vowels. From 
Aryabhata's usage it is clear that the letters 
k to m have the values of 1-25. The letters y to h 
would have the values of 3-10, but since a short a is regarded as inherent 
in a consonant when no other vowel sign is 
attached and when the virama is not 
used, and since short a refers the avarga letters to the 
place of ten's, the signs ya, etc., really have the values 
of 30-100. 1 The vowels themselves have no numerical values. 
They merely serve to., refer the consonants (which do have numerical values) to certain places. 
1 See Sarada Kanta Ganguly, op. cit., XVII (1926), 202. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comTHE TEN GITI STANZAS 5 
The last clause, which has been left untranslated, offers great difficulty. The commentator Paramesvara takes 
it as affording a method of expressing still higher numbers 
by attaching anusvcfra or visarga to the vowels and using them in nine further 
varga (and 
avarga) places. It is doubtful whether the word 
avarga can be so supplied in the compound. Fleet would translate "in the 
varga place after the nine" as giving directions for referring a consonant 
to the nineteenth place. 
In view of the fact that the plural subject must carry over into this clause Fleet's in­terpretation seems to be impossible. Fleet suggests as an alternate interpretation the emendation 
of va to 
hau. But, as explained above, au refers h to the eighteenth place. 
It would run to nineteen places only when expressed in digits. There 
is no reason why such a statement should be made 
in the rule. Rodet translates (without rendering the word 
nava), "(sep­
arement) ou a un groupe termine par un varga." That 
is to say, the clause has nothing to do with the ex­pression 
of numbers beyond the eighteenth place, 
but merely states that the vowels may be attached to the consonants singly as 
gara or to a group of con­sonants as 
gra, in which latter case it is to be under­stood as applying to each consonant in 
the group. So 
giri or gri and guru or gru. Such, indeed, is Arya­
bhata' s usage, and such a statement is really nec­essary in order to 
avojd ambiguity, but the words do 
not seem to warrant the translation given by Rodet. 
If the words can mean ''at the end of a group," and 
if nava can be taken-with what precedes, Rodet' s in-
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com6 ARYABHA TlYA 
terpretation is acceptable. However, I know no other passage which would warrant such a translation 
of 
antyavarge. 
Sarada Kanta Ganguly translates, "[Those] nine 
[vowels] [should be used] in higher places in a similar manner." 
It is possible for va to have the sense of 
"beliebig," "fakultativ," and for nava to be sepa­rated from 
antyavarge, but the regular meaning of 
antya is "the last." It has the sense of "the following" only 
at the end of a compound, and the dictionary gives only one example 
of that usage. If navantyavarge 
is to be taken as a compound, the translation "in the group following 
the nine" is all right. But Ganguly's translation 
of antyavarge can be maintained only if he produces evidence to prove 
that antya at the begin­ning 
of a compound can mean "the following." 
If nava is to be separated from antyavarge it is possible 
to take it with what precedes and to trans­late, 
"The vowels (are to be used) in two nine's of places, nine 
in varga places and nine in avarga places," 
but antyavarge va remains enigmatical. The translation must remain uncertain until further evidence bearing on the meaning 
of antya 
can be produced. Whatever the meaning may be, the passage is 
of no consequence for the numbers actually dealt with 
by Aryabhata in this treatise. The largest number used 
by Aryabhata himself (I, 1) runs to only 
ten places. ,. 
Rodet, Barth, and some others would translate "in 
the two nine's of zero's," instead of "in the two nine's 
of places." That is to say, each vowel would serve to 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comTHE TEN GITI STANZAS 7 
add two zero's to the numerical value of the con­sonant. This, 
of course, ·will work from the vowel i on, 
but the vowel a does not add two zero's. It adds no zero's or one zero depending on whether 
it is used 
with varga or avarga letters. The fact that khadvi­
navake is amplified by varge 'varge is an added difficulty to the translation "zero." 
It seems to me, therefore, preferable to take the word 
kha in the sense of "space" or better "place."
1 Later the word kha is one of the commonest words for 
,:zero," but it is still disputed whether a symbol for zero was actually in use 
in 
.Aryabhata's time. It is possible that computation may have been made on a board ruled into columns. Only nine symbols may have been in use and a blank column may have served to represent zero. There is no evidence to indicate the way in which 
the actual calculations were made, but it seems cer­
tain to me that Aryabhata could write a number in 
signs which had no absolutely fixed values in them­selves 
but which had value depending on the places occupied 
by them (mounting by powers of 10). Com­pare II, 
2, where in giving the names of classes of 
numbers he uses the expression sthanat sthanarh 
dasagurJ,arh syat, "from place to place each is ten times the preceding." 
. 
There is nothing to prove that the actual calcula­tion was made 
by means of these letters. It is prob­able 
that Aryabhata was not inventing a numerical notation to be used 
in calculation but was devising a system 
by means of which he might express large, 
1 Cf. Fleet, op. cit., 1911, p. 116. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com8 ARY ABHA TlYA 
unwieldy numbers in verse in a very brief form. 1 
The alphabetical notation is employed only in the 
Dasag'itika. In other parts of the treatise, where only a few numbers 
of small size occur, the ordinary words which denote 
the numbers are employed. 
As an illustration of .A.ryabhata's alphabetical notation 
take the number of the revolutions of the Moon 
in a yuga (I, 1), which is expressed by the word. 
cayagiyinusuchlr. Taken syllable by syllable this gives 
the numbers 6 and 30 and 300 and 3,000 and 50,000 and 700,000 
and 7,000,000 and 50,000,000. 
That is to say, 57,753,336. It happens here that the digits are given 
in order from right to left, but they may be given in reverse order or 
in any order which will make the syllables fit into the meter. 
It is hard to believe 
that such a descriptive alphabetical nota­tion was not based on a place-value notation. This stanza, as being a technical 
paribhaf$a stanza which indicates 
the system of notation employed in the 
Dasagitika, is not counted. The invocation and the colophon are not counted. There 
is no good reason why the thirteen stanzas should not have been named 
Dasagitika (as they are named by Aryabhata himself 
in stanza C) from the ten central stanzas in Giti 
meter which give the astronomical elements of the system. The discrepancy offers no firm support to 
the 
contention of Kaye that this stanza is a later addition. 
The manuscript referred to by Kaye 2 as containing fifteen instead of thirteen stanzas is doubtless com-
1 See J.A. (1880), II, 454, and BCMS, XVII (1926), 201. 
2 Op. cit., 1908, p. 111. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comTHE TEN GITI STANZAS 9 
parable to the one referred to by Bhau Daji1 as having 
two introductory stanzas "evidently an after-addi­tion, 
and not in the Arya metre.'' 
1. In a yuga the revolutions of the Sun are 4,320,000, of the 
Moon 57,753,336, of the Earth eastward 1,582,237,500, of Saturn 
1-16,564, of Jupiter 36-1,22-1, of Mars 2,:296,824, of 1\Iercury and 
Y enus the same as those of the Sun. 
2. of the apsis of the Moon -188,219, of (the conjunction of) 
Mercury 17,937,020, of (the conjunction of) Venus 7,022,388, of ( 
the conj imctions of) the others the same as those of the Sun, of 
the node of the 1\foon westward 232,226 starting at the beginning of 
Me~a at sunrise on ,yednesday at Lanka. 
The so-called revolutions of the Earth seem to 
ref er to the rotation of the Earth on its axis. The 
number given corresponds to the number of sidereal days usually reckoned 
in a yuga. Paramesvara, who follows 
the normal tradition of Indian astronomy 
and believes that the Earth is stationary, tries to 
prove that here and in IV, 9 (which he quotes) 
Aryabhata does not really mean to say that the Earth 
rotates. His effort to bring .A.ryabhata into agreement with 
the views of most other Indian astronomers seems 
to be misguided ingenuity. There is no warrant 
for treating the revolutions of the Earth given here as based on false knowledge 
(mithyajnana), which causes 
the Earth to seem to move eastward because of 
the actual westward movement of the planets (see 
note to I, 4). 
In stanza 1 the ~yllable ~ in the phrase which gives 
the revolutions of the Earth is a misprint for 
bu as given correctly in the commentary. 2 
1 Ibid., 1865, p. 397. 2 See imd., 1911, p. 122 n. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com10 ARYABHATIYA 
Here and elsewhere in the DasagUika words are used 
in their stem form without declensional endings. Lalla 
(Madhyamadhikara, 3-6, 8) gives the same numbers for 
the revolutions of the planets, and differs only 
in giving "revolutions of the asterisms" instead of "revolutions 
of the Earth." 
The Suryasiddhanta (I, 29-34) shows slight varia­tions (see 
Pancasiddhantika, pp. xviii-xix, and Kharegat
1 for the closer relationship of Aryabhata 
to the old Suryasiddhanta). 
Bibhutibhusan Datta, 2 in criticism of the number of revolutions of 
the planets reported by Alberuni (II, 16-19), remarks 
that the numbers given for the 
revolutions of Venus and Mercury really refer to the 
revolutions of their apsides. It would be more accu­
rate to say "conjunctions." Alberuni (I, 370, 377) quotes from a book 
of 
Brahmagupta's which he calls Critical Research on the 
Basis of the Canons a number for the civil days accord­ing 
to Aryabhata. This corresponds to the number of 
sidereal days given above (cf. the number of sidereal days given 
by Brahmagupta [I, 22]). Compare 
the figures for the number of revolutions of 
the planets given by Brahmagupta (I, 15-21) which differ 
in detail and include figures for the revolutions 
of the apsides and nodes. Brahmagupta (I, 61) 
akrtaryabhatal). sighragam indiiccam patam alpagaril svagatel). I 
tithyantagrahaI).anaril ghu:t;tak$aram tasya sarr1vadal). 11 
. ,. -criticizes the numbers given by Aryabhata for the 
revolutions of the apsis and node of the Moon. 3 
1 JBBRAS, XVIII, 129-31. 2 BCMS, XVII (1926), 71. 
3 See further Bragmagupta (V, 25) and Alberuni (I, 376). 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comTHE TEN GITI STANZAS 11 
Brahmagupta (II, 46-47) remarks that according 
to Aryabhata all the planets were not at the first point of 
l\f e~a at the beginning of the yuga. I do not know on 
what evidence this criticism is based. 1 
Brahmagupta (XI, 8) remarks that according to 
the ~4.ry~ta,sata the nodes move while according to 
the Dasag"itika the nodes ( excepting that of the l\Ioon) 
are fixed: 
arya§tasate pata bhramanti dasagitike sthiral:t patal;t I 
muktvendupatam apama:Q.qale bhramanti sthira natal:t. II 
This refers to I, 2 and IV, 2. Aryabhata (I, 7) gives 
the location, at the time his work was composed, of 
the apsides and nodes of all the planets, and (I, 7 and 
IV, 2) implies a knowledge of their motion. But he gives figures only for 
the apsis and node of the Moon. This 
may be due to the fact that the numbers are so 
small that he thought them negligible for his purpose. Brahmagupta 
(XI, 5) quotes stanza 1 of our text: 
yugaravibhaga:r;tal;t khyughriti yat proktam tat tayor yugaril spa~tarh 
I 
trisatI ravyudayanam tadantararn hetuna kena. 112 
1 See Suryasiddhanta, pp. 27-28, and JRAS, 1911, p. 494. 
2 Cf. JRAS, 1865, p. 401. This implies, as Sudhakara says, that 
Brahmagupta knew two works by .A.ryabhata each giving the revolu­tions of 
the Sun as 4,320,000 but one reckoning 300 s(J,vana days more 
than the other. Cf. Kharegat (op. C'it., XIX, 130). Is the reference to 
another book by the author of our treatise or was there another 
earlier .A.ryabhata? Brahmagupta (XI, 13-14) further implies that 
he knew two works by an ap.thor named A.ryabhata in one of which 
the yuga began at sunrise, in the other at midnight (see JRAS, 
1863, p. 384; JBBRAS, XIX, 130-31; JRAS, 1911, p. 494;.IHQ, IV, 
506). At any rate, Brahmagupta does not imply knowledge of a second 
.A.ryabhata. For the whole problem of the two or three A.rya­
bhatas see Kaye (Bibl. math., X, 289) and Bibhutibhusan Datta 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com12 A.RYABHA TlYA 
3. There are 14 Manus in a day of Brahman [a kalpa], and 
72 yugas constitute the period of a Manu. Since the beginning 
of this kalpa up to the TJ1_ursday_ of the Bharata battle 6 Manus, 
27 yugas, and 3 yugapadas have elapsed. 
The word yugapada seems to indicate that Arya­
bhata divided the yuga into four equal quarters. There is no direct statement to this effect, 
but also there is no reference 
to the traditional method of 
dividing the yuga into four parts in the proportion of 
4, 3, 2, and 1. Brahmagupta and later tradition ascribes to 
.Aryabha ta the division of the yuga into four equal parts. 
For the traditional division see 
Suryasiddhanta (I, 18-20, 22-23) and Brahmagupta (I, 7-8). 
For discussion of this and the supposed divisions 
of .Aryabhata see Fleet. 1 Compare III, 10, 
which gives data for the calculation of the date of the composition 
of .Aryabhata's treatise. It is clear 
that the fixed point was the beginning of .Aryabhata's 
fourth yugapada (the later Kaliyuga) at the time of 
the great Bharata battle in 3102 B.c. 
Compare Brahmagupta (I, 9) 
yugapadan aryabhatas catvari samani krtayugadini I 
yad abhihitavan na te~arh smrtyuktasamanam ekam api II 
and XI, 4 
aryabhato yugapadams trill yatan aha kaliyugadau yat I 
tasya lqtantar yasmat svayugadyantau na tat tasmat II 
(op. cit., XVII [1926], 60-74). The PancaMdhantilca also (XV, 20), 
"Aryabhata maintains that the beginning of the day is to be reckoned from midnight 
at Lanka; and the same 'teacher again says that the day begins from sunrise 
·at Lanka,'' ascribes the two theories to one 
Aryabhata. 
1 Op. cit., 1911, pp. 111, 486. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comTHE TEN GITI STANZAS 13 
with the comn1entary of Sudhakara. Brahmagupta (I, 
12) quotes stanza I, 3, 
manusandhiril yugam icchaty aryabhatas tanmanur yatal). skhayuga}:i 
! 
kalpas caturyuganam. sahasram a:;;tadhika:rn. tasya. !11 
Brahmagupta (I, 28) refers to the same matter, 
adhikal;i. smrtyuktamanor liryabhat,oktas caturyuge:i;ia manul)_ I 
adhikaril viri1slimsayutais tribhir yugais tasya kalpagatum. 11 
Brahmagupta (XI, 11) criticizes .Aryabhata for be-ginning the Kaliyuga with Thursday (see the com­mentary 
of Sudhakara). 
Bhau Daji 2 first pointed out the parallels in Brahmagupta I, 9 and 
XI, 4 and XI, 11.3 
4. The revolutions of the Moon (in a yuga) multiplied by 12 
are signs [ras-i]. 4 The signs multiplied by 30 are degrees. The 
degrees multiplied by 60 are minutes. The minutes multiplied 
by 10 are yojanas (of the circumference of the sky). The Earth 
moves one minute in a pra?J,a. 5 The circumference of the sky (in 
yojanas) divided by the. revolutions of a planet in a yuga gives 
the yojanas of the planet's orbit. The orbit of the Sun is a siA'tieth 
part of the circle of the asterisms. 
In translating the words sasirasaya[i tha cakram 
I have followed Paramesvara's interpretation sasinas 
cakram bhagaJJ,a dvadasaguJJ,ita rasaya!J,. The Sanskrit construction is a harsh one, 
but there is no other way 
of making sense. Sasi ( without declensional ending) is to be separated. Paramesvara explains the word 
grahajavo as fol-
1 Cf. III, 8. • 2 Op. cit., 1865, pp. 40o-401. 
3 Cf. Alberuni, I, 370, 373-74. 
4 A rasi is a sign of the zodiac or one-twelfth of a circle. 
6 For '[)'T"a?J,a see III, 2. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com14 ARYABHA'f!YA. 
lows: ekaparivrttau grahasya javo gatimanarh yojana­
tmakarh bhavati. 
The word yojanani must be taken as given a figure in 
yojanas for the circumference of the sky (akasa­
kak~ya). It works out as 12,474,720,576,000, which is 
the exact figure given by Lalla (M adhyamadhikara 
13) who was a follower of .Aryabhata. Compare 
Suryasiddhanta, XII, 80-82; Brahmagupta, XXI, 
11-12; Bhaskara, Goladhyaya, Bhuvanakosa, 67-69 
and Ga'Y),itadhyaya, Kak~adhyaya, 1-5. 
The statement of Alberuni (I, 225) with regard to the followers of 
A.ryabhata, 
It is sufficient for us to know the space which is reached by the solar rays. We do not want the space which is not reached 
by the solar rays, though it be in itself of an enormous extent. 
That which is not reached by the rays is not reached by the per­ception 
of the senses, and that which is not reached by per­ception is not knowable, 
may be based ultimately upon this passage. The reading 
bham of our text must be incorrect. 
It is a reading adopted by Paramesvara who was de­termined to prove 
that .Aryabhata did not teach the rotation 
of the Earth. This passage could not be ex­
plained away by recourse to false knowledge (mith­
yajnana) as could I, 1 and IV, 9 and therefore was changed. The true reading 
is bhu'IJ,, as is proved con­clusively 
by the quotation of Brahmagupta (XI, 17): 
pra,:t;tenaiti kalam. bhiir yadi tarhi kuto vrajet kam adhvanam I 
avarttanam urvyas cen na patanti samucchrayal). kasmat. 11 
Compare Brahm.agupta (XXI, 59) and Alberuni (I, 
276-77, 280). 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comTHE TEN GfTI STANZAS 15 
5. A yojana consists of 8,000 times a nr [the height of a manJ. The diameter 
of the Earth is 1,050 yojanas. The diameter of the Sun 
is 4,410 yojanas. The diameter of the Moon is 315 yojanas. 
Meru is one yojana. The diameters of Venus, Jupiter, :Mercury, 
Saturn, and Mars are one-fifth, one-tenth, one-fifteenth, one­twentieth, and one-twenty-fifth 
of the diameter of the l\:Ioon. 
The years of a yuga are equal to the number of revolutions of the 
Sun in a yuga. 
As pointed out by Bhau Daji, 1 Brahmagupta (XI, 15-16) seems to quote from this stanza in his criticism 
of the diameter of the Earth given by .. ~yabhata 
~ocJ_asagaviyojana paridhirn pratibhiivyasam pulavadata I 
atmajfi.anaril khyapitam aniscayas tanilqtakanyat 11 
bhiivyasasyajfianad vyartham desantararh tadajfianat I 
sphutatithyantajfianarn tithinasad graha:r;ayor nasal;i.. 11 
The text of Brahmagupta is corrupt and must be emended. 
See the commentary of Sudhakara, who suggests for the first stanza 
Il!1liyojanabhuparidhim prati bhiivyasam punar fiila vadata I 
atmajfi.anam khyapitarn aniscayas tatlqtavyasal:i.. 11 
Lalla (M adhyamadhikara, 56 and Candragrahar:ia­
dhikara, 6) gives the same diameters for the Earth 
and the Sun but gives 320 as the diameter of the Moon, and ( 
Grahayutyadhikara, 2) gives for the planets the same fractions 
of the diameter of the Moon.
2 
Alberuni (I, 168) quotes from Brahmagupta 
Aryabhata's diameter of the Earth, and a confused 
1 JRAS, 1865, p. 402. 
2 Cf. Suryasiddhanta, I, 59; IV, 1; VII, 13-14; Brahmagupta, 
XXI, 32; Kharegat (op. cit., XIX, 132-34, discussing Suryasiddhanta, 
IX, 15-16). 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com16 ARYABHATIYA 
passage (I, 244-46) quotes Balabhadra on Arya­
bhata's conception of Meru. Its height is said to be a 
yojana. The context of the foregoing stanza seems 
to imply that its diameter is a yojana, as Paramesvara takes it. 
It is probable that its height is to be taken 
as the same. 
If Paramesvara is correct in interpreting samarka­
samalJ, as yugasama yugarkabhagarJ,asama, the nomi­native plural 
samalJ, has been contracted after sandhi. 
6. The greatest declination of the ecliptic is 24 degrees. The 
greatest deviation of the Moon from the ecliptic is 4½ degrees, of 
Saturn 2 degrees, of Jupiter 1 degree, of Mars 1 ½ degrees, of Mercury 
and Venus 2 degrees. Ninety-six angulas or 4 hastas 
make 1 nr. 
Paramesvara explains the words bhapakramo 
grahamsab, as follows: graharJ,arh bha arhsas catur­
'Virhsatibhaga apakramab,. paramapakrama ity arthab,. 
The construction is as strange as that of stanza 4 
above. 1 
7. The ascending nodes of Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, 
and Saturn having moved (are situated) at 20, 60, 40, 80, and 
100 degrees from the beginning of Mei,a. The apsides of the Sun 
and of the above-mentioned planets (in the same order) (are situated) 
at 78, 210, 90, 118, 180, and 236 degrees from the beginning of 
M6lila. 
I have followed Paramesvara's explanation of 
gatvarhsakan as uktan etan evarhsakan me?adito gatva 
vyavasthitab,. 
In view of IV, 2, "the Sun and the nodes of the 
planets and of the Moon move constantly along the 
1 Cf. SuryasiddMnta, I, 68-70 and II, 28; Brahmagupta, IX, 1 and XXI, 
52. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comTHE TEN GlTI STANZAS 17 
ecliptic," and of I, 2, which gives the number of revo­lutions of 
the node of the nioon in a yuga, the word 
gatva ("having gone") seems to imply, as Parame­
svara says, a knowledge of the revolution of the nodes of 
the planets and to indicate that ... lryabhata in­
tended merely to give their positions at the time his treatise was composed. 
The force of gatva continues into 
the second line and indicates a knowledge of the 
revolutions of the apsides. 
Aryabhata gives figures for the revolutions of the 
apsis and node of the lv1oon. Other siddhantas give figures for 
the revolutions of the nodes and apsides of all 
the planets. These seem to be based on t!ieory 
rather than on observation since their motion (except 
in the case of the l\1oon) is so slow that it would take· 
several thousand years for them to move so far that 
their motion could easily be detected by ordinary 
methods of observation. 1 Aryabhata may have re­frained from giving figures for 
the revolutions of nodes 
and apsides ( except in the case of the Moon) because 
he distrusted the figures given in earlier books as based on 
theory rather than upon accurate observa­tion. 
Brahmagupta XI, 8 ( quoted above to stanza 2) remarks 
in criticism of Aryabhata that in the Dasa­
gUika the nodes are stationary while in the Arya­
?tasata they move. This refers to I, 2 and IV, 2. In 
the DasagUika only the revolutions of the nodes of 
the Moon are given; in the Arya?tasata the nodes and 
apsides are said explicitly to move along the ecliptic. 
In the present stanza the word gatva seems clearly to 
1 Cf. Suryasiddhanta, pp. 27-28. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com18 ARYABHATIYA 
indicate a knowledge of the motion of the nodes and apsides 
of the other planets too. If Aryabhata had intended to say merely 
that the nodes and apsides are situated 
at such-and-such places the word gatva is superfluous. 
In a text of such studied brevity every word is used with a very definite purpose. 
It is true 
that Aryabhata regarded the movement of the nodes and apsides 
of the other planets as negligible for pur­poses 
of calculation, but Brahmagupta's criticism seems to be captious and unjustified (see also Bra­hmagupta, 
XI, 6-7, and the commentary of Sudha­
kara to XI, 8). Barth's criticism 1 is too severe. Lalla 
(Spaf}ta,dhikara, 9 and 28) gives the same positions for 
the apsides of the Sun and five planets (see also 
Pancasiddhantika, XVII, 2). For the revolutions 
of the nodes and apsides see Brahmagupta, 
I, 19-21, and Suryasiddhanta, I, 41-44, and note to I, 44. 
8. Divided by 4½ t]:ie epicycles of the apsides of the Moon, the Sun, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn (in the first and third quadrants) are 
7, 3, 7, 4, 14, 7, 9; the epicycles of the conjunctions 
of Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury (in 
the first and third quadrants) are 9, 16, 53, 59, 31; 
9. the epicycles of the apsides of the planets Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn in the second and fourth quadrants are 
5, 2, 18, 8, 13; the epicycles of the conjunctions of the planets Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury in the second and fourth quadrants are 
8, 15, 51, 57, 29. The circumference within which the Earth-wind 
blows is 3,375 yojanas. ----•~-' 
The criticism of these stanzas made by Brahma-· gupta (II, 33 and 
XI, 18-21) is, as pointed out by 
1 Op. cit., III, 154. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comTHE TEN GITI STANZAS 19 
Sudhakara, not justifiable. For the dimensions of Brahmagupta's epicycles see 
II, 34-39). 
Lalla (Spa?tiidhikara, 28) agrees closely with stanza 8 and 
(Grahabhrama;:ia, 2) gives the same figure for the Earth-wind. Compare also 
Suryasiddhanta, 
II, 34-37 and note, and Paftcasiddhantika, XVII, 1, 3. 
10. The (twenty-four) sines reckoned in minutes of arc are 225, 
224, 222, 219, 215, 210, 205, 199, 191, 183, 174, 164, 154, 143, 
131, 119, 106, 93, 79, 65, 51, 37, 22, 7. 
In Indian mathematics the "half-chord" takes the place 
of our "sine." The sines are given in minutes 
(of which the radius contains 3,438) at intervals of 225 
minutes. The numbers given here are in reality not the values 
of the sines themselves but the differences between the sines. Compare Silryasiddhanta (II, 
15-27) and Lalla 
(Spa?tildhikara, 1-8) and Brahmagupta (II, 2-9). 
Bhaskar a ( Gattitadhyaya, Spaf(iidhikara, Vasanabha­
?Ya to 3-9) refers to the S1.-Zryasiddhiinta and to 
Aryabhata as furnishing a precedent for the use of 
twenty-four sines. 1 
Krishnaswami Ayyangar 2 furnishes a plausible explanation 
of the discrepancy between certain of the values given in the foregoing stanza and the values as calculated by 
II, 12. 3 Some of the discrepancies may be due to bad readings 
of the manuscripts. Kern 
1 For discussion of the stanza see Barth, ibid., III, 150 n., and 
J RAS, 1911, pp. 123-24. 
2 JIMS, XV (1923-24), 121-26. 
3 See also N araharayya, "Note on the Hindu Table of Sines," ibid., 
pp. 105-13 of "Notes and Questions." 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com20 ARYABHA TlYA 
in a footnote to the stanza and Ayyangar (p. 125 n.) 
point out that the text-reading for the sixteenth and 
seventeenth sines violates the meter. This, however, 
may be remedied easily without changing the values. 1 
C. Whoever knows this Dasagitika Sutra which describes 
the movements of the Earth and the planets in the sphere of the 
asterisms passes through the paths of the planets and asterisms 
and goes to the higher Brahman. 
1 Cf. JRAS, 1910, pp. 752, 754, and IA, XX, 228. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comCH.APTER II 
GA}flTAPADA OR MATHE1IATICS 
1. Having paid reverence to Brahman, the Earth, the Moon, 
:\Iercury, Venus, the Sun, :.Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, and the aster­isms, 
lryabhata sets forth here [in this work] the science which is honored 
at Kusumapura. 1 
The translation "here at Kusumapura the revered science" is possible. 
At any rate, .Aryabhata states the school to which he belongs. Kusumapura may or may not have been the place 
of his birth. 
2. The numbers eka [one], dasa [ten], sata [hundred], sahasra 
[thousand], ayuta [ten thousand], niyuta [hundred thousand], 
prayuta [million], koti [ten million], arbuda [hundred million], and 
vrnda [thousand million] are from place to place each ten times 
the preceding. 2 
The names for classes of numbers are given only to ten places, although I, 
B describes a notation which reaches 
at least to the eighteenth place. The 
highest number actually used by Aryabhata himself runs to ten places. 
3. A square, the area of a square, and the product of two equal quantities are called 
varga. The product of three equal quantities, and a solid which has twelve edges are called 
ghana. 3 
1 Translated by Ffeet, JRAS, 1911, p. 110. See Kern's Preface to 
bis edition of the Brhat Sarhhita, p. 57, and BCMS, XVIII (1927), 7. 
2 See JRAS, 1911, p. 116; IHQ, III, 112; BCMS, XVII (1926), 
198. For the quotation in Alberuni (I, 176), which differs in the last two names, 
see the criticism in BCMS, XVII (1926), 71. 
• 3 Read dvadasasras with Paramesvara. For asra in the sense of 
"edge" see Colebrooke, Algebra, pp. 2 n. and 280 n. The translations given 
by Rodet and Kaye are inaccurate. 
21 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com22 ARYABHA TlYA 
4. One should always divide the avarga by twice the (square) root 
of the (preceding) varga. After subtracting the square ( of the quotient) from the 
varga the quotient will be the square root to the next place. 
Counting from right to left, the odd places are called 
varga and the even places are called avarga. 
According to Paramesvara, the nearest square root to the number in the last odd place on 
the left is set down in a place apart, and after this are set down the successive quotients 
of the division performed. The number subtracted is 
the square of that figure in the root represented 
by the quotient of the preceding division. The divisor 
is the square of that part of the root which has already been found. 
If the last sub­traction leaves no remainder the square root 
is exact. "Always" indicates 
that if the divisor is larger than the number to be divided a zero 
is to be placed in the line (or a blank space left there). 
Sthtiniintare ("in an­other place") is equivalent to the 
pankti ("line") of 
the later books. This process seems to be substantially correct, 
but 
there are several difficulties. Sthantintare may mean simply 
"to another place," that is to say, each division performed gives another figure of the root. 
Nityam ("always") may merely indicate that such is the regular way 
of performing the operation. 
All the translators except Saradakanta Ganguly translate 
vargad varge suddhe with what precedes. I think he is correct in taking 
it with what follows. In 
that case the parallelism with the following rule is exact. Otherwise the first rule would give the opera-
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comGA~ITAPIDA OR l\IATHE1TATICS 23 
tion for the varga place and then that for the avarga 
place while the second rule would give first the opera­tions for the aghana places and then 
that for the 
ghana place. However, for purposes of description, it 
makes no difference whether the operations are given in one or the other 
of these orders. Parallelism 
with ghanasya m·ulavarge'(ia of the 
folluwing rule seems to indicate that varganzulena is not to be translated "square root" 
but "root of the (preceding) varga.'' 
If the root is to contain more than two figures the 
varga of vargamulena is to be interpreted as applying to all the preceding figures 
up to and including the 
varga place which is being worked with. That is to say, the word 
rnula would refer to the whole of that 
part of the root which had already been found. 1 
For discussion see Kaye, 2 A vadhesh Narayan 
Singh,3 Saradakanta Ganguly. 4 I cannot agree with Ganguly' s discussion 
of the words bhagarh hared 
avargat. 1 see no reason to question the use of bhagarh 
harati with the ablative in the sense of "divide." Brahmagupta (XII, 
7) in his description of the 
process of extracting the cube root has chedo 'ghanad dvitiyat, 
which means "the divisor of the second aghana." Kaye
5 insists that this rule and the next are per­fectly general (i.e., algebraical) and apply 
to all arithmetical notations. 
He offers no proof and gives 
1 See Colebrooke, op. cit., p. 280 n. 
2 JASB, 1907, pp. 493-94. 
3 BCMS, XVIII (1927), 124. 4 JBORS, XII, 78. 
0 Op. cit., 1908, p. 120. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com24 ARYABHATiYA 
no example of the working of the rule according to his interpretation. 
To what do the words "square" and "non-square" 
of his translation refer? The words 
of Aryabhata exactly fit the method employed in later Indian mathematics. Although Brahmagupta does not give a rule for square root, his method for cube root is 
that described below, although the wording of 
his rule is different from that of Aryabhata's. I fail to see any similarity 
to the rule and method of Theon 
of Alexandria. 
In the following example the sign ° indicates the 
varga places, and the sign -indicates the avarga 
places. 
Square of the root Twice the root 
(2Xl) 
Square of the quotient Twice the root 
\2X12) 
Square of the quotient o-o-o 15129 (root= 1 
1 
2)05(2= quotient (or next digit of root) 
4 
11 
4 
24)72(3= quotient t_or next digit of root) 
72 
09 
9 
0 
Square root is 1 2 3 
5. One should divide the second aghana by three times the square 
of the (cube) root of the (preceding) ghana. The square (of the quotient) multiplied 
by three times the purva (that part of 
the cube root already found) is to be subtracted from the first 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comGA~ITAPADA OR :MATHEMATICS 25 
aghana, and the cube (of the quotient of the above division) is to 
be subtracted from the ghana. 
The translation given by A vadhesh Narayan Singh
1 as a "correct literal rendering" is inaccurate. There is nothing in the Sanskrit which corresponds to "after having subtracted the cube 
(of the quo­tient) from the 
ghana place" or to "the quotient placed 
at the next place gives the root." The latter thought, 
of course, does carry over into this rule from the preceding rule. 
In the same article (p. 132) the Sanskrit 
of the rule is inaccurately printed with 
trighanasya for trigu1J,ena ghanasya. 2 
Kaye3 remarks that this rule is given by Brahma­gupta "word for word." 
As a matter of fact, the 
Sanskrit of the two rules is very different, although the content 
is exactly the same. Counting from right to left, 
the first, fourth, etc., places are named 
ghana (cubic); the second, fifth, etc., places are called the first 
aghana (non-cubic) places; and the third, sixth, etc., places are called 
the 
second aghana (non-cubic) places. The nearest cube root to the number in ( or up to and including) the last 
ghana place on the left is the first figure of the cube root. After 
it are placed the quotients of the succes­sive divisions. 
If the last subtraction leaves no remainder the cube root is exact. 
1 BCMS, XVIII (1927), 134. 
2 The rule has been discussed in JBORS, XII, 80. Cf. Brah­roagupta (XII, 
7) and the translation and note of Colebrooke (op. 
cit., p. 280). 
3 Op. cit., 1908, p. 119. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com26 ARYABHATIY A 
In the following exan1ple the sign ° indicates the 
ghana places and the sign -indicates the aghana 
places. 
Cube of root Three times square 
of root 
(3Xl2) 
Square of quotient multiplied 
by three times the purva 
(22X3Xl) 
Cube of quotient Three times square of root 
(3X 122) 
Square of quotient multiplied 
by three times the purva 
(32X3X12) 
Cube of quotient o-•-o--o 
1860867 (root= 1 
1 
3)08(2 = quotient (or next digit of 
6 root) 26 12 140 
8 
432) 1328(3 = quotient (or next digit 1296 of root) 326 324 
27 27 
0 
Cube root is 1 2 3 
6. The area of a triangle is the product of the perpendicular and half 
the base. Half the product of this area and the height is the volume of a solid 
_which has six edges (pyramid). 
If samadalakott can denote, as Paramesvara says, a perpendicular which is common 
to two triangles the 
rule refers to all triangles. If samadalakofi, refers to a perpendicular which bisects 
the base it refers only to 
isosceles triangles. 1 
1 For asra or asri in the sense of "edge" see note to stanza II, 3. 
See JBORS, XII, 84-85, for discussion of the inaccurate value given 
in the second part of the rule. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comGA~ITAPADA OR MATHEMATICS 27 
7. Half of the circumference multiplied by half the diameter is 
the area of a circle. This area multiplied by its own square root is 
the exact volume of a sphere. 1 
8. The two sides (separately) multiplied by the perpendicu­
lar and divided by their sum ·will gfre the perpendiculars (from the point 
where the two diagonals intersect) to the parallel sides. The area 
is to be known by multiplJing half the sum of the two sides 
by the perpendicular. 
a 
aXc=d 
a+b ' 
bXc 
a+b =e' 
Area=c(a+b) 2 . 
b 
The rule applies to any four-sided plane figure of 
which two sides are parallel, i.e., trapezium. The word translated "sides" refers to the two parallel sides. The perpendicular 
is the perpendicular be­tween the two parallel sides. 
In the example given above a and b are the parallel sides, 
c is the perpendicular between them, and 
d and e are the perpendiculars from the point 
·of intersection of the two diagonals to the sides a and 
b, respectively. 
9. The area of any plane figure is found by determining two sides 
and then multiplying them together. The chord 
of the sixth part of the circumference is equal to 
the radius. 
1 See ibid. and Bibl. math., IX, 196, for discussion of the inac­curate 
value given in the second part of the rule. For a possible =,_, 
reference to this passage by Bhaskara, Goladhyiiya, Bhuvanakosa, 
stanza 61 (Vasaniibha9Ya) (not stanza 52 as stated), see BCMS, " 
XVIII (1927), 10. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com28 ARYABHA TIYA 
The very general rule given in the first half of this stanza seems 
to mean, as Paramesvara explains in some detail, 
that the mathematician is to use his in­genuity in determining two sides which will represent 
the average length and the average breadth of the figure. Their product will be 
the area. Methods to be employed with various kinds 
of figures were doubt­less handed down 
by oral tradition. Rodet thinks 
that the rule directs that the figure be broken up into a number of trapeziums. 
It is doubtful whether 
the words can bear that interpretation. 
10. Add 4 to 100, multiply by 8, and add 62,000. The result is approximately 
the circumference of a circle of which the diameter is 
20,000. 
The circumference is 62,832. The diameter is 
20,000. 
By this rule the relation of circumference to diameter is 3.1416.
1 
Bhaskara, Goladhyaya, Bhuvanakosa (stanza 52), 
Vasanabha?ya, refers to this rule of Aryabhata. 
11.. One should divide a quarter of the circumference of a circle (into as 
many equal parts as are desired). From the tri­angles and quadrilaterals (which are formed) one will have on the radius as 
many sines of equal arcs as are desired. 2 
The exact method of working out the table is not known. 
It is uncertain what is intended by the triangle 
and the quadrilateral constructed from each point marked on 
the quadrant. 3 
1 See JBORS, XII, 82; JRAS, 1910, pp. 752, 754. 
2 See the table given in I, 10 of the differences between the sines. Twenty-four sines 
taken at intervals of 225 minutes of arc are regu­larly given in 
the Indian tables. 
3 Note the methods suggested by Kaye and Rodet and cf. JIMS, 
XV (1923-24), 122 and 108-9 of "Notes and Questions." 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comGA~ITAPADA OR MATHEl\.'.IATICS 29 
12. By what number the second sine is less than the first sine, 
and by the quotient obtained by dividing the sum of the 
preceding sines by the first sine, by the sum of these two quanti­ties 
the follo'\'\ing sines are less than the first sine. 
The last phrase may be translated "the sine­differences are less 
than the first sine." 1 
This rule describes how the table of sine-differ­ences given in 
I, 10 may be calculated from the first one (225). 
The first sine n1eans always this first sine 225. 
The second sine means any particular sine with which one is working 
in order to calculate the follow­
ing sme. Subtract 225 from 225 
and the remainder is 0. Di­vide 225 
by 225 and the quotient is 1. The sum of O and 
1 is subtracted from 225 to obtain the second sine 224. 
Subtract 224 from 225 and the remainder is 1. 
Divide 225 plus 224 by 225 and the nearest quotient is 2. Add 2 and 
1 and subtract from 225. The third 
sine will be 222. Proceed in like manner for the fol­lowing sines. 
If this method is followed strictly there results several slight divergences from 
the values given in I, 
10. It is possible to reconcile most of these by assum­ing, as Krishnaswam.i Ayyangar does, 
that from time 
to time the neglected fractions were distributed among 
the sines. But of this there is no indication in 
the rule as given. 
1 For discussion of the Indian sines see the notes of Rodet and 
Kaye; Pafi(;(J,81,d,dhantika, chap. iv; Suryasiddhanta, II, 15-27; Lalla, 
p. 12; Brahmagupta, II, 2-10; JRAS, 1910, pp. 752, 754; IA, XX, 
228; Brennand, Hindu Astronomy, pp. 210-13; JIMS, XV (1923-24), 121-26, with attempted explanation of 
the variation of several of 
the values given in the table from the values calculated by means of this rule, and 
i"bid., pp. 105-13 of "Notes and Questions." 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com30 ARYABHATiYA 
How Kaye gets "If the first and second be bisected in succession the sine 
of the half-chord is obtained" 
is a puzzle to me. It is impossible as a translation 
of the Sanskrit. 
13. The circle is made by turning, and the triangle and the quadrilateral by means 
of a karrJ,a; the horizontal is determined 
by water, and the perpendicular by the plumb-line. 
TribhuJ°a denotes triangle in general and catur­
bhuja denotes quadrilateral in general. The word 
, karr;,a regularly denotes the hypotenuse of a right­angle triangle and the diagonal 
of a square or rec­tangle. I am not sure whether the restricted sense 
of 
karr;,a limits iribhuja and caturbhuja to the right-angle triangle and to the square and rectangle or whether the general sense 
of tribhuja and caturbhuja general­izes the meaning 
of karr;,a to that of one chosen side of 
a triangle and to that of the diagonal of any quadri­lateral. 
At any rate, the context shows that the rule deals with the actual construction 
of plane figures. Paramesvara interprets 
it as ref erring to the con­struction 
of a triangle of which the three sides are known and 
of a quadrilateral of which the four sides and one diagonal are known. One side 
of the triangle is taken as the 
karr;,a. Two sticks of the length of the other two sides, one touching one end and the other the other end 
of the karr;,a, are brought to such a posi­tion 
that their tips join. The quadrilateral is made 
by constructing two triangles, one on each side of the diagonal. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comGA~ITAPADA OR l\1ATHElVIATICS 31 
The circle is made by the turning of the ka·rkata, 
or compass. 1 
14. Add the square of the height of the gnomon to the square 
of its shadow. The square root of this sum is the radius of the 
khai:rtta. 
The text reads khavrtta ("sky-circle"). Para­
mesvara reads svai:rtta ("its circle"). I do not know which 
is correct. Kaye remarks 
that in order "to mark out the hour angles on an ordinary sun-dial, 
it is necessary to. 
describe two circles, one of which has its radius equal to the vertical gnomon and the other with radius equal to the hypotenuse 
of the triangle formed by the equinoctial shadow and the gnomon." 
It may be tha~ 
this second circle is the one ref erred to here. Para­
mesvara has chayagramadhyam sankusira~prapi yan 
marpJ,al,am urdhvadha"IJ,sthitam tat svavrttam ity ucyate, 
"the circle which has its centre at the extremity of 
the shadow and which touches the top of the gnomon 
is called the svavrtta." As Rodet remarks, it is diffi­
cult to see for what purpose such a circle could serve. 
15. Multiply the length of the gnomon by the distance be­tween the gnomon and the 
bhuja and divide by the difference between the length of 
the gnomon and the length of the bhuja. 
The quotient will be the length of the shadow measured from the base of the gnomon. 
2 
1 For parallels to the stanza see Lalla (Yantradhyaya, 2) and Brahm.agupta, 
XXII, 7. See BCMS, XVIII (1927), 68-69, which is 
too emphatic in its assertion that kaT'IJ,G, must mean "diagonal" and not "hypotenuse." 
2 See Brahmagupta, XII, 53; Colebrooke, op. cit., p. 317; 
Brennand, op. cit., p. 166. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com32 ARYABHATlYA 
Because of the use of the word kofi in the following rule Rodet 
is inclined to think that the gnomon and the 
bhuja were not perpendicular but projected hori­zontally from a wall. 
Bhuja denotes any side of a triangle, 
but kofi usually refers to an upright. It is 
possible, however, for k9ti to denote any perpendicu­lar to the 
bhuja whether horizontal or upright. 
A 
B~---~D~--------~C 
BA is the bhuja which holds the light, 
DE is the gnomon, 
DC DEXBD 
AF 
16. The distance between the ends of the two shadows multi­plied by the length of the shadow and divided 
by the difference in length 
of the two shadows gives the kofi. The koti multiplied 
by the length of the gnomon and divided by the length of the shadow gives the length 
of the bhuja. 
The literal translation of chayagutJ,itarh chaya­
gravivaram unena bhajiUi kofi seems to be "The dis­tance between 
the ends of the two shadows multiplied 
by the length of the shadow is equal to the kofi 
divided by the difference in length of the two shad­ows." This is equivalent to 
the translation given above. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comGA~ITAP.~DA OR :MATHEMATICS 33 
AB is the bh u}a, 
AE is the koti, 
CD is the gnomon in its first position, 
C;D; is the gnomon in its second position, 
CE and C' E' are the first and second shadows, 
CEXEE' 
AE=C'E'-CE' 
AB AEXCD 
GE . 
The length of the bhuja which holds the light and the distance between the end 
of the shadow and the base 
of the bhuja are unknown. In order to find them 
the gnomon is placed in another position so as to give a second shadow. The length 
of the shadow is its length when the 
gnomon is in its first position. The kofi is the dis­tance between the end of 
the shadow when the gno­mon is 
in its first position and the base of the bhuja. 
The word kot'i means perpendicular (or upright) and 
the rule might be interpreted, as Rodet takes it, as meaning 
that the bhuja and the gnomon extend horizontally from a perpendicular wall. 
But the 
words bhuja and kofi, also refer to the sides of a right­angle triangle without much regard as to which is horizontal and which is upright. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com34 ARYABHA TlYA 
Or the first position of the gnomon may be C' D' 
and the second CD. To find AE' and AB.1 
17. The square of the bhuja plus the square of the kofi, is the square of the 
kar?J,a. 
In a circle the product of two saras is the square of the half­chord 
of the two arcs. 
The bhuja ttnd ko{i are the sides of a right-angle triangle. The 
karr.ia is the hypotenuse. The 
saras or "arrows" are the segments of a diameter which bisects any chord. 
2 • 
b 
aXb=c 2 
a ·where c is the half-chord. 
18. (The diameters of) two circles (separately) minus the 
grasa, multiplied by the grasa, and divided separately by the sum 
of (the diameters of) the two circles after the grasa has been sub­tracted from each, 
will give respectively the sampatasaras of the two circles. 
When two circles intersect the word grasa ("the bite") denotes 
that part of the common diameter of 
the two circles which is cut off by the ip.tersecting 
_<;l:i.ord~ of the two circles. 
1 See Brahmagupta, XII, 54; Colebrooke, op. cit., p. 318; Bren­nand, 
op. cit., p. 166. 
2 Cf. Brahmagupta, XII, 41. See BCMS, XVIII (1927), 11, 71, 
with discussion of the quotation given by Colebrooke, op. cit., p. 309, 
from Prthu.dakasvami's commentary to Brahmagupta. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comGA~ITAPADA OR MATHElvIATICS 35 
B AB is the grasa, 
AE and BE are the 
sampatasarm;. 
AE=AB(d-A.B) EB=AB(D-AB) 
• D+d-2A.B' D+d-2AB ' 
where d and D are the diameters of the two circles. 
The sampatasaras are the two distances (within the 
grasa), on the common diameter, from the cir­cumferences 
of the two circles to the point of inter­section 
of this common diameter with the chord con­necting 
the two points where the circumferences intersect.
1 
19. The desired number of terms minus one, halved, plus the number 
of terms which precedes, multiplied by the common difference between the terms, plus the first term, 
is the middle term. This multiplied 
by the number of terms desired is the sum of 
the desired number of terms. Or the sum 
of the first and last terms is multiplied by half the 
number of terms. 
This rule tells how to find the sum of any desired number 
of terms taken anywhere within an arith­metical progression. 
Let n be the number of terms extending from the 
(p+l)th to the (p+n)th terms in an arithmetical progression, let 
d be the common difference between the terms, let 
a be the first term 
of the progression, and Z the last term. 
1 Cf. Brahmagupta, XII, 43; Colebrooke, op. cit., p. 311. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com36 ARYABHATIYA 
The second part of the rule applies only to the sum of the whole progression beginning with the first term. 
S (a+l)n 
2 . 
As Paramesvara says, samukhamadhyam must be taken as equivalent 
to samukharh madhyam. 
Whether Paramesvara is correct in his statement 
bahusutrarthapradarsakam etat sutram. ato bahudha yojana 
karya and subsequent exposition seems very doubtful. Brahmagupta, 
XII, 17 has only the second part of 
the rule.1 
20. Multiply the sum of the progression by eight times the common difference, 
add the square of the difference between twice 
the first term and the common difference, take the square root of 
this, subtract twice the first term, divide by the common differ­ence, add one, divide 
by two. The result will be the number of 
terms. 
n=~[-V8dS+(dd-2a)2-2a +l] _2 
As Rodet says, the development of this formula from the one in 
the preceding rule seems to indicate knowledge 
of the solution of quadratic equations in 
the form ax2+bx+c= 0.3 
1 Cf. Colebrooke, op. cit., p. 290. 
2 See Brahmagupta, XII, 18; Colebrooke, op. cit., p. 291. 
3 See also JA (1878), I, 28, 77, and JBORS, XII, 86-87. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comGA:r:HTAPADA OR :MATHEMATICS 37 
21. In the case of an ·upaciti which has one for the first term and one for the common difference between the terms 
the product 
of three terms having the number of terms for the first term and 
one as the common difference, divided by six, is the citiglwna. Or the cube 
of the number of terms plus one, minus the cube root of 
this cube, divided by six. 
Form an arithmetical progression 1 2 3 4 5, etc. Form the series 1 3 6 
10 15, etc., by taking for the 
terms the sum of the terms of the first series. The 
rule gives the sum of this series. 
It also gives the cubic contents of a pile of balls which has a triangular base. 
The wording of the rule would seem to imply 
that it was intended especially for this second case. 
Citighana means "cubic con­tents 
of the pile," and upaciti ("pile") refers to the 
base (or one side) of the pile, i.e., 1 2 3 4 5, etc.1 
As Rodet remarks, it is curious that in the face of this rule 
the rule given above (stanza 6) for the volume of a pyramid 
is incorrect. 
S=n(n+l)(n+2) 
6 or 
22. The sixth part of the product of three quantities con­sisting 
of the number of terms, the number of terms plus one, and twice the number of terms plus one is 
the sum of the squares. 
The square of the sum of the (original) series is the sum of the 
cubes. 
From the series 1 2 3 4, etc., form the series 1 4 9 
16, etc., and 1 8 27 64, etc., consisting of the 
1 Cf. Brahmagupta, XII, 19; Colebrooke, op. cit., pp. 292-93. Brahmagupta (XII, 20) directs 
that the summation of certain series be illustrated 
by means of piles of round balls. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com38 ARYABHA TIYA 
squares and cubes of the terms of the first series. The 
rule tells how to find the sums of the second and 
third series. 1 
The rule for finding the sum of the first series was given above in stanza 19. 
The sum of the squares is 
n(n+1)(2n+l) 
6 
23. One should subtract the sum of the squares of two factors from the square 
of their sum. Half the result is the product of 
the two factors. 
24. Multiply the product (of two factors) by the square of 
two ( 4), add the square of the difference between the two factors, take the square root, add and subtract the difference between the two factors, and divide the result by two. The results will be the 
two factors. 
V 4ab+(a-b)2± (a-b) .11 . d b 
2 Wl give a an . 
25. Multiply the sum of the interest on the principal and the interest on this interest 
by the time and by the principal. Add to this result the square of half the principal. Take the square root 
of this. Subtract half the principal and divide the remainder by the time. The result 
will be the interest on the principal.
2 
1 Cf. Brahmagupta, XII, 20; Colebrooke, op. cit., p. 293; BCMS, 
XVIII (1927), 70. 
2 Cf. the somewhat similar problem in Brahmagupta, XII, 15; Colebrooke, 
op. cit., pp. 287-28, and see the discussion of Kaye. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comGAijITAPIDA OR ?v1ATHElv1ATICS 39 
The formula involves the solution of a quadratic 
equation in the form of ax2+ 2bx = c.1 
A sum of money is loaned. A.f ter a certain unit of time 
the interest received is loaned for a known num­
ber of units of time at the same interest. What is known is 
the amount of the interest on the principal plus 
the interest on this interest. Call this B. Let the 
principal be A. Let t be the time. 
✓ A)2 A BXA.Xt+( 2 -2 
x= t . 
The following example is given by Paramesvara. 
The sum of 100 is loaned for one month. Then the 
interest received is loaned for six months. At that 
time the original interest plus the interest on this 
interest amounts to 16. 
B=l6 
A=lOO 
t=6 
The interest received on 100 in one month was 10. 
26. In the rule of three multiply the fruit by the desire and divide 
by the measure. The result will be the fruit of the desire. 
The rule of three corresponds to proportion. 
In the proportion a is to b as c is to x the measure is 
a, the fruit is b, the desire is c, and the fruit of the 
desire is x. 
1 See JBORS, XII, 87. be 2 x=-. a 
2 See Brahmagupta, XII, 10 and Colebrooke, op. eit., p. 283. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com40 IRYABHATIYA 
27. The denominators of multipliers and divisors are multi­plied together. 
).Iultiply numerators and denominators by the other denominators in order 
to reduce fractions to a common denominator. 
For the first part of the rule I have given what seems to be 
the most likely literal translation. The 
exact sense is uncertain. Kaye (agreeing with Rodet) translates, 
"The denominators are multiplied by one another in multiplication and division." 
If that is the 
correct translation the genitive plural is curious. Paramesvara explains 
gur:iakara as gur:iagur:iyayor 
ahatir atra guriakarasabdena vivak?ita. harya ity artha"!J, 
and then seems to take bhagahara as ref erring to a fractional divisor of this product. 
Can the words bear 
that construction? In either case the inversion of numerator 
and denominator of the divisor would be 
taken for granted. 
It is tempting to take gur:iakarabhagahara as mean­ing "fraction" 
and to translate, "The denominators 
of fractions are multiplied together." But for that 
interpretation I can find no authority. 
28. Multipliers become divisors and divisors become multi­pliers, addition becomes subtraction and subtraction becomes addition in the inverse method. 
The inverse method consists in beginning at the 
end and working backward. As, for instance, in the 
question, "What number multiplied by 3, divided by 
5, plus 6, minus 1, will give 5?" 
29. If you know the results obtained by subtracting suc­cessively from a sum 
of quantities each one of these quantities set these results down separately. Add 
them all together and divide 
by the number of terms less one. The result will be the sum 
of all the quantities. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comGA~ITAPADA OR :vIATHEl\1ATICS 41 
The translation given by Kaye is incorrect. The 
rev"ised translation given in his Indian .Jf athematics, 
page 4 7, is not an improvement. 1 
x-d=a+b+c 
x-a=b+c+d 
x-b=a+c+d 
x-c=a+b+d According to the rule 3a+3b+3c+3d 
divided by 3 gives x=a+b+c+d 
since 4x=4a+4b+4c+4d. 
30. One should di·dde the difference between the pieces of money possessed 
by two men by the difference between the ob­jects possessed 
by them. The quotient will be the value of one of the objects 
if the wealth of the two men is equal. 
Two men possess each a certain number of pieces 
of money (such as rupees) and a certain number of 
objects of merchandise (such as cows). 
Let a and b be the number of rupees possessed by 
two men, and let m and p be the number of cows possessed 
by them. 
b-a x=-- since mx+a=px+b. m-p 
If one man has 100 rupees and 6 cows and the 
other man has 60 rupees and 8 cows the value of a cow is 20 rupees provided 
the wealth of the two men 
is equal. 
31. The two distances between two planets moving in eippo­
site directions is divided by the sum of their daily motions. The 
two distances between two planets moving in the same direction is divided 
by the difference of their daily motions. The two results (in each case) 
will give the time of meeting of the two in the past and in the future. 
1 Cf. JBORS, XII, 88-90. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com42 ARYABHATIYA 
In each case there will be two distances between 
the planets, namely, that between the one which is behind 
and the one which is ahead, and, measuring in 
the same direction, the distance between the one which is ahead 
and the one which is behind. This seems to be 
the only adequate interpretation of the 
word dve. The translations of Rodet and Kaye fail to do full justice 
to the word dve.1 
The next two stanzas give a method for the solu­tion 
of indeterminate equations of the first degree; 
but no help for the interpretation of the process in­tended, which is only sketchily presented 
in Arya­bhata, 
is to be found in Mahavira, Bhaskara, or the 
second Aryabhata. The closest parallel is found in 
Brahmagupta, XVIII, 3-5.2 The verbal expression is very similar to 
that of Aryabhata, but with one im­
portant exception. In place of the enigmatic state­
ment matigurJ,am agrantare k~iptam, "(The last re­mainder) is multiplied 
by an assumed number and 
added to the difference between the agras," Brahma­
gupta has, "The residue ( of the reciprocal division) is multiplied 
by an assumed number such that the 
product having added to it the difference of the 
remainders may be exactly divisible (by the residue's divisor). 
That multiplier is to be set down ( under­neath) and 
the quotient last." It is possible that this 
sam~ process is to be understood in Aryabhata. 
1 Cf. Paramesvara, dve iti vacanam antarasya dvaividhyat. 
sighragatihino mandagatir antararh bhavati. mandagatihinas sighragatis cantararh 
bhavati. iti dvaividhyam and his further interpretation of the 
results. 
Cf. Brahmagupta, IX, 5-6 and Bhaskara, Ga1;iitadhyaya, Gra­
hayutyadhikara, 3--4, and Vasanab~ya, and see JA. (1878), I, 28. 
2 Colebrooke, op. cit., p. 325. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comGA~ITAPADA OR MATHEMATICS 43 
First I shall explain the stanza on the basis of 
Param.esvara's interpretation and of Brahmagupta's 
method: 
32-33. Di'vide the divisor which giYes the greater agra by the 
divisor which gives the smaller agra. The remainder is reciprocal­
ly dfrided (that is to say, the remainder becomes the divisor of 
the original divisor, and the remainder of this second division becomes 
the divisor of the i:econd di\isor, etc.). (The quotients are placed below each other in 
the so-called chain.) (The last remainder) is multiplied 
by an assumed number and added to the 
difference between the agras. Multiply the penultimate number 
by the number above it and add the number which is below it. 
(Continue this process to the top of the chain.) Divide (the top 
number) by the divisor which gives the smaller agra. Multiply 
the remainder by the divisor which gives the greater agra. Add this product 
to the greater agra. The result is the number which will satisfy 
both di·d.sors and both agras. 
In this the sentence, '' (The last remainder) is multiplied 
by an assumed number and added to the 
difference between the agras," is to be understood as equivalent 
to the quotation from Brahmagupta given above. 
The word agra denotes the remainders which con­
stitute the provisional values of x, that is to say, values one 
of which will satisfy one condition, one of which 
will satisfy the second condition of the prob­lem. 
The word di.icchedagra denotes the value of x 
which will satisfy both conditions. 
I cannot agree with the translation given by Kaye 
(and followed by Mazumdar, BClYJS, III, 11) or accept 
the method given by Kaye. Kaye's transla­tion of 
matigurJ,am agrantare k~ipt,am, "An assumed number together with 
the original difference is thrown 
in," is an impossible translation, and any method 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com44 IRYABHA TIY A 
based on that translation is bound to be incorrect. It 
omits altogether the important word gur:iam (".multi­plied"). Since 
the preceding phrase dealt with the 
remainders of the reciprocal division, the natural 
word to supply with matigu1J,am seems to be se?am 
("remainder"). Something has to be supplied, and 
Brahmagupta's method offers a possible interpreta­
tion. A second possible interpretation, which ~rill be 
given below, would supply "quotient" instead of ''remainder.'' 
The following example is given by Paramesvara. 
Sx · · d f 4 17 x · · d f 7 29 gives a remam er o · 45 gives a remam er o . 
. Sx-4 17x-7 These are eqmvalent to 29 =y and 45 =z or 8x-
29y=4 and 17x-45z=7 
where y and z are the quotients of the division (y and z to be whole numbers). 
I. First process. To find a value of x which will satisfy the first equation: 
8)29(3 
24 
5)8(1 
5 
3)5(1 
3 
2)3(1 
2 
1 
Take an assumed number such that multiplied by 
1 (the last remainder of the reciprocal division) and 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comGA~ITAPADA OR 1IATHE::.\'1ATICS 45 
plus or minus 4 (the original remainder) it "rj]J be exactly divisible 
by 2 ( the last divisor of the recip­rocal division). 
· 6-4 6 1s taken because -2 = 1. 
Therefore 6 and 1 are to be added to the quotients to form 
the chain. 
3 73 29)73(2 
58 15 1 20 
1 13 
1 7 This remainder 15 is the agra, that is to say, a value of x 
which will satisfy the equation. 6 
1 
2. Second process. To find a value of x which ·will satisfy the 
second equation: 17)45(2 34 11)17(1 
11 
6)11(1 
6 
5)6(1 
5 
1 
Take an assumed number such that multiplied 
by 1 (the last remainder of the reciprocal division) 
and plus or minus 7 (the original remainder) it will be 
exactly divisible by 5 ( the last divisor of the reciprocal division). 
3+7 3 is taken because 5 = 2. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com46 IRYABHATIYA 
Therefore 3 and 2 are to be added to the quotients to 
form the chain. 
2 34 34)45(1 
1 13 34 
1 8 
1 5 11 
3 This remainder 11 is the agra, that is to say, a value of x 
2 which will satisfy the equation. 
These numbers 15 and 11 are the agras mentioned 
at the beginning of the rule. The corresponding divisors are 
29 and 45. The difference between the 
agras is 4, i.e., 15-11. 
3. Third process. To find a value of x which ·will satisfy both 
equations: 29)45(1 
29 
16)29(1 
16 13)16(1 
13 
3)13(4 
12 
1 
Take an assumed number such that multiplied by 
1 (the last remainder of the reciprocal division) and plus or minus 4 (the difference between 
the agras) it 
will be exactly divisible by 3 (the last divisor of the 
reciprocal division). 
2 is taken because 214 = 2. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comGA~ITAPIDA OR ~IATHEl\IATICS 47 
Therefore 2 and 2 are to be added to the quotients 
to form the chain. 
45)34(0 
0 
34 1 34 
1 22 
1 12 
4 10 
2 Therefore 34 is the remainder. 
2 
Then in accordance -with the rule 34X29=986 
and 986+15=1001 
This number 1001 is the smallest number which will satisfy 
both equations. Strictly speaking, 
the rule applies only to the third 
process given above. The solution of the single inde­terminate equation is 
taken for granted and is not 
given in full. There is nothing to indicate how far 
the reciprocal division was to be carried. 1\iiust it be carried 
to the point where the last remainder is 1? 
Must the number of quotients taken to make the 
chain be even in number? On page 50 of 
Kern's edition a 1 has been omitted 
by mistake (twice) as the fourth member of the chains 
given. 
The following method was partially worked out by 
1\1azumdar, 1 who was misled in some details by fol­lowing 
Kaye's translation, and by Sen Gupta,2 and 
fully worked out by Sarada Kanta Ganguly .3 
1 BCMS, III, 11-19. 
2 Journal of the Department of Letters (Calcutta University), XVI, 
27-30. 
3 BCMS, XIX (1928), 170-76. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com48 ARYABHA T!YA 
According to Ganguly's interpretation, the trans­lation would be: 
32-33. Divide the divisor corresponding to the greater re­mainder 
by the divisor corresponding to the smaller remainder. The remainder 
(and the divisor) are reciprocally divided. (This process 
is continued until the last remainder is 0.) (The quotients are placed below 
ea.eh other in the so-called chain.) Multiply any assumed number 
by the last quotient of the reciprocal division and add 
it to the di:ff erence between the two remainders. (Interpreted as meaning 
that this product and this difference are 
placed in the chain beneath the quotients.) Multiply the penulti­mate number 
by the number above it and add the number which is below it. (Continue this process 
to the top of the chain.) 
Dhide (the lower of the two top numbers) by the divisor cor­responding 
to the smaller remainder. Multiply the remainder 
by the divisor corresponding to the greater remainder. Add the product 
to the greater remainder. The result is the (least number) which will satisfy the two divisors and 
the two re­mainders. 
He remarks: 
The implication is that the least number satisfying the given conditions can also be obtained 
by multiplying the remainder, obtained as the result 
of division of the upper number by the divisor corresponding 
to the greater given remainder, by the divisor corresponding to the smaller given remainder and then adding the smaller remainder 
to the product. 
From this point of view the problem would be 
that of finding a number which will leave given remainders when divided 
by given positive integers. For example, to take a simple case: What num­ber divided 
by 3 and 7 will leave as remainders 2 and 
1? 
Following the rule literally, even though a smaller 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comGA~ITA.P.ADA OR rvIATHEMATICS 49 
number has to be divided by a larger number we get the 
following: 
7)3(0 
0 
3)7(2 
6 
1)3(3 3 
0 
l\1ultiply the last quotient (3) by an assumed number (for instance, 
3) and set this product and the difference between the remainders 2 and 
1, i.e., (1) 
down below the quotients to form the chain. 
0 28 
2 65 
3 28 
9 
1 
or 7)65(9 
63 
2 
Then 2X3=6 and 6+2=8. 
3)28(9 
27 
1 
Then 1X7=7 and 7+1=8. 
Therefore 8 is the number desired. 
The two methods attach different significations to the word 
agra and supply different words with bhajite 
in the third line ("remainder," in one case; "quo­tient," 
in the other). They differ fundamentally in 
their interpretations of the words matigu't},am agra-
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com50 A.RYABHA TlYA 
ntare k?iptam. In the first method it is necessary to 
supply much to fill out the meaning, but the transla­
tion of these words themselves is a more natural one. 
In the second method it is not necessary to supply 
anything except "quotient" with matigu?J,am (in the 
first method it is necessary to supply "remainder"). 
But if the intention was that of stating that the 
product of the quotient and an assumed number, and 
the difference between the remainders, are to be 
added below the quotients to form a chain the 
thought is expressed in a very curious way. Ganguly 
finds justification for this interpretation (p. 172) in 
his formulas, but I cannot help feeling that the San­
skrit is stretched in order to make it fit the formula. 
The general method of solution by reciprocal 
division and formation of a chain is clear, but some 
of the details are uncertain and we do not know to 
what sort of problems .Aryabhata applied it. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comCHAPTER III 
KALAKRIY A OR THE RECKONI~G 
OF TI~1E 
1. A year consists of twelve months. A month consists of 
thirty days. A day consists of sixty naiJ,Is. A nai/l consists of 
si:dy vinacJ.,ikas. 1 
2. Sixty long letters or six prci1J,as make a sidereal rinacjika. 
This is the division of time. In like manner the di,ision of space beginning 
with a revolution. 2 
3. The difference between the number of revolutions of two 
planets in a yuga is the number of their conjunctions. 
Twice the sum of the revolutions of the Sun and ~.Ioon is the number 
of vyat'ipiltas. 3 
This is a yoga of the Sun and l\foon when they are in different 
ayanas, have the same declination, and the sum 
of their longitudes is 180 degrees. 
4. The difference between the number of revolutions of a 
planet and the number of revolutions of its ucca. is the number of 
reYolutions of its epicycle. The number 
of revolutions of Jupiter multiplied by 12 are the years of Jupiter beginning 
·with A§yayuja. 4 
1 Cf. Suryasiddhanta, I, 11-13; Alberuni, I, 335; Bbatt,otpala, p. 
24. 
2 Cf. Suryasiddhanta, I, 11, 28; Bhattotpala, p. 24; Paifoasi­
ddhantika, XIV, 32, for the first part of 2; Brahmagupta, I, 5-6, and 
Bhaskara, Gattitadhaya, Kalamanadhyaya, 16-18, for both stanzas. 
3 See Lalla, Jfadhyamadhikara, 11; Brahmagupta, XIII, 42, for 
the first part. For vyati.'[)ti,ta see Su.ryas'iddhanta, XI, 2; Pan-easi­
ddhantika, III, 22; Lalla, Mahapatadhikara, 1; Brahmagupta, XIV, 
37, 39. 
4 For the first part see Lalla, J.1fodhyamadhikara, 11; Brahma­
gupta, XIII, 42; Bhaskara, Gattitadhyaya, Bhaga~iadhyaya, 14. For 
the second part see JRAS, 1863, p. 378; ibid., 1865, p. 404; 
Suryasiddhanta, I, 55; Bhattotpala, p. 182. 
51 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com52 XRYABHATIYA 
The word ucca refers both to mandocca ("apsis") 
and sighrocca ("conjunction"). 
Paramesvara explains that the number of revolu­tions 
of the epicycle of the apsis of the l\f oon is equal to the difference 
behveen the number of revolutions 
of the Moon and the revolutions of its apsis; that since 
the apsides of the six others are stationary, the number 
of revolutions of the epicycles of their apsides is equal to 
the number of revolutions of, the planets; 
and that the number of revolutions of the epicycles 
of the conjunctions of J\ifercury, Venus, J\,:Iars, 
Jupiter, and Saturn is equal to the difference between 
the revolutions of the planets and the revolutions of their conjunctions. As pointed 
out in the note to I, 7, the apsides were 
not regarded by Aryabhata as being stationary in the 
absolute sense. They were regarded by him as sta­
tionary for purposes of calculation at the time when his treatise was composed since their movements were very slow. 
5. The revolutions of the Sun are solar years. The conjunc­tions 
of the Sun and Moon are lunar months. The conjunctions of the Sun and the 
Earth are [civil] days. The revolutions of the asterisms are sidereal days. 
The word yoga applied to the Sun and the Earth 
(instead of bhaga1J,a or avarta) seems clearly to indi­cate 
that Aryabhata believed in a rotation of the 
Earth (see IV, 48). Paramesvara's explanation, ravi­
bhuyogasabdena raver bhuparibhrama7J,am abhihitam, 
seems to be impossible. 
6. Subtract the solar months in a yuga from the lunar months in a 
yuga. The result will be the number of intercalary months in 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comK..lLAKRIY.A OR THE RECKONING OF TIME 53 
a yuga. Subtract the natural [ci,il] days in a yuga from the lunar 
days in a yuga. The result will be the number of omitted lunar 
days in a yuga.1 
7. A solar year is a year of men. Thirty of these make a year 
of the Fathers. Twelve years of the Fathers make a year of the 
gods. 8. Twelve thousand years 
of the gods make a yuga of all the 
planets. A thousand and eight yugas of the planets make a day 
of Brahman. 2• 
9. The first half of a yuga is called utsarpi1J,i [ascending]. The 
latter half is called avasarpi1J,i [descending]. The middle part of a 
yuga is called su~ama. The beginning and the end are called 
duij~ama. Because of the apsis of the :\ifoon. 
Alberuni (I, 370-71) remarks: 
.A.ryabhata of Kusumapura, who belongs to the school of the 
elder Aryabhata, says in a small book of his on A.l-ntj (?), that 
"1,008 caturyugas are one day of Brahman. The first half of 504 
caturyiUJaS is called idsarpi1J,i, during which the sun is ascending, 
and the second half is called avasarpitzi, during which the sun is descending. 
The midst of this period is called sama, i.e., equality, for 
it is the midst of the day, and the two ends are called durtama 
(?). 
"This is so far correct, as the comparison between day and 
kalpa goes, but the remark about the sun's ascending and 
descending is not correct. If he meant the sun who makes our day, 
it was his duty to explain of what kind that ascending and 
descending of the sun is; but if he meant a sun who specially be­longs 
to the day of Brahman, it was his duty to show or to 
describe him to us. I almost think that the author meant by these two expressions 
the progressive, increasing development of things during 
the first half of this period, and the retrograde, decreasing development 
in the second half.'' 
1 Of. Suryasiddhanta, I, 35-36; Lalla, Madhyamiidhikara, 10; 
Brahmagupta, I, 24 and XIII, 26. 
2 Of. SuryasiddM.nta, I, 13-15; I, 20. Brahmagupta (I, 12) criticizes 
Aryabhata's figure of 1,008 yugas instead of 1,000 yugas. Cf. 
JRAS, 1865, p. 400. Cf. also I, 3 and see JRAS, 1911, p. 486. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com54 .~RYABHATIYA 
The reference is to the foregoing stanza. The mid­dle of the 
yuga seems to be called suf}ama e'even") 
because good and bad are evenly mixed. The begin­ning and the end are called 
du[![Jama ("1n1even") be­cause 
in one case goodness and in the other case badness predominates. Paramesvara remarks 
that the vyakhyakara has given no explanation. 
Then he quotes from the 
Bhat.aprakasika a statement to the effect that our text refers to the increase and decrease of men's lives in the course of a 
yuga and a criticism (asyartho 
'bhiyuktair nirupya vakta1JyalJ,) of the last phrase of the stanza. He 
then continues by saying that he does not see what meaning can be intended 
by the word 
induccat, and adds that the word has nothing to do with the 
matter under discussion, has no significance for the calculation of 
the places of the planets. Then he adds two forced explanations. 
The meaning of 
induccat is quite uncertain. Sudhakara 
(Ga?J,akatarangirfi,, p. 7) suggests the 
emendation to agnyarhsat. 
The terminology is distinctively J aina.1 
10. When three yugapad.as and sixty times sixty years had elapsed 
(from the beginning of the yuga) then twenty-three years 
of my life had passed. 2 
If Aryabhata began the Kaliyuga at 3102 B.c. as later astronomers did, and if his fourth 
yugapada 
1 See Hemacandra, Abhidhanacintamar.ii, 128--35; Glasenapp, 
Der Jainismus, pp. 244-45; Kirfel, Kosmographie, p. 339; ZDMG, 
LX, 320-21; Stevenson, The Heart of Jainism, pp. 212 ff. See also 
Hardy, Manual, of Bud.dhism, p. 7. 
2 See JRAS, 1863, p. 387; ibid., 1865, p. 405; Kern, Brhat 
Samhito,, Preface, p. 57; JRA.S, 1911, pp. 111-12. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comKALAKRIYA OR THE RECKONING OF TE\1E 55 
began with the beginning of the Kaliyuga, we arrive 
at th~ date 499 A.D. It is natural to take this as the 
date of composition of the treatise. Paramesvara quotes 
the Prakasikakara to the e:ff ect that this is to be 
taken as the date at which the calculations of the 
true places of the planets made by it would be correct, 
and that for later times a correction would have to be made. 
The word iha may mean "here" or "now." 
Param.esvara takes it as referring to this present twenty-eighth 
caturyuga. 
11. The yuga, the year, the month, and the day began all together 
at the beginning of the bright fortnight of Caitra. Time, which has no beginning and no 
end, is measured by (the move­
ments of) the planets and the asterisms on the sphere. 
Bhau Daji1 first pointed out the criticism made 
of this stanza by Brahmagupta (XI, 6): 
yugavaf$adin vadata caitrasitade];). samam pra,rrttan yatl 
tad asad yata];). sphutayugari:J. tat sthairyan mandapatanam.!I 
Compare Brahmagupta, I, 4, and Bhaskara, Ga1J,ita­
dhyaya, Kalamanadhyaya, 15, who refers to an earlier commentary 
in which time is called endless. 2 
12. The planets moving equally (traversing the same distance in 
yojanas each day) in their orbits complete the circle of the 
asterisms in sixty solar years, and the circle of the sky in a divine age 
[caturyuga]. 
In sixty years they move a distance in yojanas 
equal to the circle of the asterisms. In a caturyuga 
they move a distance in yojanas equal to the circum­ference of 
the sky (akasakak?yii) (cf. I, 4). 
1 JRAS, 1865, p. 401. 
2 For discussion of the stanza see Fleet, ibid., 1911, pp. 489-90; 
cf. I, 2. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com56 A.RYABHA'_flYA 
The planets really all move at the same speed. The nearer ones seem to move more rapidly 
th?,n the more distant ones because their orbits are smaller.
1 
13. The l\Ioon, being below, completes its small orbit in a short time. Saturn, being above all 
the others, completes its large orbit in a long time.
2 
14. The zodiacal signs (a twelfth of the circle) are to be known as small 
in a small circle and large in a large circle. Like­wise 
the degrees and minutes are the same in number in the 
various orbits. 3 
15. Beneath the asterisms are Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, the Sun, Venus, Mercury, 
and the Moon, and beneath these is the Earth 
situated in the center of space like a hitching-post.4 
16. These seven lords of the hours, Saturn and the others, are in order swifter 
than the preceding one, and counting suc­cessively 
the fourth in the order of their swiftness they become the Lords of the days from sunrise. 
They a.re called "swifter than the preceding" be­cause their orbits being successively smaller 
they 
complete their revolutions in less time (traverse a given number 
of degrees in less time). The order of 
the planets is Saturn, Jupiter, Jvfars, the Sun, Venus, Mercury, and 
the Moon. Therefore they become rulers 
of the days of the week as follows: 
1 Cf. Suryasiddhanta, I, 27 and note; Brahmagupta, XXI, 12; 
Paikasiddhilntika, XIII, 39; Bhaskara, Goladhyaya, Bhuvanakosa, 
69; JRAS, 1911, p. 112. 
2 Cf. JRAS, 1863, p. 375; Suryasiildhanta, XII, 76-77; Pancasi­ddhantika, 
XIII, 41; Brahrnagupta, XXI, 14; Bhattotpala, p. 45. 
3 Cf. JRAS, 1863, p. 375; Pancasiddhantika, XIII, 40; Suryasi­ddhanta, 
XII, 75; Brahrnagupta, XXI, 14; Bhattotpala, p. 45. 
4 Cf. JRAS, 1863, p. 375; Pancasiddhantika, XIII, 39; Lalla, 
Madhyarnii,dhikara, 12; Brahmagupta, XXI, 2; Bhattotpala, p. 44. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comKA.LAKRIYA OR THE RECKONING OF TIME 57 
Saturday-Saturn 
Sunday-Sun 
:.Ionday-J\Ioon 
Tuesday-Mars Wednesday-:Mercury 
Thursday-Jupiter 
Friday-,' en us 
For the first part see Brahmagupta, XXI, 13; 
Suryasiddhanta, XII, 78.1 
Bhau Daji2 first pointed out the criticism of this stanza made 
by Brahmagupta (XI, 12) : 
suryadayas caturtha dinavara yad uvaca tad asad aryabhatali.l 
la:rikodaye yato 'rkasyastamayam praha siddhapure. ii 
As Sudhakara shows, the criticism is a futile one. 
17. All the planets move by their (mean) motion on their orbits and their eccentric circles from the 
apsis eastward and from the conjunction westward.
3 
The mean planet moves with its mean motion on 
its orbit the center of which is the center of the Earth. 
The true planet moves with its (mean) motion on an eccentric circle the center 
of which does not coincide with 
the center of the Earth. 
Kakrrya in this passage stands for kak?yiima1pJ.ala, 
the orbit on which the mean planet moves. The pra­
tima1},</,ala is the eccentric circle on which the true planet moves. Because of the eccentricity 
of this second circle the planet 
_is sometimes seen ahead of and sometimes back 
of its mean place. 4 
1 See Barth (CEuvres, III, 151) concerning this as the only refer­ence 
to astrology in Aryabhata's treatise. The reference to iiyatipata 
(III, 5) should be added. 
2 JRAS, 1865, p. 401. 
3 See Lalla, Chedyakadhikara, 12-13; Brahmagupta, XIV, 11 and 
XXI, 24. 
4 See Brennand, Hindu Astronomy, pp. 224 ff.; Surya.siddhanta, 
p. 64. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com58 ARY ABHA TiYA 
18. The eccentric circle of each planet is equal to its kakwa­
ma1.uJ.ala [the orbit on which the mean planet moves]. The center of 
the eccentric circle is outside the center of the solid Earth. 
The kakfiytimmyJ,ala is determined by I, 4. 
19. The distance between the center of the Earth and the 
center of the eccentric circle is equal to the radius of the epicycle. 
The planets move with their mean motions on their epicycles. 1 
Brahmagupta, XI, 52, has 
nicoccavrttamadhyasya golabahyena nama krtam uccam I 
tatstho na bhavati ucco yatas tato vetti noccam api. II 
If this really refers to A.ryabhata the criticism is futile since 
Aryabhata does not call the center of the epi­cycle 
ucca. As Caturvedacarya says, vagbalam etat. 
20. The planet in its swift motion from its ucca has a pra­
tiloma motion on its epicycle. In its slow motion from its iwca it 
has an anuloma motion on its epicycle. 
The exact meaning of this is not clear to me. It 
can hardly mean that the planet moves on its epicycle 
pratiloma from its sighrocca and anuloma from its 
mandocca. On the epicycle of the apsis the motion should be exactly the reverse 
of these. 2 
Anulomameans ''eastward'' or ''ahead''; Pratiloma 
means "westward" or "behind." Paramesvara remarks 
that anuloma and pratiloma 
refer to the planet's position with reference to the mean planet as ahead 
of it or behind it. He also re­marks 
that the planet is sighragati in the six signs 
1 Cf. Lalla, Chedyakadhilcara, 8-9; Brahmagupta, XIV, 10 and 
XXI, 24-26. 
2 See Brahmagupta, XXI, 25-26 and Suryasiddhanta, pp. 63-64, 
67-68. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comK.ALAKRIYA OR THE RECKONING OF Tll\1E 59 
which are above, and mandagati in the six signs which 
are below the ucca. '\Yhen pratiloma the true planet 
is below the mean planet. "\'Vben anuloma the true planet is 
above the mean planet. 1 
madhyamakak~a,'Ttte madhyamaya gacchati graho gatya I 
upar~that tallaghvya tadadhikagatya tv adha}J.sthal;i syat. ! ! 
Paramesvara sums up the content of the stanza 1\7.th 
rnadhyamat sphutasya pratilomanulo magatitvarn uktam. 
The meaning of the stanza seems to be that during half of its revolution on its epicycle the planet is ahead 
of the mean planet and during half of its revolution is behind the mean planet. 
21. The epicycles move eastward from the apsis and west­
ward from the conjunctions. The mean planet, situated on its orbit, appears at the center 
of its epicycle. 2 
The next three stanzas state briefly the method of 
calculating the true places of the planets from their mean places. Paramesvara explains the method as follows: For the Sun and 
J\tioon only one process of cor­rection is required, 
that for the apsis. For Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn four processes are neces.sary: 
(1) From the mean place the mandaphala 
is calculated and (half of it is) applied to the mean place. 
(2) From this corrected place the sighraphala 
is calculated and half of it is applied to the corrected place. 
(3) From this result the mandaphala is again calculated and applied to the mean place. ( 4) From this result the 
sighraphala is again calculated and applied to the place obtained in 
the third process. 
1 Cf. Lalla, Bhuvanakosa, 38. 2 Cf. Brahmagupta, XXI, 25. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com60 ~lR YABHA TIYA 
For Venus and ntiercury three processes are nec­essary: (I) From 
the mean place the sighrap/iala is calculated and half 
of it is applied vyastam (in reverse order) to the 
mandocca (apsis). (2) This corrected 
mandocca is subtracted from the mean place, the 
mandaphala is calculated from this and applied to the 
mean place. (3) From this corrected place the sighra­
phala is calculated and applied to the place obtained 
in the second process. 
22-23. (The corrections) from the apsis are minus, plus, plus, minus (in the four quadrants). (The corrections) from 
the con­junctions are just the reverse. 
In the case of Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars in the first process half 
of the mandaphala obtained from the apsis is minus and plus to the mean planet. Half (the correction) from 
the conjunction is minus and plus to the 
manda planets. (By applying the correc­tion) from the apsis they become 
sphutamadhya. (By applying 
the correction) from the conjunction they become sphuta. 
24. Half (the correction) from the conjunction is to be ap­plied minus and plus 
to the apsis. (By applying the correction) from the 
manda [apsis] thus obtained Venus and Mercury become 
sphutamadhya. They become sphuta (by applying the correction from the conjunction). 
The first half of stanza 22 gives the general rule as 
to whether the equations of anomaly and of com­mutation 
(mandaphala and sighraphala) are to be added or subtracted in each 
of the four quadrants. The equation from 
the apsis is minus in the half of 
the orbit beginning with Me~a, plus in the half of the orbit beginning with Tula. The equation from 
the 
conjunction is plus in the half of the orbit beginning with Mesa, minus in 
the half of the orbit beginning with Tula. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comKALAKRIYA DR THE RECKONING OF TI:..\IE 61 
The planet is called 1nanda after the first correc­
tion from the apsis has been applied to the mean place. 
Sphuta means "true." 
In stanza 24 Paramesvara gives no explanation of 
the two last words, sphutau bhavatah. It would be 
natural to take these words as summing up what precedes and 
to understand that only two processes are involved. 
But Paramesvara's detailed description 
of the process in his commentary to stanza 21 indi­cates 
that three processes are involved, that sphu(m.t 
bhavatalJ, indicates a further application of the equa­tion from 
the conjunction. The commentary to stanza 
24 gives in detail the process of calculating the 
equations for apsis and conjunction. 1 
Brahmagupta (II, 19, 33, 46-47) criticizes Arya­
bhata for the inaccuracy of his method of calculating 
the true places. 
25. The product of its hypotenuses di,ided by the radius ·will 
give the distance between the planet and the Earth. 
The planet has the same speed on its epicycle that it has on its orbit. 
Paramesvara explains that the kan;as referred to 
are the sighrakany,a and the mandakarr;,a employed in 
the last and the next to the last processes for calculating 
the true places of the planets. 
The second half of the stanza is uncertain. This 
same statement was made in unmistakable terms in 
1 See Pancasiddhantika, },,,_""\'II, 4-10; Suryasiddhanta, II, 43-45; 
Brahmagupta, II, 34-40; Lalla, SpaiJtadhikara, 31-36; Bhaskara, 
Ga1J,itadhyaya, SpG,?ta,dhikara, 34-36 and Goladhyaya, Chedyaka­dhikara, 
10 ff.; JRAS, 1863, pp. 353-59; Brennand, op. cit., pp. 214-
28; Kaye, Hindu Astronomy, pp. 87-89. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com62 ARY ABHATIYA 
III, 19. Paramesvara quotes the author of the earlier 
Prakasika, bhiUaragrahavivaravyasardhaviracitayarh kak~yayarh 
yo grahasya javas sa mandanicocce bhavati. 
tavatprama'(l,ayarh kak$yayarh graho mandasphutagatya 
gacchatity artha!J,. ity aha. asman kirh tv etan nopa­
pannam iti pratibhati. Then he explains that the 
meaning may be that the radius of the epicycle is 
equal to the greatest distance by which the mean 
orbit lies inside or outside of the eccentric circle. 
Grahavega!J, is reminiscent of grahajavab, in I, 4, 
but the meaning can hardly be the same. 
Kar'(l,a ("hypotenuse") is the distance between the 
center of the Earth and the planet. 1 
1 Cf. Brahmagupta, XXI, 31; Bhaskara, Ga1J,itadhyaya, Candra­
graha'l',J.ddhikara, 4-5; Suryasiddhanta, p. 69. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comCHA.PTER IV 
GOLA OR THE SPHERE 
1. From the beginning of Me~a to the end of Kanya is the northern 
half of the ecliptic. The other half from the beginning 
of Taulya to the end of Min.a is the southern half of the ecliptic. 
Both devi.ate equally from the Equator. 
Therefore the greatest declinations north and south are equal, and the declinations 
of the first three signs in each half are equal to the declinations 
of the last three signs taken in reverse order. 
1 
2. The Sun, the nodes of the planets, and the node of the 
Moon move constantly along the ecliptic. The shadow of the 
Earth moves along the ecliptic at a distance of 180 degrees from 
the Sun. 
Bhau Daji2 first pointed out the reference to this passage made 
by Brahmagupta, XI, 8.3 
Barth 4 questions the stanza, but without good reason. 
3. The Moon, from its nodes, moves northward and south­
ward of the ecliptic. Likewise Jupiter, Mars, and Saturn. Venus 
and Mercury do the same from their conjunctions. 6 
4. When the Moon has no declination it is visible when 12 
degrees from the Sun. Venus when 9 degrees. The other planets 
1 Cf. JRAS, 1863, p. 374; Bhattotpala, p. 45. 
2 JRAS, 1865, p. 401. 
3 Cf. I, 7 and note; Brahmagupta, XXI, 53; Suryasiddhanta, 
IV, 6. 
4 (Euvres, III, 154. 
5 Cf. Suryasiddha.nta, I, 68-69 and .Aryabhafiya, I, 6. 
63 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com64 ARYABHATiYA 
in succession according to their decreasing sizes when at 9 degrees increased 
by two's. 
Compare Brahmagupta, VI, 6; Suryasiddhanta, 
IX, 6-9 and X, 1; Pancasiddhantika, XVII, 12 and XVIII, 58. 
Bhau Daji1 first pointed out the criticism 
of this stanza made by Brahmagupta, VI, 12: 
aryabhata}.l. lq;etramsair drsyadrsyan yad uktavams tad asat I 
drggai;ritavisanivadad drggaQ.itaikyam svakalamsail).. 11 
5. Half of the spheres of the Earth, the planets, and the asterisms is darkened 
by their shadows, and half, being turned 
toward the Sun, is light (being small or large) according to their size.
2 
6. The sphere of the Earth, being quite round, situated in the 
center of space, in the middle of the circle of asterisms, surrounded 
by the orbits of the planets, consists of water, earth, fire, and air.3 
7. Just as a ball formed by a Kadamba flower is surrounded on 
all sides by blossoms just so the Earth is surrounded on all sides 
by all creatures terrestrial and aquatic. 4 
8. During a day of Brahman the sphere of the Earth increases 
a yojana in size all around. During a night of Brahman, which is equal 
in length to a day of Brahman, there is a decrease by the 
same amount of the Earth which has been increased by Earth. 5 
9. As a man in a boat going forward sees a stationary object moving backward 
just so at Laiilm a man sees the stationary asterisms moving backward (westward) 
in a straight line. 
The natural interpretation of this stanza seems 
1 JRAS, 1865, p. 401. 
2 Cf. Lalla, Madhyagativasana, 40-41; Bhattotpala, p. 100; Paff.­
casiddho,mika, XIII, 35, for the Moon. 
3 Cf. III, 15. Cf. Lalla, Bhugoladhyaya, 1; Paftcasiddhantika, 
XIII, 1; Bhattotpala, p. 58 (and see JRAS, 1863, pp. 373-74); 
Alberuni, I, 268. 
4 Cf. Lalla, Bh-agoladhyaya, 6; Bhattotpala, p. 58 (and see JRAS, 
1863, pp. 373-74); Bhaskara, GoUidhyaya, Bhuvarwlco§a, 3. 
6 Cf. Lalla, Grahabhramasamsthadhyaya, 20; Bhaskara, Golli,.. 
dhyaya, Bhuvanako§a, 62. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comGOLA OR THE SPHERE 65 
to be that an observer at the Equator of the Earth, 
which ,rotates toward the East, sees the stationary celestial objects as though moving westward. 
But 
Paramesvara explains that whereas the Earth does 
not really move, it appears to move toward the east because of 
the westward movement of the asterisms. He is forced 
to take the words anuloma and viloma, 
which regularly mean "ahead," "eastward," and "backward," "westward," in exactly 
the opposite senses. 
He explains that persons on the asterisms, which move toward 
the west, would seem to see sta­tionary objects on 
the Earth moving eastward. As 
Barth 1 points out, this explanation is quite unac­ceptable. 
It seems that Paramesvara completely mis­represents the opinion of 
Aryabhata, as clearly stated 
in several places in the text, and as described by 
Brahmagupta and other critics of Aryabhata. 
There is nothing to indicate that this stanza repre­sents a 
state of affairs caused by mithyajnana ("false knowledge)." 
Bhattotpala (pp. 58-59) quotes this stanza and 
then refutes it by quoting the Paficasiddhantika, 
XIII, 6-8, Paulisa, Brahmagupta, and strangely enough 
.Aryabhata himself (the following stanza, IV, 10). 
It is curious that Aryabhata should be quoted against himself, 
and that Bhattotpala should not 
indicate clearly which view really represents Arya­
bhata's own opinion. It looks as though Bhattotpala 
regarded the first stanza as containing a purvapak~a 
or erroneous view. 2 
1 Op. cit., III, 158 n. 2 Cf. JRAS, 1863, pp. 3i5--77. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com66 ARYABHA TlYA 
For criticisms of the rotation of the Earth see 
A.lberuni (I, 276-77, 280); Lalla, Mithya}nana­dhyaya, 
42-43; Sripati as reported in the Lucknow edition of Bhaskara's 
Goladhyaya, page 83; see also Barth.
1 
Colebrooke 2 quotes Prthiidaka the commentator on Brahmagupta as follows: 
bhapaiijara};i sthiro bhur evavrtyavrtya pratidaivasikau I 
udayastamayau sampadayati nak$atragraha1).am. 113 
The Viisanavarttika to Bhaskara's GrahagaJJ,ita, 
page 113, 4 quotes the fore going stanza and remarks 
that according to Aryabhata the planets move toward 
the east, the asterisms are stationary, and the Earth 
rotates eastward. 
10. The cause of their rising and setting is due to the fact 
that the circle of the asterisms, together with the planets, driven 
by the provector wind, constantly moves straight westward at 
Lanka. 5 
Bhattotpala (p. 59) quotes this stanza to disprove the preceding stanza which he quoted on page 58 (cf. 
JRAS, 1863, p. 377). 6 
The Marici (p. 43) to Bhaskara's Grahaga1J,ita 7 
quotes this stanza. 
1 Op. cit., III, 158. 2 Essays, II, 392. 
3 See JRAS, 1865, pp. 403-4; IHQ, I, 666 (the words given as a direct quotation from 
Aryabhata are incorrect); BCMS, XVII (1926), 
175. The author of the last article remarks that it is not clear whether 
Aryabhata had in mind the geocentric or the heliocentric motion of the 
Earth. The latter is out of the question. Of. III, 15, 
bhumir medhibhuta khamadhyastha, and IV, 6, khamadhyagata'IJ,. 
4 Pandit, Vol. XXXI. 
5 Cf. Suryasirldhanta, II, 3: Lalla, Madhyamiidhikara, 12. 
6 See Barth, op. cit., III, 158. 1 Pandit, Vol. XXX. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comGOLA OR THE SPHERE 67 
The Vasanavarttika to Bhaskara's GrahagarJ,ita (p. 118)
1 quotes this stanza apparently ·without seeing in 
it anything contradictory to the preceding stanza 
which was quoted on page 113, and with the remark 
that .Aryabhata is here following the opinion of V 
rddhavasi$tha. 
If the readings of our text are correct it is difficult to see how the two stanzas can be brought into agree­ment. 
The ninth stanza states unequivocally that 
the asterisms are stationary and implies the rotation 
of the Earth. The tenth stanza seems to state that the 
asterisms, together with the planets, are driven by 
the provector wind. This would imply the ordinary point of view 
of most Indian astronomers that the 
Earth was stationary. Paramesvara avoids the diffi­culty 
by assuming that stanza 9 describes a state of 
mind brought about by mithyajnana ("false knowl­edge"). 
But since several other stanzas (I, 1; I, 4; 
III, 5; IV, 48) and the testimony of later writers who quote 
.Aryabhata prove that Aryabhata believed in 
the rotation of the Earth, it is impossible to follow Paramesvara. 
We might understand in stanza 10 the 
phrase "they seem to move" as stating a purvapak~a 
( the erroneous view), but in the absence of any word to suggest this interpretation 
it is a doubtful expedi­ent. 
Stanza 10 cannot be regarded as an interpolation (unless one stanza 
has been dropped out in order to 
make room for it) because the last three sections of 
Aryabhata's work were known to Brahmagupta as 
"The Hundred and Eight Stanzas" (and our text con­
tains 108 stanzas). 
1 Tbid., Vol. XXXI. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com68 ARYABHA TiYA 
11. In the center of the Nandana forest is Mount Meru, a 
yojana in measure (diameter and height), shining, surrowided by 
the Himavat Mountains, made of jewels, quite round. 1 
12. Heaven and Meru are at the center of the land, Hell and 
Yaq.avamukha are at the center of the water. The gods and the dwellers in Hell both think constantly 
that the others are beneath them.
2 
Quoted by Bhattotpala, page 58. 3 
13. Sunrise at Lank! is sunset at Siddhapura, midday at 
Yavakoti, and midnight at Romaka. 4 
Brahmagupta's criticism (XI, 12) 
suryadayas caturtha dinavara yad uvaca tad asad aryabhatal). I 
lankodaye yato 'rkasyastamayaril praha siddhapure II 
is incorrect, as pointed out by Sudhakara in his com­mentary. 
14. Lanka is 90 degrees from the centers of the land and water [north and south poles]. 
Ujjain is straight north of Lanka 
by 22½ degrees. 5 
15. From a level place half of the sphere of the asterisms 
1 Cf. I, 5. Cf. also Suryasiddhanta, XII, 34; Lalla, Bhuvanakoaa, 
18-19; Bhliskara, Goladhy{J,ya, Bhuvanakoaa, 31; Alberuni (I, 244, 246). 
Quoted by Bhattotpala, p. 58 (cf. JRAS, 1863, p. 373). 
2 Cf. Pa~Mntika, XIII, 2-3; Suryasiddhanta, XII, 35-36, 53; Brahmagupta, 
XXI, 3; Lalla, Bhugolii,dhyaya, 3-4; Bhaska.ra, 
Goliidhyaya, Bhuvanakosa, 17-20, 31. 
3 Cf. JRAS, 1863, p. 373. 
4 Cf. Kern, Brhat Sariihita, Preface, p. 57; Suryasiddhanta, XII, 
38-41; Pancasiddhantik{J, 1 XV, 23; Lalla, Bhugoladhyaya, 12; Bhas-­
kara, Golii.dhyaya, Bhuvanakosa, 17, 44; Alberuni I, 267-68; JRAS, 
1865, p. 402. 
~ Cf. Suryasiddhanta, I, 62; Pancasiddhantika, XIII, 17; Lalla, 
Madhyam&Ihikara, 55, and Bhuvanakosa, 41; Brahmagupta, XXI, 
9; Bhaskara, Goladhyaya, Bhuvanakosa, 50 (Vasanabha,wa), and 
Madhyagati, 24; Alberuni, I, 316 (cf. BCMS, XVII [1926], 71). 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comGOLA OR THE SPHERE 69 
decreased by the radius of the Earth is visible. The other half, plus 
th~ radius of the Earth, is cut off by the Earth. 1 
16. The gods, who dwell in the north on Meru, see the northern half 
of the sphere of the asterisms moving from left to right. The 
Pretas, who dwell in the south at Vaq.avamukha, see 
the southern half of the sphere of the asterisms moving from right to 
left.2 
Quoted by Bhattotpala, page 324. 3 
17. The gods and the Pretas see the Sun after it has risen for half a solar year. The Fathers 
who dwell in the Moon see it for half a lunar month. Here men 
see it for half a natural [civil] day.' 
Referred to by Alberuni, I, 330. 
18. There is a circle east and west (the prime vertical) and another north and south (the meridian) both passing through zenith and nadir. There is a horizontal circle, the horizon, on which the heavenly 
~odies rise and set.5 
19. The circle which intersects the east and west points and two points on the meridian which are above and below the horizon 
by the amount of the observer's latitude is called the unmarp/,ala. 
On it the increase and decrease of day and night are measured. 
The unma?J,<J,ala is the east and west hour-circle 
which passes through the poles. It is also called "the 
horizon of La:rika." 6 
1 Of. Lalla, Bhuvanakosa, 36; Brahms.gupta, XXI, 64; Bhaskara, 
GoliJ,dhyaya, Tri:prasnavasana, 38. 
! Of. Suryasiildhii:nta, XII, 55; Pancasidr1hantika, XIII, 9; 
Brahmagupta, XXI, 6-7; Lalla, Grahabhramaearhsthi.idhyaya, 3-5; 
Bhaskara, Gowilhyaya, Bhuvanakosa, 51. 
3 Of. JRAS, 1863, p. 378. 
'Cf. Suryasiddhanta, XII, 74 and XIV, 14; Lalla, Grahabhra,­
masarhsthadyaya, 14; Brahmagupta, XXI, 8; Pancasidd,hantika, 
XIII, Z'l, 38. 
6 Of. Lalla, Golabarulhadhilcara, 1-2; Brahmagupta, XXI, 49. 
6 Of. Lalla, Golabarulhiiil,hikara, 3; Brahmagupta 1 XXI, 50. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com70 ARY ABHATIYA 
20. The east and west line and the north and south line and the perpendicular from zenith 
to nadir intersect in the plaCP-where the observer is. 
21. The vertical circle which passes through the place where the observer is and the planet is the 
drnmarpJ,ala. There is also the 
drkk?epamarpJ,ala which passes through the nonagesimal point.
1 · 
The nonagesimal or central-ecliptic point is the point 
on the ecliptic which is 90 degrees from the point 
of the ecliptic which is on the horizon. These 
two circles are used in calculating the parallax in longitude in eclipses. 
22. A light wooden sphere should be made, round, and of equal weight 
in every part. By ingenuity one should cause it to revolve 
so as to keep pace with the progress of time by means of 
quicksilver, oil, or water. 2 
Sukumar Ranjan Das 3 remarks that two instru­ments are named 
in this stanza ( the gola and the 
cakra). I can see no reference to the cakra. 
23. On the visible half of the sphere one should depict half of the sphere of the asterisms 
by means of sines. The equinoctial sine is the sine 
of latitude. The sine of co­latitude is its 
koti. 
The sine of the distance between the Sun and the , 
zenith at midday of the equinoctial day is the equi­noctial sine. This is the same as the equinoctial shadow and equals the sine 
of latitude. It is the base. 
1 Cf. SuryMiMhanta, V, 6-7 n.; Kaye, Hindu Astronomy, p. 76. 
2 Cf. Suryasiddhanta, XIII, 3 ff.; Lalla, Yantr&ihyaya, 1 :ff.; !HQ, 
IV, 265 ff. 
3 !HQ, IV, 259, 262. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comGOLA OR THE SPHERE 71 
The sine of co-latitude is the koti ( the side perpen­diculat to the base) or 
sanku (gnomon). 1 
24. Subtract the square of the sine of the given declination from the square of the radius. The square root of the remainder 
will be the radius of the day-circle north or south of the Equator. 
The day-circle is the diurnal circle of revolution described by a planet 
at any given declination from the Equator. 
So these day-circles are small circles parallel to the Equator.
2 ,_ 
• 25. Multiply the day-radius of the circle of greatest declina­tion (24 degrees) by 
the sine of the desired sign of the zodiac and divide 
by the radius of the day-circle of the desired sign of 
the zodiac. The result will be the equivalent in right ascension of 
the desired sign beginning with Mees,. 
To determine the right ascension of the signs of 
the zodiac, that is to say, the time which each sign 
of the ecliptic will take to rise above the horizon at 
the Equator. 3 
26. The sine of latitude multiplied by the sine of the given declination and divided 
by the sine of co-latitude is the earth­sine, which, being situated in the plane 
of one's day-circle, is the 
sine of the increase of day and night. 
The earth-sine is the distance in the plane of the day-circle between the observer's horizon and the 
1 Cf. Brahmagupta, III, 7-8; Lalla., Samanyago1.ahand,ha, 9-10; 
Bhaskara, Ga1J,itadhyaya, Tripra8'Ttli,d,hikara, 12-13. 
2 Cf. Lalla, SpaWUlhikara, 18; Pancasiddhii,ntika, IV, 23; Surya­
siddoonta, II, 60; Brahmagupta, II, 56; Bhaskara, Gar,,itii.ahyaya, 
Spal}#ii,dhik4ra, 48 (Vasanabhawa); Kaye, op. cit., p. 73. 
3 Cf. Lalla, TriprasTIIJ,d,hikara, 8; Brahmagupta, II, 57-58; 
Suryasid.dhii,nta, III, 42-43 and note; Parica8iddhantikll,, IV1 29-30; 
Bhaskara, Ga'IJ,itii,dhyaya, Spa,JJ(ii,d,hikara, 57; Kaye, op. cit., pp. 79-80. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com72 ARYABHATIYA 
horizon of Lanka (the unmar;icJ,ala). When trans­formed to the plane 
of a great circle it becomes the ascensional 
diff erence. 1 
27. The first and fourth quadrants of the ecliptic rise in a quarter 
of a day (15 ghatikas) minus the ascensional difference: The second and third quadrants rise 
in a quarter of a day plus the ascensional difference, with regular increase and decrease. 
The last phrase means that the values for signs 
1, 2, 3 are equal, respectively, to those of signs 6, 5, 4 and 
that the values of 7, 8, 9 are equal, respectively, to those 
of 12, 11, 10. They increase in the first quadrant, decrease in 
the second, increase in the third, and decrease in the fourth. There are, there­fore, only three numerical values involved, those cal­culated for 
the first three signs. See the table given in 
Suryasiddhanta, III, 42-45 n. 2 
28. The sine of the Sun at any given point from the horizon on its day-circle multiplied 
by the sine of co-latitude and divided by the radius 
is the sanku when any given part of the day has elapsed or remains. 
The sanku is the sine of the altitude of the Sun at 
any time on the vertical circle from the zenith pas­sing through the Sun. Cf. Brahmagupta, 
XXI, 63, 
drgma1J,<l,ale natarhsajya drgjya sankur unnatarhsajya, 
1 Of. Suryasiddhanta, II, 61-63; Lalla, Sp~'tfi,dhikara, 17, and 
Samanyagolabandha, 4; Brahmagupta, II, 57-60; Pancasiddhantika, 
IV, 26 and note; Bhaskara, Gar;iitoohyaya, Spar;ta,dhikara, 48; Kaye, 
op. cit., p. 73. 
2 Of. Lalla, Madhyagativasana, is; Bhaskara, Gar;iitoohyaya, Spa;fadhikara, 
65 (Vasanabha?ya) who names Aryabhata in connec­
tion with this rule. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comGOLA OR THE SPHERE 73 
and Bhaskara, Goladhyii.ya, Triprasnavasana, 36, 
sankur unnatalavajyaka bhavet. 1 
Paramesvara remarks: uttaragole gatagantavya­subhyas caradalasun visodhya jivam adaya 
svahora­
trardhena nihatya trijyaya vibhajya labdhe bhujyam 
prakr;ipet. sa kr;itijad utpanna svahoratref}ta,jya bhavati. This corresponds 
to the so-called cheda of Brahma­gupta. 
29. Multiply the given sine of altitude of the Sun by the sine of 
latitude (the equinoctial sine) and dh-ide by the sine of co­latitude. 
The result will be the base of the saiiku of the Sun south of 
the rising and setting line. 
Sankvagra is the same as sankutala ("the base of 
the sanku") and denotes the distance of the base of 
the sanku from the rising and setting line. 2 
30. The sine of the greatest declination multiplied by the 
given 1;>ase::-sine._9f.:the .. &,g_ and divided by the sine of co-latitude 
is the Sllil.'S ·aura on the east and west horizons. 
The agra is the Sun's amplitude or the sine of the degrees 
of difference between the day-circle and the east and west points on the horizon.
3 
The proportions employed are those given in 
Suryasiddhanta, V, 3 n. 
1 Cf. Suryasid,dhanta, III, 35-39 and note; Brahmagupta, III, 
25-26; BCMS, XVIII (1927), 25. 
2 Cf. Brahmagupta, III, 65 and XXI, 63; Bhaskara, Goladhyaya, 
Triprasnavasana, 40-42 (and Vasanabhawa) and GaTJ,itadhyaya, Tri­prafrnadhikara, 
73 (and Vasanabhiu;ya); Lalla, Tri'[>'rasnadhikara, 49. 
3 See Suryasid,dhanta, III, 7 n.; Brahmagupta, XXI, 61; Bb.a.s­
kara, Gol,a,dhyaya, Triprasnavasana, 39 and GarJ,itadhyaya, Trir,rasna­
dhikara, 17 (Vasanabhawa). 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com74 ARYABHATIYA 
31. The measure of the Sun's amplitude north of the Equator [i.e., when the Sun 
is in the Northern hemisphere], if less than the sine 
of latitude, multiplied by the sine of co-latitude and,divided 
by the sine of latitude gives the sine of the altitude of the Sun on 
the prime vertical.1 
Bhau Daji2 first pointed out that Brahmagupta (XI, 
22) contains a criticism. of stanzas 30-31. 
uttaragole 'grayfuh vii;;uvajjyato yad uktam unayam I 
samamal).qalagas tad asat krantijyayani yato bhavati 11 
Paramesvara remarks: vi?uvajjyona cet. vi?uvaj-jyonaya krantya sadhita 
ced ity arthah,. vi?uvaj­jyonakrantisiddha sodaggatarkagra. 
32. The sine of the degrees by which the Sun at midday has risen above 
the horizon will be the sine of altitude of the Sun at 
midday. The sine of the degrees by which the Sun is below the 
zenith at midday will be the midday shadow. 33. Multiply the meridian-sine 
by the orient-sine and divide 
by the radius. The square root of the difference between the 
squares of this result and of the meridian-sine will be the sine of 
the ecliptic zenith-distance. 
The madhyajya or "meridian-sine" is the sine of 
the zenith-distance of the meridian ecliptic point. 
The udayajya or "orient-sine" is the sine of the amplitude 
of that point of the ecliptic which is on the horizon. The sine of 
the ecliptic zenith-distance of that 
point of the ecliptic which has the greatest altitude (nonagesimal point) is called the 
drkk?epajya. 3 
1 Cf. Suryasiddhiinta, III, 25-26 n.; Brahmagupta, III, 52; 
Pancasiddhtintika, IV, 32-3, 35 n. 
2 JRAS, 1865, p. 402. 
3 Cf. Suryasiddhanta, V, 4-6; Pancasiddhantika, IX, 19-20 and 
note; Lalla, Suryagrahat1,adhikara, 5-6; Kaye, op. cit., pp. 76-77; 
BCMS, XIX (1928), 36 .. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comGOLA OR THE SPHERE 75 
Brahmagupta (XI, 29-30) criticizes this stanza as 
follow6: 
vitribhalagne drklqepama]J.g.alam tadapamal)q.alayutau jya I 
madhya drklq1epajya naryabhatoktanaya tulya l I 
dr~epajyato 'sat tannasad a..-anater nasal) I 
avanatinasad grasasyonadhikata ravigrahaI_le. I! 
34. The square root of the difference of the squares of the sines 
of the ecliptic zenith-distance and of the zenith-distance is 
the sine of the ecliptic-altitude. 9 2.. '> • ft 7 Cj 7 A 
kuvasat keitije sva drk chaya bhiivyasardharb. nabhomadhyat. 
The sine of the altitude of the nonagesimal point 
of the ecliptic is called the drggatijya. 
Drk is equivalent to drgjya the sine of the zenith­distance 
of any planet. 1 
This stanza is criticized by Brahmagupta (XI, 
21) : 6 7:> S ~ f 6-f 5 b S 1-5" 
dr~epJa bahur drgjya ila.rJ.10 'nayol). lqti-dse~at I 
miilam drgnatijiva sati1sthanam ayuktarn etad api. !I 
The construction of the second part of the stanza 
and the exact meaning of drk and chaya are not clear 
to me. It seems to mean that when the sine of the zenith-distance is equal 
to the radius the greatest parallax (horizontal parallax) is equal 
to the radius of 
the Earth. Kuvasat ("because of the Earth") 
seems to indicate that parallax is due to the fact 
that we are situated on its surf ace and not at its 
center, and that parallax, therefore, is the difference between 
the positions of an object as seen from the center 
and from the surface of the Earth. 
1 Cf. Silryasiiidhanta, V, 6; Lalla, Suryagrahari,a, 6; Pancasi­ddhantika, 
IX, 21 and p. 60; Bhaskara, Ga1J,itadhyiiya, Suryagraha'l).a, 
II, 5-6 (and Vasanabhawa); BCMS, XIX (1928), 36-37. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com76 ARYABHA TlYA 
Paramesvara's explanation is as follows: 
Drgbhedahetubhuta svacchaya drgjya va svacJ.rggatijya va drklq,epajya 
vety arthal).. sa yadi ~itije bhavati nabhomadhyat 
k1?itijanta bhavati vyasardhatulya bhavatity arthas tada 
kuvasad bhumivasan ni~panno drgbhedo vyasardham bhavati 
bhuvyasardhatulyam drgbhedayojanam ity arthal,1. antarale 
'nupatat kalpyam. 
Sukumar Ranjan Das1 states that there is no 
reference to parallax in Aryabha ta. If Paramesvara is 
correct in interpreting the second part of the rule as giving 
yojanas of drgbheda (parallax), we must ascribe to 
Aryabhata the knowledge of parallax, even though no rules are given for its calculation 
at intermediate points. 
It is hard to see what else the "radius of the 
Earth" can refer to when given immediately after rules for finding 
the drkk?epajya and the drggati­
jya (cf. Brahmagupta, XXI, 64-65, and Bhaskara, 
Goladhyaya, GraharJ,avasana, 11-17), especially since parallax was well known to the old 
Suryasiddhanta 
which antedated .Aryabhata. 2 
It seems to me that the passage is probably to be interpreted 
in the light of Brahmagupta, XXI, 64-65: 
drsyadrsyam drggolardhani bhuvyasadalavihinayutam I 
drai;;ta bhugolopari yatas tato lambanavanati II 
ki;!itije bhudalaliptal:i kak1?ayam driinatir nabhomadhyat I 
avanatilipta yamyottara ravigrahavad anyatra. 113 
35. The sine of latitude multiplied by the sine of celestial latitude and divided 
by the sine of co-latitude is minus and plus to the Moon when 
it is north of the ecliptic depending on 
1 "Parallax in Hindu Astronomy," BCMS, XIX (1928), 29-42. 
2 Cf. Pancasiddhantika, p. 60. 
8 See also Lalla, M adhyagativasana, 23-28. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comGOLA OR THE SPHERE i7 
whether it is in the Eastern or "\Y estern hemi:,phere, plus and minus 
~-hen it is south of the ecliptic under the same circum­stances. 
This stanza and the next give the calculation called 
drkkarman, an operation for determining the point on 
the ecliptic to which a planet having a given 
latitude will be ref erred by a secondary to the prin1e vertical. 
It has been called "operation for apparent longitude" 
and falls into two parts, namely, the "operation for latitude" 
(a.J.,?adrkkarman) treated in 
this stanza and the "operation for ecliptic-deviation" (ayanadrkkarman) treated 
in the following stanza. 1 
The stanza is criticized by Brahmagupta (XI, 34) : 
~epagu:r;tak:$ajya lambakabhakta grahe dhanam roam yat I 
uktam udayastamayayor na pratighatikari1 yatas tad asat. i I 
Brahmagupta, X, 13-14 gives a general criticism of 
Aryabhata's drkkarman, followed by a.n exposition 
of his own method. 
36. Multiply the versed sine (of the Moon) by the celestial 
latitude and by the (greatest) declination, and divide by the square of 
the radius. The result is minus or plus to the Moon when 
it is in the northern ayana depending on whether its celestial latitude is north 
or south, and plus or minus when it is in the 
southern ayana under the same conditions. 
Paramesvara explains utkrama1J.,am by kofya utkrama}ya. 
The ayanas are the northern and southern paths of 
the Sun from solstice to solstice. 2 
1 Cf. Suryasiddhanta, VII, &-9 n.; Kaye, op. cit., pp. 78-79. 
2 Cf. Suryasid,dhii,nta, VII, 10 n.; Lalla, Madhyagativasana, 
47-48. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com78 ARYABHA 'flYA 
Criticized by Brahmagupta (XI, 35): 
trijyakrtibhakta vik~epapakramagm;iotkramajyendol;t I 
ayanante yad n1.adhanam tat tasyadau tato 'sat tat. II 
37. The Moon consists of water, the Sun of fire, the Earth 
of earth, and the Earth's shadow of darkness. The Moon ob­
scures the Sun and the great shadow of the Earth obscures the 
Moon. 1 
Brahmagupta (XI, 9) remarks: 
aryabhato janati graha,etagatirh yad uktavarils tad asat I 
rahukrtaril na graha:r;iaril tatpato na~tamo rahul;l. 11 
There is no such statement in our text and Brahma­gupta himself (XXI, 43-48) ascribes eclipses 
to Rahu. 
38. When at the end of the true lunar month the Moon, being near the node, enters the Sun, or when 
at the end of the half­month the Moon enters the shadow 
of the Earth that is the middle 
of the eclipse which occurs sometimes before and some­
times after the exact end of the lunar month or half-month. 
Paremesvara remarks, sphutasasimasante lamba­nasarhskrte 
'miivtisyantakiile. He also takes the words 
adhikonam as meaning "middle of the eclipse which lasts for a longer or shorter time," 
but gives as an alternate explanation offered 
by some the foregoing translation. 
2 
39. Multiply the distance between the Earth and the Sun by the diameter 
of the Earth and divide by the difference between the diameters 
of the Earth and the Sun. The result will be the length 
of the shadow of the Earth (measured) from the diameter of the Earth. 
1 Cf. Suryasiddhanta, IV, 9; Lalla, Madhyagativasana, 29, 34. 
2 Cf. Suryasiddhanta, IV, 6, 16; Lalla, CandragrahaV,a, 10; Albe­runi, II, 111. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comGOLA OR THE SPHERE 79 
The last clause seems to indicate that the measure­ment 
is to be reckoned from the center of the Earth. 1 
40. The difference between the length of the Earth ·s shadow 
and the distance of the l\Ioon from the Earth multiplied by the 
diameter of the Earth and di\'ided by the length of the Earth's 
shadow is the diameter of the Earth's shadow (in the orbit of the 
Moon). 2 
41. Subtract the square of the celestial latitude of the ~Ioon 
from the square of half the sum (of the diameters of the Sun and 
Moon or of the Moon and the shadow). The square root of the 
remainder is known as the sthityardha. From this the time is calculated 
by means of the daily motions of the Sun and :\loon. 
The sthityardha is half of the time from first to last 
contact.:! 
42. Subtract the radius of the Moon from the radius of the 
Earth's shadow. Subtract from the square of the remainder the 
square of the celestial latitude. The square root of this remainder 
will be the vimardardha. 
The vimardiirdha denotes half of the time of total obscuration. 
4 
43. Subtract the radius of the 1\Ioon from the radius of the 
Earth's shadow. Subtract this remainder from the celestial latitude. 
The remainder is the part of the Moon which is not 
eclipsed. 
44. Subtract the given time from half of the duration of the 
obscuration. Add this to the square of the celestial latitude. Take 
1 Cf. Brahmagupta, XXIII, 8. 
2 Cf. Brahmagupta, X..XIII, 9. 
a Cf. Paiicasiddhantika, VI, 3 and X, 2b-3; Suryasiddhanta, IV, 
12-13; Brahmagupta, IV, 8. 
4 Cf. Suryasiddhanta, IV, 13; Pancasiddhantika, X, 7; Brah­
magupta, IV, 8. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com80 ARYABHA TlYA 
the square root. Subtract this from half the sum of the diameters. The remainder 
will be the obscuration at the given time.; 
The first sentence ought to be: "Subtract the 
koti of the given time from the koti of the sthityardha. 
Square this.'' 
45. The sine of the latitude multiplied by the sine of the hour-angle and divided 
by the radius is the deflection due to latitude. 
It is south. sthityardhac carkendos 
trirasisahitayanat sparse. 
For the difficulty of the stanza and the gap in the commentary 
of Paramesvara see the Preface to Kern's edition (pp. v-vi) with 
the references to Bhaskara. "Hour-angle" is expressed 
by madhyahnat krama 
(gu1J,itah,). "Deflection due to latitude" seems to be the meaning of 
dik. 
The first part deals with the fik?avalana or "deflec­tion due to latitude." According to Paramesvara, 
it 
is south in the Eastern and north in the Western hemisphere. The other books give 
just the opposite. Paramesvara remarks, 
etad ak?avalanarh sthitya­
rdhac ea. sthityardhasabdena tanmulabhilto vik?epa 
ucyate. 
Paramesvara also remarks, ayanasabdenapakrama ucyate. 
trirasisahitad arkac candrac ea ni?panno 
'pakramo 'pi tayor arkendor valanam bhavati. 
Paramesvara explains sparse as sparsa iti graha1J,a 
ity evarthatalJ,. 
However the second part of the stanza is to be 
1 Cf. Suryasiddhanta, IV, 18-20; Pancasiddhantika, X, 5-6; 
Brahmagupta, IV, 11-12. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comGOLA OR THE SPHERE 81 
translated it must deal with the so-called tiyanavalana 
or "deflection due to the deviation of the ecliptic from 
the equator." 
Both valanas ("deflection of the ecliptic'') were employed in the projection 
of eclipses. 1 
46. At the beginning of an eclipse the ?\foon is dhumra, when half obscured 
it is kr?'tJ,a, when completely obscured it is kapila, 
at the middle of an eclipse it is kr?rJ,atamra. 2 
47. When the Moon eclipses the Sun eYen though an eighth 
part of the Sun is covered this is not preceptible because of the 
brightness of the Sun and the transparency of the l\Ioon. 3 
· 48. The Sun has been calculated from the conjunction of the 
Earth and the Sun, the Moon from the conjunction of the Sun and 
Moon, and all the other planets from the conjunctions of the 
planets and the Moon. 4 
49. By the grace of God the precious sunken jewel of true 
knowledge has been rescued by me, by means of the boat of my 
own knowledge, from the ocean which consists of true and false knowledge.
5 
50. He who disparages this universally true science of astronomy, which formerly was revealed 
by Svayambhii, and is now described 
by me in this Aryabhafiya, loses his good deeds 
and his long life. 6 
Read pratikuncuko. 
1 Cf. Brahm.agupta, IV, 16-17 and XXI, 66; Lalla, Ca.ndragraha-
1J,adhikara, 23, 25; Suryasiddhanta, IV, 24-25: "From the position of 
the eclipsed body increased by three signs calculate the degrees of declination." See Brennand, 
Hindu Astronomy, pp. 280-83; Kaye, Hindu 
Astronomy, pp. 77-78. 
2 Cf. Suryasiddhiinta, VI, 23; Lalla, Candragraha'{lii,dhikara, 36; 
Brahmagupta, IV, 19. 
3 Cf. Silryasiddhanta, VI, 13. 
'Cf. BCMS, XII (1920-21), 183. 
° Cf. ibid., p. 187. 6 Cf. JRAS, 1911, p. 114. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comDownloaded from https://www.holybooks.comGENERAL INDEX 
[Including the most important Sanskrit proper names] 
Alberuni, 10, 14, 15, 53, 69 
Alphabet, letters of, used with numerical value, 
2-9 
Altitude of Sun, sine of, 72, 73 
at midday, 74 
on prime vertical, 7 4 
Amplitude, of Sun, 73, 74 
Anomaly, equation of, 60 
Apparent longitude, 77 
Apsides of planets, epicycles, 18 
motion, 16-18, 52 
position, 16 
Apsis of Moon, 53, 54 
epicycle, 18 
revolutions, 9 
Apsis of Sun, epicycle, 18 
motion, 16-18, 52 
position, 16 
Area, any plane figure, 27 
circle, 27 
square, 21 
trapezium, 27 
triangle, 26 
Ascensional difference, 72 
Asterisms, 55, 56 
half-dark, half-light, 64 
revolutions, 52 
stationary, xiv, 64-67 Asterisms, 
circle of, 55 
driven by provector wind, 66 
sixty times orbit of Sun, 13 
surrounds Earth as center, 64 
Asterisms, sphere of, half, de­
picted on a sphere, 70 
half, minus radius of Earth visible to 
men, 68-69 
83 visible to Gods, half to 
Pre/as, 69 
Balabhadra, 16 
Balls, pile of, with triangular 
base, 37 
Base of sanku, 73 
Base of triangle, 26, 33, 70 
Base-sine of Sun, 73 
Bharata battle, 12 
Bhaskara, 14, 19, 27 n., 28, 55, 
66, 67, 73, 76, 80 
Bhattotpala, 65, 68, 69 
Brahmagupta, 2, 10, 11, 12, 13, 
14, 15, 17, 18, 55, 57, 58, 64, 
68, 74, 75, 76, 78 
Brahman, day of. See Day 
night of, 64 
Central ecliptic-point. See Non­
agesimal point 
Chain, in indeterminate equa­tions, 
43, 45-50 
Circle, area, 27 
chord of one-sixth circumf er­
ence, 27 
construction, 30 
quadrant, in constructing 
sines, 28 
relation of circumference to diameter, 
28 
saras, 33 
sampatasaras, 34-35 
Civil day, 52, 69 
Co-latitude, sine of, 70, 71, 72, 
73, 74, 76 
Commutation, equation of, 60 
Compass, 31 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com84 ARYABHA TIYA 
Conjunctions, · Earth and Sun, 
52, 81 
:\loon and Sun, 52, 81 
;.\loon and planets, 81 
planets with one another number 
in a yuga, 51 
past and future, calculated from distance 
apart, 
41-42 
Conjunctions, of planets, epi­cycles, 18 revolutions, 9 Venus 
and Mercury cross ecliptic 
at, 63 
Cube, defined, 21 
Cube root, 24-26 
Day, 51 
civil, 52, 69 
sidereal, 52 
Day-circle, 71, 72 radius, 
71 
Day of Brahman, 12 
increase of Earth during, 64 measurement of, 
53 
part which has elapsed, 12 
Day-radius, 71 
Declination, 71 
Declination, greatest: of ecliptic, 
16 
day-radius, 71 
sine of, 73, 77 Deflection, in eclipses, 80-81 Degrees, 
13, 56 
Deviation, of ecliptic from Equa­
tor, 63 
of Moon and planets from ecliptic, 16 Diameter, of circle, relation 
to 
circumference, 28 of 
Earth, Sun, Moon, and 
planets, 15 
Earth, compared to round Ka­
damba flower, 64 conjunction ·with Sun, 52, 81 
constitution, 64, 78 diameter, 15 half dark, half light, 64 increase 
and decrease in size, 64 located in cent.er 
of space, 56, 64 moves one minute in a 
pra7J,a, 
13 
revolutions eastward, 9 
rotation, 9, 14, 65-66 shadow. 
See Shadow simile of 
man moving m a boat, 64 Earth-sine, 
71 
Earth-wind, 18 
East and west hour-circle, 69 
Eccentric circle, equal in size to 
orbit, 58 location of center, 58 movement of planet on, 57 Eclipses, 78-81 causes 
and time, 78 color of Moon, 
81 
deflection, 80-81 half-duration, 
79 
middle, 78 obscuration at given time, 
79-80 
of Sun not perceptible if less 
than one-eighth obscured, 
81 
part of Moon not eclipsed, 79 
shadow of Earth, 78-79 
total obscuration, 79 
Ecliptic, deviates equally from Equator, 63 deviation of Moon 
and plan­ets from, 
16 
greatest declination, 16 
northern and southern halves, 63 quadrants, 72 Sun, nodes of Moon 
and plan­ets, 
and shadow of Earth 
move along, 63 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comGENERAL INDEX 85 
Ecliptic-altitude, sine of, 7,5 
Ecliptic-dev--iation, 77 
Ecliptic. zenith-distance, sine of, 
74, 75 
Epicycles, dimensions, 18, 58 
mean planets at centers, 59 
movement of, 59 
planets on, 58, 59, 61 
number of revolutions, 51 
Equator, celestial, 63 
Equator, terrestrial. See Lanka 
Equinoctial shadow, 70 
Equinoctial sine, 70, 73 Factors, problems relating 
to 
two, 38 
Fathers, dwell in Moon, 69 
see Sun for half a month, 69 
year of, 53 Fractions, 
40 
Gnomon, 31-33, 71 
Gods, dwell on Mero, 69 
see northern half of stellar sphere, 
69 
see Sun for half a year, 69 
think dwellers in Hell are be­
neath them, 68 
year of, 53 
Half-duration, of eclipse, 79 Heaven, 
at center of land, 68 
Hell, at center of ocean, 68 
Himavat Mountains, 68 Horizon, 
69 
Horizon of Lanka, 69, 72 
Horizontal, how determined, 30 
Hour-angle, 80 
Hypotenuse, of a planet, 61 
relation to side of right-angle triangle, 31, 33 
Indeterminate equations of first degree 
(ku"aka), xiv, 42-50 Intercalary months, 52 
Interest, 38-39 
Inverse method, 40 
Jupiter. See Planets years of, 
51 
Kusumapum, 21 
Lalla, 10, 1--1, Lj, 18, 19, .S9, 66 Larika 
(terrestrial Equator), 9. 
6--1, 66, 6S . 
horizon of, 69, 72 
90 degrees from poles, 68 
Latitude, celestial, 76, 77, 79 
Latitude, sine of, 70, 71, 73, 74, 
76, 80 
Long letter, as measure of time, 
51 
Longitude, apparent, 77 
Lunar days, omitted, 53 
Lunar month, 52, 69 
l\Iahasiddhanta, xvi 
l\Ianu, period of, 12 
::\farici, 66 l\Iars. 
See Planets 
Mean planet, 57, 58, 59, 60 
Mean motion, of planets, 57, 58 Mercury. 
See Planets Meridian, 
69 
Meridian-sine, 7 4 
Meru, at center of land, 68 description, 
68 
dimensions, 15, 68 home of 
the gods, 68 
Midday shadow, 74 
Midnight school, 11 n. 
Minutes, 13, 56 
Month, 51 
intercalary, 52 
lunar, 52, 69 
Moon, calculated from conjunc­
tion of Sun and Moon, 81 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com86 ARYABHATIYA 
causes eclipse of Sun, 78 
crosses ecliptic at node, 63 diameter, 
15 
distance from Sun at which visible, 
63 
eclipse. See Eclipses epicycle of apsis, 
18 
greatest deviation from eclip-tic, 16 half dark, half light, 64 home of 
the Fathers, 69 
Lord of Monday, 56-57 
made of water, 78 nearest 
to Earth, 56 node moves along ecliptic, 
63 
revolutions, 9 
of apsis, 9 of node, 9 
true place, calculation of, 59 
Munisvara, xv 
N andana forest, 68 Night of Brahman, decrease of 
Earth during, 64 Node 
of Moon, moves along ecliptic, 
63 
revolutions, 9 
Nodes of planets 
Jupiter, Mars, and Saturn 
cross ecliptic at nodes, 63 move along ecliptic, 
16-18, 63 
position of ascending nodes, 16 N onagesimal point, 
70 
altitude, 75 
zenith-distance, 7 4 Numbers, classes of, enumerated 
by powers of ten, 21 
Oblique ascension, equivalents in, of quadrants of ecliptic, 72 Omitted lunar days, 
53 
Orbits, of planets, in yojanas, 13 
movement of IJlanets on, 57 surround 
Earth as center, 56, 64 Orient-sine, 7 4 Pancasiddhantika, 10, 12 n., 18, 19, 
64, 65 
Parallax, 75-76 Perpendicular, how determined 
30 ' 
Perpendiculars, from intersection of diagonals of trapezium, 
27 
Plane figure, area of any, 27 Planets, as lords of 
the days, 
56-57 
calculated from conjunctions with 
the Moon, 81 
conjunctions past and future calculated from distance 
apart, 41 number 
in a yuga, 51 cross ecliptic at nodes or con­junctions, 63 diameters, 15 distance from 
Earth at which visible, 
63-64 
driven by provector wind, 66 epicycles, 18, 51, 58-59, 
61 
greatest deviation from eclip-tic, 
16 
half dark, half light, 64 mean, 57, 58, 59, 60 motion, 57, 58 move with equal speed, 55 movement of apsides, 
16-18, 
52 
on orbits and eccentric cir­cles, 57 nodes move along ecliptic, 
63 
orbits of, in yojanas, 13 
periods of revolution differ because orbits differ in 
size, 56 positions of apsides 
and as­cending nodes, 16 relative position 
with refer­ence 
to Earth as center, 56 revolutions, 9 of conjunctions, 
9 
time in which they traverse distance equal 
to circle of asterism.s 
and of sky, 55 
true distance from Earth, 61 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comGENERAL INDEX 87 
true places, calculation of, 
59-61 
yuga· of, 53 Plumb-line, 
30 
Pretas, dwell at Vaq.avamukha, 69 
see southern half of stellar sphere, 69 see 
Sun for half a year, 69 
Prime vertical, 69 
altitude of Sun on, 7 4 
Progression, arithmetical, num­
ber of terms, 36 
sum, 35-36 
of any number of terms 
taken anywhere within, 35-36 of series made 
by taking 
sum of terms, 37 
sums of series made by taking 
squares and cubes of terms, 37-38 
Proportion, 39 
Provector wind, 66 
Prthiidaka, quoted, 66 
Pyramid, volume, 26 
Quadrilateral, construction, 30 
formed in quadrant of circle, 
28 
Radius, 61, 72, 74, 80 
equals chord of one-sixth cir­cumference, 27 
square of, 71, 77 
Reciprocal division, 42-46, 48-
49 
Revolutions, of apsis of Moon, 9 
of asterisms are sidereal days, 
52 
of conjunctions of planets, 9 of 
Earth eastward, 9 of epicycles, 
51 
of node of Moon, 9 of Sun, 
are solar years, 52 Moon, 
and planets, 9 in yuga equal years of 
yuga, 15 
time and place from which 
calculated, 9 
Right ascension, equivalents in, of signs of zodiac, 
71 
Romaka, 68 
Rule of three, 39 
Saturn. See Planets farthest from 
Earth, 56 Series, made 
?Y taking sum of terms of 
anthmetical progres­sion, 
37 
made by taking squares and 
cubes of terms of arith­
metical progression, 37-38 
Shadow, midday, 74 Shadow of 
Earth, causes eclipse of 
:Moon, 78 
diameter of, in orbit of :Moon, 
79 
length, 78 
maae of darkness, 78 
moves along ecliptic, 63 Shadow of gnomon, 31-33 Sidereal day, 52 Sidereal 
vinaiJ,ika, 51 
Siddhapura, 68 
Signs of zodiac, 13, 56 day-circle of, 
71 
right ascension, equivalents in, 
71 
sine of, 71 
Sine of Sun, 72 Sines, construction of, 
on radius of 
quadrant, 28 
table of sine-differences, 19 
calculation of, 29 Sky, circumference of, 13, 14, 55 Solid 
with twelve edges, 21 Solar year, 52, 53, 69 Space, measurement of, 
51 
Sphere, volume, 27 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com88 ARYABHA TIYA 
wooden, made to revolve, 70 
half of stellar sphere de-
picted on, 70 
Square, defined, 21 
Square root, 22-24 
Sripati, quoted, 66 
Sun, amplitude, 73, 74 
apsis, position of, 16 
base-sine, 73 
calculated from conjunction 
of Earth and Sun, 81 
diameter, 15 
eclipse. See Eclipses 
epicycle of apsis, 18 
Lord of Sunday, 56-57 
made of fire, 78 
moves along ecliJ?tic, 63 
orbit is one-sixtieth circle of 
asterisms, 13 
relative position among plan­
ets, 56 
revolutions, 9, 52 
in yuga equal years of 
yuga, 15 
sine of, 72 
altitude. See Altitude 
true place, calculation of, 59 
visible to gods and Pretas for 
half a year, 69 
to Fathers for half a 
month, 69 
to men for half a day, 69 
Sunrise school, 11 n. 
Suryasiddhanta, 10, 12, 14, 18, 
19, 57, 64, 72, 73 
Three, rule of, 39 Time, beginningless and end­
less, 55 
measurement, 51 
Total obscuration, in eclipse, 79 
Trapezium, area, 27 
perpendicular from intersec­
tion of diagonals, 27 
Triangle, area, 26 
construction, 30 
formed in quadrant of circle, 
28 
hypotenuse of right-angle, 31, 
33 
True places of planets, 59--61 
Ujjain, 22½ degrees north of 
Lanka, 68 
Vaqavamukha, 68, 69 
Vasanavarttika, 66, 67 
Venus. See Planets 
Versed sine, of Moon, 77 
Volume, pyramid, 26 
solid with twelve edges, 21 
sphere, 27 
Yavakoti, 68 
Year, 51 
of gods, 53 
of the Fathers, 53 
of men, 53 
solar, 53, 69 
Zenith-distance, 75 
Zero, 6-7 
Zodiacal signs. See Signs 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comSA.NSKRIT INDEX 
Agra, 43, 45-46, 49 
Agra, 73 
Aghana, 24-26 
Angula, 16 
Adhikonam, 79 
Anuloma, 58, 65 
Anlyavarga, 2, 6 
Ayana, 51, 77 
Avarga, letters and places, 2-5 
in square root, 22-24 
Avasarpi~t, 53 
Asra, 21 n., 26 n. 
Asvayuja, 51 
Akasakab;ya, 14, 55 
AkJJadrkkarman, 77 
.4.k§avalana, 80 
Ayqnadrkkarman, 77 
.Ayana1.:alana, 81 
I nduccat, 54 
Ucca, 51, 52, 58 
Utkrama7Jam, 77 
Utsar'f)iri'i, 53 
Udayaiya, 74 
Unmar.uJ,ala, 69, 72 
Upaciti, 37 
Kak~ya, 57 
Kakl}yam.arp:J,ala, 57, 58 
Kanya, 63 
Kam, 1 
Karkafa, 31 
Kan:.w,, 30, 33, 61, 62 
Kalpa, 12 
K utta,ka, xiv 
Kuvasat, 75 
Ko,i, 70, 71 Kotz, 32, 33 
Kha. 7 
Khadvinai·aka, 7 
Khai-rtta, 31 
Gw:wkarablu'igahara, 40 
Gola, 70 
Grahajarn, 13, 62 
Grahai·ega, 62 
Grasa, 34 
Ghatika, 72 
Ghana, defined, 21 
in cube root, 24-26 
Cakra, 70 
Caturbhuja, 30 
Caturyuga, 55 Citighana, 
37 
89 Caitra, ,55 
Chaya, 75 
Cheda, 73 
Tul,a, 60 
Taulya, 63 
Tribhuja, 30 
Dik, 80 
Duf}tjama, 53-54 
Drk, 75 
Drkkarman, 77 
DrkkfJepajya, 7 4, 76 
DrkkJJepamar:uJ,ala, 70 
Drggatijya, 75, 76 
Drgjya, 75 
Drgbheda, 76 
Drnma-,;iJ,ala, 70 
Dvadasasra, 21 
Dvicchedagra, 43 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com90 ARYABHAT!YA 
Na<J,r, 51 
Nr, measurement of, 16 number 
in a yojana, 15 
Parikti, 22 
ParibhiifJa, 8 
Purva, 24, 26 
Purvapakt;a, 65, 67 
Pratima1,.irJala, 57 Pratiloma, 
58 
Pra:,:w, 13 
number in a vina<J,ika, 51 
Bham, 14 
Bhuja, 31-33 
M adhyajya, 7 4 
M adhyahnat krama, 80 
Manda, 60, 61 
MandakarrJ,a, 61 
M andagati, 59 
M andaphala, 59-60 
Mando,cca, 52, 58, 60 
Mithyajfw:na, 9, 14, 65, 67 
Mina, 63 
Met;a, 9, 11, 16, 60, 63, 71 
-¥-aya,°'neginning of, 9, 55 
at midnight, 11 n. 
at sunrise, 9, 11 n. division 
into four equal parts, 
12 
measurement of, 53 names for 
parts of, 53 number 
in period of a Manu, 
12 
revolutions of Earth, Sun, Moon, 
and planets in, 9 
years of, equal revolutions of 
Sun, 15 
Yugapada, 12, 54 Yoga, 
of Sun and Earth, 52, 81 
Y ojana, measure of increase and decrease of Earth, 64 measurement of, 15 
Yojanas, in circumferenc~ of sky, 
13 
in planet's -orbit, 13 
of parallax, 76 
same number traversed by 
each planet in a day, 55 
Rasi, 13 
Varga, defined, 21 
in square root, 22-24 
letters and places, 2-7 
Valana, 80-81 
VinarJika, 51 
V imardardha, 79 
Viloma, 65 
Vyatipata, 51 
Vyastam, 60 
Sanku, 71, 72, 73 
Sankutala, 73 
Sankvagra, 73 
Sara, 33 
Sighrakar?J,a, 61 
Sighragati, 58 
Sighraphala, 59-60 
Sighrocca, 52, 58 
Satya devata, 1 
Samadalakofi, 26 
Sampatasara, 34-35 
SW'}ama, 53-54 
Sthanantare, 22 
Sthityardha, 79 Sphu~a, 
60, 61 
Sphuiamadhya, 60 
Svayambhu, 1, 81 
Svavrtta, 31 
Hasta, 16 
[PRINTED] IN U·S·k 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.comDownloaded from https://www.holybooks.comDownloaded from https://www.holybooks.comDownloaded from https://www.holybooks.com