 
 
 
From Shrimad -Bhaagavat MahaPuran, Book 11.06 -29 
 
(Compiled and edited by Jay Mazo, International Gita Society)  
 
(You are free to copy this provided you do not remove the name of the 
society and author from it !! )  
 
NOTE: Instructions to Uddhava  by Lord Krishna known as "The 
Uddhava -Gita" starts from verse 40, Chapter 6, Book 11 of Shrimad -
Bhaagavat MahaPuran and ends after Chapter 29. It has more than 
1,000 verses. This is also called the farewell message of Lord Krishna, 
a parting discourse, an d is meant for those students who have first 
thoroughly studied The Bhagavad -Gita.  
  
Book 11  
Chapter 6. The Yadu Dynasty Retires to Prabhasa  
Chapter 7. Lord Krsna Instructs Uddhava  
Chapter 8. The Story of Pingala  
Chapter 9. Detachment from All that Is Material  
chapter 10. The Nature of Fruitive Activity  
Chapte r 11. The Symptoms of Conditioned and Liberated 
Living Entities  
Chapter 12. Beyond Renunciation and Knowledge  
Chapter 13. The Hamsa -avatara Answers the Questions of 
the Sons of Brahma  
Chapter 14. Lord Krsna Explains the Yoga System to Sri 
Uddhava  
Chapter 15. Lord Krsna's Description of Mystic Yoga 
Perfections  
Chapter 16. The Lord's Opulence  
Chapter 17. Lord Krsna's Description of the Varnasrama 
System  
Chapter 18. Description of Varnasrama -dharma  
Chapter 19. The Perfection of Spiritual Knowledge  
Chapter 20. Pure Devotional Service Surpasses Knowle dge 
and Detachment  
Chapter 21. Lord Krsna's Explanation of the Vedic Path  
Chapter 22. Enumeration of t he Elements of Material Creation  
Chapter 23. The Song of the Avanti Brahmana  
Chapter 24. The Philosoph y of Sankhya  
Chapter 25. The Three Modes of Nature and Beyond  
Chapter 26. The Aila -Gita 
Chapter 27. Lord Krsna's Instructions on the Process of Deity 
Worship  
Chapter 28. Jnana -yoga  
Chapter 29. Bhakti -yoga  
  Chapter Six: The Yadu Dynasty Retires to Prabhasa  
1. Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said: Lord Brahma then set off for Dvaraka, accompanied by his own sons as well 
as by the demigods and the great Prajapatis. Lord Siva, the bestower of auspiciousness to all living beings, 
also went, surrounded by many ghostly creatures.  
2-4. The powerful Lord Indra, along with the Maruts, Adityas, Vasus, Asvinis, Rbhus, Angiras, Rudras, 
Visvedevas, Sadhyas , Gandharvas, Apsaras, Nagas, Siddhas, Caranas, Guhyakas, the great sages and 
forefathers and the Vidyadharas and Kinnaras, arrived at the city of Dvaraka, hoping to see Lord Krsna. By 
His transcendental form, Krsna, the Supreme Lord, enchanted all human b eings and spread His own fame 
throughout the worlds. The Lord’s glories destroy all contamination within the universe.  
5. In that resplendent city of Dvaraka, rich with all superior opulences, the demigods beheld with unsatiated 
eyes the wonderful form of Sri Krsna.  
6. The demigods covered the Supreme Lord of the universe with flower garlands brought from the gardens 
of heaven. Then they praised Him, the best of the Yadu dynasty, with statements containing charming words 
and ideas.  
7. The demigods began to speak: Our dear Lord, advanced mystie yogis, striving for liberation from the 
severe bondage of material work, meditate with great devotion upon Your lotus feet within their hearts. 
Dedicating our intelligence, senses, vital air, mind and power of speech t o Your Lordship, we demigods 
bow down at Your lotus feet.  
8. O unconquerable Lord, You engage Your illusory energy, composed of three modes, to unleash, maintain 
and devastate the inconceivable manifest cosmos, all within Your own self. As the supreme supe rintendent 
of maya, You appear to be situated in the interaction of the modes of nature; however, You are never 
affected by material activities. In fact, You are directly engaged in Your own eternal, spiritual bliss, and thus 
You cannot be accused of any m aterial infection.  
9. O greatest of all, those whose consciousness is polluted by illusion cannot purify themselves merely by 
ordinary worship, study of the Vedas, charity, austerity and ritual activities. Our Lord, those pure souls who 
have developed a powerful transcendental faith in Your glories achieve a purified state of existence that can 
never be attained by those lacking such faith.  
10. Great sages, desiring the highest benefit in life, always cherish Your lotus feet within their hearts, which 
are melted by love for You. Similarly, Your self -controlled devotees, desiring to cross beyond the material 
kingdom of heaven to achieve opulence equal to Yours, worship Your lotus feet in the morning, at noon and 
in the evening. Thus, they meditate upon Y our Lordship in Your quadruple expansion. Your lotus feet are 
just like a blazing fire that burns to ashes all the inauspicious desires for material sense gratification.  
11. Those about to offer oblations into the fire of sacrifice in accordance with the R g, Yajur and Sama 
Vedas meditate on Your lotus feet. Similarly, the practitioners of transcendental yoga meditate upon Your 
lotus feet, hoping for knowledge about Your divine mystic potency, and the most elevated pure devotees 
perfectly worship Your lotus feet, desiring to cross beyond Your illusory potency.  
12. O almighty Lord, You are so kind to Your servants that You have accepted the withered flower garland 
that we have placed on Your chest. Since the goddess of fortune makes her abode on Your transcend ental 
chest, she will undoubtedly become agitated, like a jealous co -wife, upon seeing our offering also dwelling 
there. Yet You are so merciful that You neglect Your eternal consort Laksmi and accept our offering as 
most excellent worship. O merciful Lord , may Your lotus feet always act as a blazing fire to consume the 
inauspicious desires within our hearts.  
13. O omnipotent Lord, in Your incarnation as Trivikrama, You raised Your leg like a flagpole to break the 
shell of the universe, allowing the holy Ga nges to flow down, like a banner of victory, in three branches 
throughout the three planetary systems. By three mighty steps of Your lotus feet, Your Lordship captured Bali Maharaja, along with his universal kingdom. Your lotus feet inspire fear in the dem ons by driving them 
down to hell and fearlessness among Your devotees by elevating them to the perfection of heavenly life. We 
are sincerely trying to worship You, our Lord; therefore may Your lotus feet kindly free us from all of our 
sinful reactions.  
14. You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the transcendental entity who is superior to both material 
nature and the enjoyer of nature. May Your lotus feet bestow transcendental pleasure upon us. All of the 
great demigods, beginning with Brahma, are embo died living entities. Struggling painfully with one another 
under the strict control of Your time factor, they are just like bulls dragged by ropes tied through their 
pierced noses.  
15. You are the cause of the creation, maintenance and destruction of this  universe. As time, You regulate 
the subtle and manifest states of material nature and control every living being. As the threefold wheel of 
time You diminish all things by Your imperceptible actions, and thus You are the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead.  
16. My dear Lord, the original purusa -avatara, Maha -Visnu, acquires His creative potency from You. Thus 
with infallible energy He impregnates material nature, producing the mahat -tattva. Then the mahat -tattva, 
the amalgamated material energy, endowed with th e potency of the Lord, produces from itself the primeval 
golden egg of the universe, which is covered by various layers of material elements.  
17. O Lord, You are the supreme creator of this universe and the ultimate controller of all moving and 
nonmoving l iving entities. You are Hrsikesa, the supreme controller of all sensory activity, and thus You 
never become contaminated or entangled in the course of Your supervision of the infinite sensory activities 
within the material creation. On the other hand, othe r living entities, even yogis and philosophers, are 
disturbed and frightened simply by remembering the material objects that they have supposedly renounced 
in their pursuit of enlightenment.  
18. My Lord, You are living with sixteen thousand exquisitely bea utiful, aristocratic wives. By their 
irresistible coy and smiling glances and by their lovely arching eyebrows, they send You messages of eager 
conjugal love. But they are completely unable to disturb the mind and senses of Your Lordship.  
19. The nectar -bearing rivers of discussions about You, and also the holy rivers generated from the bathing 
of Your lotus feet, are able to destroy all contamination within the three worlds. Those who are striving for 
purification associate with the holy narrations of Your  glories by hearing them with their ears, and they 
associate with the holy rivers flowing from Your lotus feet by physically bathing in them.  
20. Sri Sukadeva Gosvami continued: After Brahma, along with Lord Siva and the other demigods, thus 
offered prayer s to the Supreme Lord, Govinda, Lord Brahma situated himself in the sky and addressed the 
Lord as follows.  
21. Lord Brahma said: My dear Lord, previously we requested You to remove the burden of the earth. O 
unlimited Personality of Godhead, that request h as certainly been fulfilled.  
22. My Lord, You have reestablished the principles of religion among pious men who are always firmly 
bound to the truth. You have also distributed Your glories all over the world, and thus the whole world can 
be purified by hea ring about You.  
23. Descending into the dynasty of King Yadu, You have manifested Your unique transcendental form, and 
for the benefit of the entire universe You have executed magnanimous transcendental activities.  
24. My dear Lord, those pious and saintly  persons who in the age of Kali hear about Your transcendental 
activities and also glorify them will easily cross over the darkness of the age.  25. O Supreme Personality of Godhead, O my Lord, You have descended into the Yadu dynasty, and thus 
You have spe nt one hundred twenty -five autumns with Your devotees.  
26-27. My dear Lord, there is nothing remaining at this time for Your Lordship to do on behalf of the 
demigods. You have already withdrawn Your dynasty by the curse of the brahmanas. O Lord, You are th e 
basis of everything, and if You so desire, kindly return now to Your own abode in the spiritual world. At the 
same time, we humbly beg that You always protect us. We are Your humble servants, and on Your behalf 
we are managing the universal situation. We , along with our planets and followers, require Your constant 
protection.  
28. The Supreme Lord said: O lord of the demigods, Brahma, I understand your prayers and request. Having 
removed the burden of the earth, I have executed everything that was required  on your behalf.  
29. That very Yadava dynasty in which I appeared became greatly magnified in opulence, especially in their 
physical strength and courage, to the extent that they threatened to devour the whole world. Therefore I have 
stopped them, just as the shore holds back the great ocean.  
30. If I were to leave this world without withdrawing the overly proud members of the Yadu dynasty, the 
whole world would be destroyed by the deluge of their unlimited expansion.  
31. Now due to the brahmana’s curse, th e annihilation of My family has already begun. O sinless Brahma, 
when this annihilation is finished and I am enroute to Vaikuntha, I will pay a small visit to your abode.  
32. Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said: Thus addressed by the Lord of the universe, the self -born Brahma fell down 
in obeisances at the lotus feet of the Lord. Surrounded by all the demigods, the great Brahma then returned 
to his personal abode.  
33. Thereafter, the Personality of Godhead observed that tremendous disturbances were taking place in th e 
holy city of Dvaraka. Thus the Lord spoke to the assembled senior members of the Yadu dynasty as follows.  
34. The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Our dynasty has been cursed by the brahmanas. Such a curse 
is impossible to counteract, and thus great disturbances are appearing everywhere around us.  
35. My dear respected elders, we must not remain any longer in this place if we wish to keep our lives intact. 
Let us go this very day to the most pious place Prabhasa. We have no time to delay.  
36. Once, the moon was afflicted with consumption because of the curse of Daksa, but just by taking bath at 
Prabhasa -ksetra, the moon was immediately freed from his sinful reaction and again resumed the waxing of 
his phases.  
37-38. By bathing at Prabhasa -ksetr a, by offering sacrifice there to placate the forefathers and demigods, by 
feeding the worshipable brahmanas with various delicious foodstuffs and by bestowing opulent gifts upon 
them as the most suitable candidates for charity, we will certainly cross ove r these terrible dangers through 
such acts of charity, just as one can cross over a great ocean in a suitable boat.  
39. Sukadeva Gosvami said: O favorite son of the Kurus, thus advised by the Personality of Godhead, the 
Yadavas made up their minds to go to  that holy place, Prabhasa -ksetra, and thus yoked their horses to their 
chariots.  
"The Uddhava -Gita" starts  
40-41. My dear King, Uddhava was a constantly faithful follower of Lord Krsna. Upon seeing the imminent 
departure of the Yadavas, hearing from them  of the Lord’s instructions and taking note of the fearful omens, he approached the Personality of Godhead in a private place. He bowed down with his head at the lotus feet 
of the supreme controller of the universe and with folded hands addressed Him as fo llows.  
42. Sri Uddhava said: O my Lord, O supreme God among all the demigods, real piety is invoked simply by 
hearing and chanting Your transcendental glories. My Lord, it appears that You will now withdraw Your 
dynasty, and thus You Yourself will finally give up Your pastimes within this universe. You are the 
supreme controller and the master of all mystic power. But although You are fully capable of counteracting 
the brahmanas’ curse against Your dynasty, You are not doing so, and Your disappearance is im minent.  
43. O Lord Kesava, my dear master, I cannot tolerate giving up Your lotus feet even for a fraction of a 
moment. I urge You to take me along with You to Your own abode.  
44. O my dear Krsna, Your pastimes are supremely auspicious for mankind and are an intoxicating beverage 
for the ears. Tasting such pastimes, people forget their desires for other things.  
45. My dear Lord, You are the Supreme Soul, and thus You are most dear to us. We are Your devotees, and 
how can we possibly reject You or live witho ut You even for a moment? Whether we are lying down, 
sitting, walking, standing, bathing, enjoying recreation, eating or doing anything else, we are constantly 
engaged in Your service.  
46. Simply by decorating ourselves with the garlands, fragrant oils, cl othes and ornaments that You have 
already enjoyed, and by eating the remnants of Your meals, we, Your servants, will indeed conquer Your 
illusory energy.  
47. Naked sages who seriously endeavor in spiritual practice, who have raised their semen upward, who are 
peaceful and sinless members of the renounced order, attain the spiritual abode called Brahman.  
48-49. O greatest of mystics, although we are conditioned souls wandering on the path of fruitive work, we 
will certainly cross beyond the darkness of this material world simply by hearing about Your Lordship in the 
association of Your devotees. Thus we are always remembering and glorifying the wonderful things You do 
and the wonderful things You say. We ecstatically recall Your amorous pastimes with Your con fidential 
conjugal devotees and how You boldly smile and move about while engaged in such youthful pastimes. My 
dear Lord, Your loving pastimes are bewilderingly similar to the activities of ordinary people within this 
material world.  
50. Sukadeva Gosvami said: O King Pariksit, thus addressed, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, 
the son of Devaki, began to reply confidentially to His dear, unalloyed servant Uddhava.  
Chapter Seven Lord Krsna Instructs Uddhava  
1. The Supreme Personality of Godhead said : O greatly fortunate Uddhava, you have accurately revealed 
My desire to withdraw the Yadu dynasty from the earth and return to My own abode in Vaikuntha. Thus 
Lord Brahma, Lord Siva and all other planetary rulers are now praying for Me to resume My reside nce in 
Vaikuntha.  
2. Answering the prayer of Lord Brahma, I descended within this world along with My plenary portion, 
Lord Baladeva, and performed various activities on behalf of the demigods. I have now completed My 
mission here.  
3. Now due to the brahmanas’ curse the Yadu dynasty will certainly perish by fighting among themselves; 
and on the seventh day from today the ocean will rise up and inundate this city of Dvaraka.  
4. O saintly Uddhava, in the near future I will abandon this ea rth. Then, being overwhelmed by the age of 
Kali, the earth will be bereft of all piety.  5. My dear Uddhava, you should not remain here on the earth once I have abandoned this world. My dear 
devotee, you are sinless, but in Kali -yuga the people will be addi cted to all types of sinful activities; 
therefore do not stay here.  
6. Now you should completely give up all attachment to your personal friends and relatives and fix your 
mind on Me. Thus being always conscious of Me, you should observe all things with eq ual vision and 
wander throughout the earth.  
7. My dear Uddhava, the material universe that you perceive through your mind, speech, eyes, ears and 
other senses is an illusory creation that one imagines to be real due to the influence of maya. In fact, you 
should know that all of the objects of the material senses are temporary.  
8. One whose consciousness is bewildered by illusion perceives many differences in value and meaning 
among material objects. Thus one engages constantly on the platform of material go od and evil and is bound 
by such conceptions. Absorbed in material duality, such a person contemplates the performance of 
compulsory duties, nonperformance of such duties and performance of forbidden activities.  
9. Therefore, bringing all your senses under  control and thus subduing the mind, you should see the entire 
world as situated within the self, who is expanded everywhere, and you should also see this individual self 
within Me, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.  
10. Being fully endowed with conclusive knowledge of the Vedas and having realized the ultimate purpose 
of such knowledge in practice, you will be able to perceive the pure self, and thus your mind will be 
satisfied. At that time you will become dear to all li ving beings, headed by the demigods, and you will never 
be hampered by any disturbance in life.  
11. One who has transcended material good and evil automatically acts in accordance with religious 
injunctions and avoids forbidden activities. The self -realize d person does this spontaneously, like an 
innocent child, and not because he is thinking in terms of material good and evil.  
12. One who is the kind well -wisher of all living beings, who is peaceful and firmly fixed in knowledge and 
realization, sees Me wi thin all things. Such a person never again falls down into the cycle of birth and death.  
13. Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said: O King, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Krsna, thus instructed 
His pure devotee Uddhava, who was eager to receive knowledge fro m the Lord. Uddhava then offered 
obeisances to the Lord and spoke as follows.  
14. Sri Uddhava said: My dear Lord, You alone award the results of yoga practice, and You are so kind that 
by Your own influence You distribute the perfection of yoga to Your dev otee. Thus You are the Supreme 
Soul who is realized through yoga, and it is You who are the origin of all mystic power. For my supreme 
benefit You have explained the procedure for giving up the material world through the process of sannyasa, 
or renunciatio n. 
15. My dear Lord, O Supreme Soul, for those whose minds are attached to sense gratification, and especially 
for those bereft of devotion unto You, such renunciation of material enjoyment is most difficult to perform. 
That is my opinion.  
16. O my Lord, I  myself am most foolish because my consciousness is merged in the material body and 
bodily relations, which are all manufactured by Your illusory energy. Thus I am thinking, “I am this body, 
and all of these relatives are mine.” Therefore, my Lord, please instruct Your poor servant. Please tell me 
how I can very easily carry out Your instructions.  
17. My dear Lord, You are the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and You reveal 
Yourself to Your devotees. Besides Your Lordship, I do not see an yone who can actually explain perfect 
knowledge to me. Such a perfect teacher is not to be found even among the demigods in heaven. Indeed, all of the demigods, headed by Lord Brahma, are bewildered by Your illusory potency. They are conditioned 
souls who accept their own material bodies and bodily expansions to be the highest truth.  
18. Therefore, O Lord, feeling weary of material life and tormented by its distresses, I now surrender unto 
You because You are the perfect master. You are the unlimited, all -knowing Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, whose spiritual abode in Vaikuntha is free from all disturbances. In fact, You are known as 
Narayana, the true friend of all living beings.  
19. The Supreme Lord replied: Generally those human beings who can expertly a nalyze the actual situation 
of the material world are able to raise themselves beyond the inauspicious life of gross material gratification.  
20. An intelligent person, expert in perceiving the world around him and in applying sound logic, can 
achieve real benefit through his own intelligence. Thus sometimes one acts as one’s own instructing 
spiritual master.  
21. In the human form of life, those who are self -controlled and expert in the spiritual science of Sankhya 
can directly see Me along with all of My po tencies.  
22. In this world there are many kinds of created bodies —some with one leg, others with two, three, four or 
more legs, and still others with no legs —but of all these, the human form is actually dear to Me.  
23. Although I, the Supreme Lord, can nev er be captured by ordinary sense perception, those situated in 
human life may use their intelligence and other faculties of perception to directly search for Me through 
both apparent and indirectly ascertained symptoms.  
24. In this regard, sages cite a his torical narration concerning the conversation between the greatly powerful 
King Yadu and an avadhuta.  
25. Maharaja Yadu once observed a certain brahmana avadhuta, who appeared to be quite young and 
learned, wandering about fearlessly. Being himself most le arned in spiritual science, the King took the 
opportunity and inquired from him as follows.  
26. Sri Yadu said: O brahmana, I see that you are not engaged in any practical religious activity, and yet you 
have acquired a most expert understanding of all thin gs and all people within this world. Kindly tell me, sir, 
how did you acquire this extraordinary intelligence, and why are you traveling freely throughout the world 
behaving as if you were a child?  
27. Generally human beings work hard to cultivate religios ity, economic development, sense gratification 
and also knowledge of the soul, and their usual motive is to increase the duration of their lives, acquire fame 
and enjoy material opulence.  
28. You, however, although capable, learned, expert, handsome and mo st eloquent, are not engaged in doing 
anything, nor do you desire anything; rather, you appear stupefied and maddened as if you were a ghostly 
creature.  
29. Although all people within the material world are burning in the great forest fire of lust and gree d, you 
remain free and are not burned by that fire. You are just like an elephant who takes shelter from a forest fire 
by standing within the water of the Ganges River,  
30. O brahmana, we see that you are devoid of any contact with material enjoyment and t hat you are 
traveling alone, without any companions or family members. Therefore, because we are sincerely inquiring 
from you, please tell us the cause of the great ecstasy that you are feeling within yourself.  
31. Lord Krsna continued: The intelligent Kin g Yadu, always respectful to the brahmanas, waited with 
bowed head as the brahmana, pleased with the King’s attitude, began to reply.  32. The brahmana said: My dear King, with my intelligence I have taken shelter of many spiritual masters. 
Having gained tr anscendental understanding from them, I now wander about the earth in a liberated 
condition. Please listen as I describe them to you.  
33-35. O King, I have taken shelter of twenty -four gurus, who are the following: the earth, air, sky, water, 
fire, moon, s un, pigeon and python; the sea, moth, honeybee, elephant and honey thief; the deer, the fish, the 
prostitute Pingala, the kurara bird and the child; and the young girl, arrow maker, serpent, spider and wasp. 
My dear King, by studying their activities I hav e learned the science of the self.  
36. Please listen, O son of Maharaja Yayati, O tiger among men, as I explain to you what I have learned 
from each of these gurus.  
37. A sober person, even when harassed by other living beings, should understand that his a ggressors are 
acting helplessly under the control of God, and thus he should never be distracted from progress on his own 
path. This rule I have learned from the earth.  
38. A saintly person should learn from the mountain to devote all his efforts to the service of others and to 
make the welfare of others the sole reason for his existence. Similarly, as the disciple of the tree, he should 
learn to dedicate himself to others.  
39. A learned sage should take his satisfaction in the simple maintenance of his e xistence and should not 
seek satisfaction through gratifying the material senses. In other words, one should care for the material 
body in such a way that one’s higher knowledge is not destroyed and so that one’s speech and mind are not 
deviated from self -realization.  
40. Even a transcendentalist is surrounded by innumerable material objects, which possess good and bad 
qualities. However, one who has transcended material good and evil should not become entangled even 
when in contact with the material object s; rather, he should act like the wind.  
41. Although a self -realized soul may live in various material bodies while in this world, experiencing their 
various qualities and functions, he is never entangled, just as the wind which carries various aromas does  not 
actually mix with them.  
42. A thoughtful sage, even while living within a material body, should understand himself to be pure spirit 
soul. Similarly, one should see that the spirit soul enters within all forms of life, both moving and 
nonmoving, and t hat the individual souls are thus all -pervading. The sage should further observe that the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, as the Supersoul, is simultaneously present within all things. Both the 
individual soul and the Supersoul can be understood by compari ng them to the nature of the sky: although 
the sky extends everywhere and everything rests within the sky, the sky does not mix with anything, nor can 
it be divided by anything.  
43. Although the mighty wind blows clouds and storms across the sky, the sky i s never implicated or 
affected by these activities. Similarly, the spirit soul is not actually changed or affected by contact with the 
material nature. Although the living entity enters within a body made of earth, water and fire, and although 
he is impell ed by the three modes of nature created by eternal time, his eternal spiritual nature is never 
actually affected.  
44. O King, a saintly person is just like water because he is free from all contamination, gentle by nature, 
and by speaking creates a beautif ul vibration like that of flowing water. Just by seeing, touching or hearing 
such a saintly person, the living entity is purified, just as one is cleansed by contact with pure water. Thus a 
saintly person, just like a holy place, purifies all those who con tact him because he always chants the glories 
of the Lord.  
45. Saintly persons become powerful by execution of austerities. Their consciousness is unshakable because 
they do not try to enjoy anything within the material world. Such naturally liberated sage s accept foodstuffs that are offered to them by destiny, and if by chance they happen to eat contaminated food, they are not 
affected, just like fire, which burns up contaminated substances that are offered to it.  
46. A saintly person, just like fire, some times appears in a concealed form and at other times reveals 
himself. For the welfare of the conditioned souls who desire real happiness, a saintly person may accept the 
worshipable position of spiritual master, and thus like fire he burns to ashes all the  past and future sinful 
reactions of his worshipers by mercifully accepting their offerings.  
47. Just as fire manifests differently in pieces of wood of different sizes and qualities, the omnipotent 
Supreme Soul, having entered the bodies of higher and lower life forms created by His own potency, 
appears to assume the identity of each.  
48. The various phases of one’s material life, beginning with birth and culminating in death, are all 
properties of the body and do not affect the soul, just as the appare nt waxing and waning of the moon does 
not affect the moon itself. Such changes are enforced by the imperceptible movements of time.  
49. The flames of a fire appear and disappear at every moment, and yet this creation and destruction is not 
noticed by the o rdinary observer. Similarly, the mighty waves of time flow constantly, like the powerful 
currents of a river, and imperceptibly cause the birth, growth and death of innumerable material bodies. And 
yet the soul, who is thus constantly forced to change his position, cannot perceive the actions of time.  
50. Just as the sun evaporates large quantities of water by its potent rays and later returns the water to the 
earth in the form of rain, similarly, a saintly person accepts all types of material objects with his material 
senses, and at the appropriate time, when the proper person has approached him to request them, he returns 
such material objects. Thus, both in accepting and giving up the objects of the senses, he is not entangled.  
51. Even when reflected in various objects, the sun is never divided, nor does it merge into its reflection. 
Only those with dull brains would consider the sun in this way. Similarly, although the soul is reflected 
through different material bodies, the soul remains undivided and no nmaterial.  
52. One should never indulge in excessive affection or concern for anyone or anything; otherwise one will 
have to experience great suffering, just like the foolish pigeon.  
53. There once was a pigeon who lived in the forest along with his wife. He had built a nest within a tree 
and lived there for several years in her company.  
54. The two pigeons were very much devoted to their household duties. Their hearts being tied together by 
sentimental affection, they were each attracted by the other’s gla nces, bodily features and states of mind. 
Thus, they completely bound each other in affection.  
55. Naively trusting in the future, they carried out their acts of resting, sitting, walking, standing, conversing, 
playing, eating and so forth as a loving coup le among the trees of the forest.  
56. Whenever she desired anything, O King, the she -pigeon would flatteringly cajole her husband, and he in 
turn would gratify her by faithfully doing whatever she wanted, even with great personal difficulty. Thus, he 
could  not control his senses in her association.  
57. Then the female pigeon experienced her first pregnancy. When the time arrived, the chaste lady 
delivered a number of eggs within the nest in the presence of her husband.  
58. When the time was ripe, baby pigeo ns, with tender limbs and feathers created by the inconceivable 
potencies of the Lord, were born from those eggs.  59. The two pigeons became most affectionate to their children and took great pleasure in listening to their 
awkward chirping, which sounded v ery sweet to the parents. Thus with love they began to raise the little 
birds who were born of them.  
60. The parent birds became very joyful by observing the soft wings of their children, their chirping, their 
lovely innocent movements around the nest and their attempts to jump up and fly. Seeing their children 
happy, the parents were also happy.  
61. Their hearts bound to each other by affection, the foolish birds, completely bewildered by the illusory 
energy of Lord Visnu, continued to take care of the you ng offspring who had been born to them.  
62. One day the two heads of the family went out to find food for the children. Being very anxious to feed 
their offspring properly, they wandered all over the forest for a long time.  
63. At that time a certain hunte r who happened to be wandering through the forest saw the young pigeons 
moving about near their nest. Spreading out his net he captured them all.  
64. The pigeon and his wife were always anxious for the maintenance of their children, and they were 
wandering  in the forest for that purpose. Having obtained proper food, they now returned to their nest.  
65. When the lady pigeon caught sight of her own children trapped within the hunter’s net, she was 
overwhelmed with anguish, and crying out, she rushed toward them as they cried out to her in return.  
66. The lady pigeon had always allowed herself to be bound by the ropes of intense material affection, and 
thus her mind was overwhelmed by anguish. Being in the grip of the illusory energy of the Lord, she 
completely forgot herself, and rushing forward to her helpless children, she was immediately bound in the 
hunter’s net.  
67. Seeing his own children, who were more dear to him than life itself, fatally bound in the hunter’s net 
along with his dearmost wife, whom he considered equal in every way to himself, the poor male pigeon 
began to lament wretchedly.  
68. The male pigeon said: Alas, just see how I am now destroyed! I am obviously a great fool, for I did not 
properly execute pious activities. I could not sa tisfy myself, nor could I fulfill the purpose of life. My dear 
family, which was the basis of my religiosity, economic development and sense gratification, is now 
hopelessly ruined.  
69. My wife and I were an ideal match. She always faithfully obeyed me and  in fact accepted me as her 
worshipable deity. But now, seeing her children lost and her home empty, she has left me behind and gone 
to heaven with our saintly children.  
70. Now I am a wretched person living in an empty home. My wife is dead; my children a re dead. Why 
should I possibly want to live? My heart is so pained by separation from my family that life itself has 
become simply suffering.  
71. As the father pigeon wretchedly stared at his poor children trapped in the net and on the verge of death, 
pathetically struggling to free themselves, his mind went blank, and thus he himself fell into the hunter’s net.  
72. The cruel hunter, having fulfilled his desire by capturing the head pigeon, his wife and all of their 
children, set off for his own home.  
73. In this way, one who is too attached to family life becomes disturbed at heart. Like the pigeon, he tries to 
find pleasure in mundane sex attraction. Busily engaged in maintaining his own family, the miserly person 
is fated to suffer greatly, along with all  his family members.  74. The doors of liberation are opened wide to one who has achieved human life. But if a human being 
simply devotes himself to family life like the foolish bird in this story, then he is to be considered as one 
who has climbed to a hig h place  
only to trip and fall down.  
Chapter Eight The Story of Pingala  
1. The saintly brahmana said: O King, the embodied living entity automatically experiences unhappiness in 
heaven or hell. Similarly, happiness will also be experienced, even without one ’s seeking it. Therefore a 
person of intelligent discrimination does not make any endeavor to obtain such material happiness.  
2. Following the example of the python, one should give up material endeavors and accept for one’s 
maintenance food that comes of its own accord, whether such food be delicious or tasteless, ample or 
meager.  
3. If at any time food does not come, then a saintly person should fast for many days without making 
endeavor. He should understand that by God’s arrangement he must fast. Thus, following the example of the 
python, he should remain peaceful and patient.  
4. A saintly person should remain peaceful and materially inactive, maintaining his body without much 
endeavor. Even though possessed of full sensual, mental and physical strength,  a saintly person should not 
become active for material gain but rather should always remain alert to his actual self -interest.  
5. A saintly sage is happy and pleasing in his external behavior, whereas internally he is most grave and 
thoughtful. Because hi s knowledge is immeasurable and unlimited he is never disturbed, and thus in all 
respects he is like the tranquil waters of the unfathomable and unsurpassable ocean.  
6. During the rainy season the swollen rivers rush into the ocean, and during the dry summ er the rivers, now 
shallow, severely reduce their supply of water; yet the ocean does not swell up during the rainy season, nor 
does it dry up in the hot summer. In the same way, a saintly devotee who has accepted the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead as the goal of his life sometimes will receive by providence great material opulence, 
and sometimes he will find himself materially destitute. However, such a devotee of the Lord does not 
rejoice in a flourishing condition, nor is he morose when poverty -stricken.  
7. One who has failed to control his senses immediately feels attraction upon seeing a woman’s form, which 
is created by the illusory energy of the Supreme Lord. Indeed, when the woman speaks with enticing words, 
smiles coquettishly and moves her body sen suously, his mind is immediately captured, and thus he falls 
blindly into the darkness of material existence, just as the moth maddened by the fire rushes blindly into its 
flames.  
8. A foolish person with no intelligent discrimination is immediately arouse d at the sight of a lusty woman 
beautifully decorated with golden ornaments, fine clothing and other cosmetic features. Being eager for 
sense gratification, such a fool loses all intelligence and is destroyed just like the moth who rushes into the 
blazing fire. 
9. A saintly person should accept only enough food to keep his body and soul together. He should go from 
door to door accepting just a little bit of food from each family. Thus he should practice the occupation of 
the honeybee.  
10. Just as the honeyb ee takes nectar from all flowers, big and small, an intelligent human being should take 
the essence from all religious scriptures.  
11. A saintly person should not think, “This food I will keep to eat tonight and this other food I can save for 
tomorrow.” In  other words, a saintly person should not store foodstuffs acquired by begging. Rather, he should use his own hands as his plate and eat whatever fits on them. His only storage container should be his 
belly, and whatever conveniently fits into his belly sh ould be his stock of food. Thus one should not imitate 
the greedy honeybee who eagerly collects more and more honey.  
12. A saintly mendicant should not even collect foodstuffs to eat later in the same day or the next day. If he 
disregards this injunction a nd like the honeybee collects more and more delicious foodstuffs, that which he 
has collected will indeed ruin him.  
13. A saintly person should never touch a young girl. In fact, he should not even let his foot touch a wooden 
doll in the shape of a woman. By bodily contact with a woman he will surely be captured by illusion, just as 
the elephant is captured by the she -elephant due to his desire to touch her body.  
14. A man possessing intelligent discrimination should not under any circumstances try to exploit the 
beautiful form of a woman for his sense gratification. Just as an elephant trying to enjoy a she -elephant is 
killed by other bull elephants also enjoying her company, one trying to enjoy a lady’s company can at any 
moment be killed by he r other lovers who are stronger than he.  
15. A greedy person accumulates a large quantity of money with great struggle and pain, but the person who 
has struggled so much to acquire this wealth is not always allowed to enjoy it himself or give it in charity to 
others. The greedy man is like the bee who struggles to produce a large quantity of honey, which is then 
stolen by a man who will enjoy it personally or sell it to others. No matter how carefully one hides his hard -
earned wealth or tries to protect it, there are those who are expert in detecting the whereabouts of valuable 
things, and they will steal it.  
16. Just as a hunter takes away the honey laboriously produced by the honeybees, similarly, sai ntly 
mendicants such as brahmacaris and sannyasis are entitled to enjoy the property painstakingly accumulated 
by householders dedicated to family enjoyment.  
17. A saintly person dwelling in the forest in the renounced order of life should never listen to songs or 
music promoting material enjoyment. Rather, a saintly person should carefully study the example of the 
deer, who is bewildered by the sweet music of the hunter’s horn and is thus captured and killed.  
18. Becoming attracted to the worldly singing, dancing and musical entertainment of beautiful women, even 
the great sage Rsyasrnga, the son of Mrgi, fell totally under their control, just like a pet animal.  
19. Just as a fish, incited by the desire to enjoy his tongue, is fatally trapped on the fisherm an’s hook, 
similarly, a foolish person is bewildered by the extremely disturbing urges of the tongue and thus is ruined.  
20. By fasting, learned men quickly bring all of the senses except the tongue under control, because by 
abstaining from eating such men  are afflicted with an increased desire to gratify the sense of taste.  
21. Although one may conquer all of the other senses, as long as the tongue is not conquered it cannot be 
said that one has controlled his senses. However, if one is able to control the  tongue, then one is understood 
to be in full control of all the senses.  
22. O son of kings, previously in the city of Videha there dwelled a prostitute named Pingala. Now please 
hear what I have learned from that lady.  
23. Once that prostitute, desiring t o bring a lover into her house, stood outside in the doorway at night 
showing her beautiful form.  
24. O best among men, this prostitute was very anxious to get money, and as she stood on the street at night 
she studied all the men who were passing by, thin king, “Oh, this one surely has money. I know he can pay 
the price, and I am sure he would enjoy my company very much.” Thus she thought about all the men on the 
street.  25-26. As the prostitute Pingala stood in the doorway, many men came and went, walking by her house. Her 
only means of sustenance was prostitution, and therefore she anxiously thought, “Maybe this one who is 
coming now is very rich...Oh, he is not stopping, but I am sure someone else will come. Surely this man 
who is coming now will want to pay me for my love, and he will probably give lots of money.” Thus, with 
vain hope, she remained leaning against the doorway, unable to finish her business and go to sleep. Out of 
anxiety she would sometimes walk out toward the street, and sometimes she we nt back into her house. In 
this way, the midnight hour gradually arrived.  
27. As the night wore on, the prostitute, who intensely desired money, gradually became morose, and her 
face dried up. Thus being filled with anxiety for money and most disappointed,  she began to feel a great 
detachment from her situation, and happiness arose in her mind.  
28. The prostitute felt disgusted with her material situation and thus became indifferent to it. Indeed, 
detachment acts like a sword, cutting to pieces the binding network of material hopes and desires. Now 
please hear from me the song sung by the prostitute in that situation.  
29. O King, just as a human being who is bereft of spiritual knowledge never desires to give up his false 
sense of proprietorship over many ma terial things, similarly, a person who has not developed detachment 
never desires to give up the bondage of the material body.  
30. The prostitute Pingala said: Just see how greatly illusioned I am ! Because I cannot control my mind, 
just like a fool I desi re lusty pleasure from an insignificant man.  
31. I am such a fool that I have given up the service of that person who, being eternally situated within my 
heart, is actually most dear to me. That most dear one is the Lord of the universe, who is the bestowe r of real 
love and happiness and the source of all prosperity. Although He is in my own heart, I have completely 
neglected Him. Instead I have ignorantly served insignificant men who can never satisfy my real desires and 
who have simply brought me unhappin ess, fear, anxiety, lamentation and illusion.  
32. Oh, how I have uselessly tortured my own soul! I have sold my body to lusty, greedy men who are 
themselves objects of pity. Thus practicing the most abominable profession of a prostitute, I hoped to get 
money and sex pleasure.  
33. This material body is like a house in which I, the soul, am living. The bones forming my spine, ribs, 
arms and legs are like the beams, crossbeams and pillars of the house, and the whole structure, which is full 
of stool and urine,  is covered by skin, hair and nails. The nine doors leading into this body are constantly 
excreting foul substances. Besides me, what woman could be so foolish as to devote herself to this material 
body, thinking that she might find pleasure and love in th is contraption?  
34. Certainly in this city of Videha I alone am completely foolish. I neglected the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, who awards us everything, even our original spiritual form, and instead I desired to enjoy sense 
gratification with many men . 
35. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is absolutely the most dear one for all living beings because He is 
everyone’s well -wisher and Lord. He is the Supreme Soul situated in everyone’s heart. Therefore I will now 
pay the price of complete surrender, and  thus purchasing the Lord I will enjoy with Him just like 
Laksmidevi.  
36. Men provide sense gratification for women, but all these men, and even the demigods in heaven, have a 
beginning and an end. They are all temporary creations who will be dragged away by time. Therefore how 
much actual pleasure or happiness could any of them ever give to their wives?  
37. Although I most stubbornly hoped to enjoy the material world, somehow or other detachment has arisen 
in my heart, and it is making me very happy. There fore the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Visnu, must 
be pleased with me. Without even knowing it, I must have performed some activity satisfying to Him.  38. A person who has developed detachment can give up the bondage of material society, friendship and 
love, and a person who undergoes great suffering gradually becomes, out of hopelessness, detached and 
indifferent to the material world. Thus, due to my great suffering, such detachment awoke in my heart; yet 
how could I have undergone such merciful sufferi ng if I were actually unfortunate? Therefore, I am in fact 
fortunate and have received the mercy of the Lord. He must somehow or other be pleased with me.  
39. With devotion I accept the great benefit that the Lord has bestowed upon me. Having given up my s inful 
desires for ordinary sense gratification, I now take shelter of Him, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.  
40. I am now completely satisfied, and I have full faith in the Lord’s mercy. Therefore I will maintain 
myself with whatever comes of its own acc ord. I shall enjoy life with only the Lord, because He is the real 
source of love and happiness.  
41. The intelligence of the living entity is stolen away by activities of sense gratification, and thus he falls 
into the dark well of material existence. With in that well he is then seized by the deadly serpent of time. 
Who else but the Supreme Personality of Godhead could save the poor living entity from such a hopeless 
condition?  
42. When the living entity sees that the entire universe has been seized by the serpent of time, he becomes 
sober and sane and at that time detaches himself from all material sense gratification. In that condition the 
living entity is qualified to be his own protector.  
43. The avadhuta said: Thus, her mind completely made up, Pingala cut off all her sinful desires to enjoy 
sex pleasure with lovers, and she became situated in perfect peace. Then she sat down on her bed.  
44. Material desire is undoubtedly the cause of the greatest unhappiness, and freedom from such desire is 
the cause of  the greatest happiness. Therefore, completely cutting off her desire to enjoy so -called lovers, 
Pingala very happily went to sleep.  
Chapter Nine Detachment from All that Is Material  
1. The saintly brahmana said: Everyone considers certain things within th e material world to be most dear to 
him, and because of attachment to such things one eventually becomes miserable. One who understands this 
gives up material possessiveness and attachment and thus achieves unlimited happiness.  
2. Once a group of large haw ks who were unable to find any prey attacked another, weaker hawk who was 
holding some meat. At that time, being in danger of his life, the hawk gave up his meat and experienced 
actual happiness.  
3. In family life, the parents are always in anxiety about t heir home, children and reputation. But I have 
nothing to do with these things. I do not worry at all about any family, and I do not care about honor and 
dishonor. I enjoy only the life of the soul, and I find love on the spiritual platform. Thus I wander the earth 
like a child.  
4. In this world two types of people are free from all anxiety and merged in great happiness: one who is a 
retarded and childish fool and one who has approached the Supreme Lord, who is beyond the three modes 
of material nature.  
5. Once a marriageable young girl was alone in her house because her parents and relatives had gone that 
day to another place. At that time a few men arrived at the house, specifically desiring to marry her. She 
received them with all hospitality.  
6. The girl  went to a private place and began to make preparations so that the unexpected male guests could 
eat. As she was beating the rice, the conchshell bracelets on her arms were colliding and making a loud 
noise.  7. The young girl feared that the men would cons ider her family to be poor because their daughter was 
busily engaged in the menial task of husking rice. Being very intelligent, the shy girl broke the shell 
bracelets from her arms, leaving just two on each wrist.  
8. Thereafter, as the young girl continue d to husk the rice, the two bracelets on each wrist continued to 
collide and make noise. Therefore she took one bracelet off each arm, and with only one left on each wrist 
there was no more noise.  
9. O subduer of the enemy, I travel throughout the surface of the earth learning constantly about the nature 
of this world, and thus I personally witnessed the lesson of the young girl.  
10. When many people live together in one place there will undoubtedly be quarreling. And even if only two 
people live together t here will be frivolous conversation and disagreement. Therefore, to avoid conflict, one 
should live alone, as we learn from the example of the bracelet of the young girl.  
11. Having perfected the yoga sitting postures and conquered the breathing process, o ne should make the 
mind steady by detachment and the regulated practice of yoga. Thus one should carefully fix the mind on 
the single goal of yoga practice.  
12. The mind can be controlled when it is fixed on the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Having achie ved a 
stable situation, the mind becomes free from polluted desires to execute material activities; thus as the mode 
of goodness increases in strength, one can completely give up the modes of passion and ignorance, and 
gradually one transcends even the mat erial mode of goodness. When the mind is freed from the fuel of the 
modes of nature, the fire of material existence is extinguished. Then one achieves the transcendental 
platform of direct relationship with the object of his meditation, the Supreme Lord.  
13. Thus, when one’s consciousness is completely fixed on the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, one no longer sees duality, or internal and external reality. The example is given of the arrow 
maker who was so absorbed in making a straight  arrow that he did not even see or notice the king himself, 
who was passing right next to him.  
14. A saintly person should remain alone and constantly travel without any fixed residence. Being alert, he 
should remain secluded and should act in such a way t hat he is not recognized or noticed by others. Moving 
without companions, he should not speak more than required.  
15. When a person living in a temporary material body tries to construct a happy home, the result is fruitless 
and miserable. The snake, howev er, enters a home that has been built by others and prospers happily.  
16. The Lord of the universe, Narayana, is the worshipable God of all living entities. Without extraneous 
assistance, the Lord creates this universe by His own potency, and at the time o f annihilation the Lord 
destroys the universe through His personal expansion of time and withdraws all of the cosmos, including all 
the conditioned living entities, within Himself. Thus, His unlimited Self is the shelter and reservoir of all 
potencies. The  subtle pradhana, the basis of all cosmic manifestation, is conserved within the Lord and is in 
this way not different from Him. In the aftermath of annihilation the Lord stands alone.  
17-18. When the Supreme Personality of Godhead displays His own potency  in the form of time and guides 
His material potencies, such as the mode of goodness, into a neutral condition of equilibrium, He remains as 
the supreme controller of that neutral state, called pradhana, as well as of the living entities. He is also the 
supreme worshipable object for all beings, including liberated souls, demigods and ordinary conditioned 
souls. The Lord is eternally free from any material designation, and He constitutes the totality of spiritual 
bliss, which one experiences by seeing the L ord’s spiritual form. The Lord thus exhibits the fullest meaning 
of the word “liberation.”  
19. O subduer of the enemies, at the time of creation the Personality of Godhead expands His own 
transcendental potency in the form of time, and agitating His materi al energy, maya, composed of the three 
modes of material nature, He creates the mahat -tattva.  20. According to great sages, that which is the basis of the three modes of material nature and which 
manifests the variegated universe is called the sutra or mah at-tattva. Indeed, this universe is resting within 
that mahat -tattva, and due to its potency the living entity undergoes material existence.  
21. Just as from within himself the spider expands thread through his mouth, plays with it for some time and 
eventu ally swallows it, similarly, the Supreme Personality of Godhead expands His personal potency from 
within Himself. Thus, the Lord displays the network of cosmic manifestation, utilizes it according to His 
purpose and eventually withdraws it completely withi n Himself.  
22. If out of love, hate or fear an embodied soul fixes his mind with intelligence and complete concentration 
upon a particular bodily form, he will certainly attain the form that he is meditating upon.  
23. O King, once a wasp forced a weaker in sect to enter his hive and kept him trapped there. In great fear 
the weak insect constantly meditated upon his captor, and without giving up his body, he gradually achieved 
the same state of existence as the wasp. Thus one achieves a state of existence acc ording to one’s constant 
concentration.  
24. O King, from all these spiritual masters I have acquired great wisdom. Now please listen as I explain 
what I learned from my own body.  
25. The material body is also my spiritual master because it teaches me detachment. Being subject to 
creation and destruction, it always comes to a painful end. Thus, although using my body to acquire 
knowledge, I always remember that it will ultimately be con sumed by others, and remaining detached, I 
move about this world.  
26. A man attached to the body accumulates money with great struggle to expand and protect the position of 
his wife, children, property, domestic animals, servants, homes, relatives, friends , and so on. He does all this 
for the gratification of his own body. As a tree before dying produces the seed of a future tree, the dying 
body manifests the seed of one’s next material body in the form of one’s accumulated karma. Thus assuring 
the continua tion of material existence, the material body sinks down and dies.  
27. A man who has many wives is constantly harassed by them. He is responsible for their maintenance, and 
thus all the ladies constantly pull him in different directions, each struggling fo r her self -interest. Similarly, 
the material senses harass the conditioned soul, pulling him in many different directions at once. On one 
side the tongue is pulling him to arrange tasty food; then thirst drags him to get a suitable drink. 
Simultaneously th e sex organs clamor for satisfaction, and the sense of touch demands soft, sensuous 
objects. The belly harasses him until it is filled, the ears demand to hear pleasing sounds, the sense of smell 
hankers for pleasant aromas, and the fickle eyes clamor for pleasing sights. Thus the senses, organs and 
limbs, all desiring satisfaction, pull the living entity in many directions.  
28. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, expanding His own potency, maya -sakti, created innumerable 
species of life to house the condit ioned souls. Yet by creating the forms of trees, reptiles, animals, birds, 
snakes and so on, the Lord was not satisfied within His heart. Then He created human life, which offers the 
conditioned soul sufficient intelligence to perceive the Absolute Truth, and became pleased.  
29. After many, many births and deaths one achieves the rare human form of life, which, although 
temporary, affords one the opportunity to attain the highest perfection. Thus a sober human being should 
quickly endeavor for the ultimate perfection of life as long as his body, which is always subject to death, has 
not fallen down and died. After all, sense gratification is available even in the most abominable species of 
life, whereas Krsna consciousness is possible only for a human being.  
30. Having learned from my spiritual masters, I remain situated in realization of the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead and, fully renounced and enlightened by realized spiritual knowledge, wander the earth without 
attachment or false ego.  31. Although the A bsolute Truth is one without a second, the sages have described Him in many different 
ways. Therefore one may not be able to acquire very firm or complete knowledge from one spiritual master.  
32. The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Having thus spoken to King Yadu, the wise brahmana 
accepted obeisances and worship from the King and felt pleased within himself. Then bidding farewell, he 
left exactly as he had come.  
33. O Uddhava, hearing the words of the avadhuta, the saintly King Yadu, who is the forefa ther of our own 
ancestors, became free from all material attachment, and thus his mind was evenly fixed on the spiritual 
platform.  
Chapter Ten The Nature of Fruitive Activity  
1. The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Taking full shelter in Me, with the m ind carefully fixed in the 
devotional service of the Lord as spoken by Me, one should live without personal desire and practice the 
social and occupational system called varnasrama.  
2. A purified soul should see that because the conditioned souls who are d edicated to sense gratification 
have falsely accepted the objects of sense pleasure as truth, all of their endeavors are doomed to failure.  
3. One who is sleeping may see many objects of sense gratification in a dream, but such pleasurable things 
are merel y creations of the mind and are thus ultimately useless. Similarly, the living entity who is asleep to 
his spiritual identity also sees many sense objects, but these innumerable objects of temporary gratification 
are creations of the Lord’s illusory potenc y and have no permanent existence. One who meditates upon 
them, impelled by the senses, uselessly engages his intelligence.  
4. One who has fixed Me within his mind as the goal of life should give up activities based on sense 
gratification and should instea d execute work governed by the regulative principles for advancement. When, 
however, one is fully engaged in searching out the ultimate truth of the soul, one should not accept the 
scriptural injunctions governing fruitive activities.  
5. One who has accept ed Me as the supreme goal of life should strictly observe the scriptural injunctions 
forbidding sinful activities and, as far as possible, should execute the injunctions prescribing minor 
regulative duties such as cleanliness. Ultimately, however, one shou ld approach a bona fide spiritual master 
who is full in knowledge of Me as I am, who is peaceful, and who by spiritual elevation is not different from 
Me. 
6. The servant or disciple of the spiritual master should be free from false prestige, never consider ing 
himself to be the doer. He should be active and never lazy and should give up all sense of proprietorship 
over the objects of the senses, including his wife, children, home and society. He should be endowed with 
feelings of loving friendship toward the  spiritual master and should never become deviated or bewildered. 
The servant or disciple should always desire advancement in spiritual understanding, should not envy 
anyone and should always avoid useless conversation.  
7. One should see one’s real self -interest in life in all circumstances and should therefore remain detached 
from wife, children, home, land, relatives, friends, wealth and so on.  
8. Just as fire, which burns and illuminates, is different from firewood, which is to be burned to give 
illumina tion, similarly the seer within the body, the self -enlightened spirit soul, is different from the material 
body, which is to be illuminated by consciousness. Thus the spirit soul and the body possess different 
characteristics and are separate entities.  
9. Just as fire may appear differently as dormant, manifest, weak, brilliant and so on, according to the 
condition of the fuel, similarly, the spirit soul enters a material body and accepts particular bodily 
characteristics.  10. The subtle and gross material bodies are created by the material modes of nature, which expand from the 
potency of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Material existence occurs when the living entity falsely 
accepts the qualities of the gross and subtle bodies as being his own factual nature. This illusory state, 
however, can be destroyed by real knowledge.  
11. Therefore, by the cultivation of knowledge one should approach the Supreme Personality of Godhead 
situated within oneself. By understanding the Lord’s pure, transcendental existe nce, one should gradually 
give up the false vision of the material world as independent reality.  
12. The spiritual master can be compared to the lower kindling stick, the disciple to the upper kindling stick, 
and the instruction given by the guru to the th ird stick placed in between. The transcendental knowledge 
communicated from guru to disciple is compared to the fire arising from the contact of these, which burns 
the darkness of ignorance to ashes, bringing great happiness both to guru and disciple.  
13. By submissively hearing from an expert spiritual master, the expert disciple develops pure knowledge, 
which repels the onslaught of material illusion arising from the three modes of material nature. Finally this 
pure knowledge itself ceases, just as fire c eases when the stock of fuel has been consumed.  
14-16. My dear Uddhava, I have thus explained to you perfect knowledge. There are philosophers, however, 
who challenge My conclusion. They state that the natural position of the living entity is to engage in fruitive 
activities, and they see him as the enjoyer of the happiness and unhappiness that accrue from his own work. 
According to this materialistic philosophy, the world, time, the revealed scriptures and the self are all 
variegated and eternal, existing as a perpetual flow of transformations. Knowledge, moreover, cannot be one 
or eternal, because it arises from the different and changing forms of objects; thus knowledge itself is always 
subject to change. Even if you accept such a philosophy, My dear Uddh ava, there will still be perpetual 
birth, death, old age and disease, since all living entities must accept a material body subject to the influence 
of time.  
17. Although the performer of fruitive activities desires perpetual happiness, it is clearly obser ved that 
materialistic workers are often unhappy and only occasionally satisfied, thus proving that they are not 
independent or in control of their destiny. When a person is always under the superior control of another, 
how can he expect any valuable resul ts from his own fruitive actions?  
18. It is observed within the material world that sometimes even an intelligent person is not happy. 
Similarly, sometimes even a great fool is happy. The concept of becoming happy through expertly 
performing material activities is simply a useless exhibition of false egotism.  
19. Even if people know how to achieve happiness and avoid unhappiness, they still do not know the 
process by which death will not be  able to exert its power over them.  
20. Death is not at all pleasing, and since everyone is exactly like a condemned man being led to the place of 
execution, what possible happiness can people derive from material objects or the gratification they 
provide?  
21. That material happiness of which we hear, such as promotion to heavenly planets for celestial 
enjoyment, is just like that material happiness we have already experienced. Both are polluted by jealousy, 
envy, decay and death. Therefore, just as an atte mpt to raise crops becomes fruitless if there are many 
problems like crop disease, insect plague or drought, similarly, the attempt to attain material happiness, 
either on earth or on the heavenly planets, is always fruitless because of innumerable obstacl es. 
22. If one performs Vedic sacrifices and fruitive rituals without any mistake or contamination, one will 
achieve a heavenly situation in the next life. But even this result, which is only achieved by perfect 
performance of fruitive rituals, will be van quished by time. Now hear of this.  
23. If on earth one performs sacrifices for the satisfaction of the demigods, he goes to the heavenly planets, 
where, just like a demigod, he enjoys all of the heavenly pleasures he has earned by his performances.  24. Hav ing achieved the heavenly planets, the performer of ritualistic sacrifices travels in a glowing 
airplane, which he obtains as the result of his piety on earth. Being glorified by songs sung by the 
Gandharvas and dressed in wonderfully charming clothes, he enjoys life surrounded by heavenly goddesses.  
25. Accompanied by heavenly women, the enjoyer of the fruits of sacrifice goes on pleasure rides in a 
wonderful airplane, which is decorated with circles of tinkling bells and which flies wherever he desires. 
Being relaxed, comfortable and happy in the heavenly pleasure gardens, he does not consider that he is 
exhausting the fruits of his piety and will soon fall down to the mortal world.  
26. Until his pious r esults are used up, the performer of sacrifice enjoys life in the heavenly planets. When 
the pious results are exhausted, however, he falls down from the pleasure gardens of heaven, being moved 
against his desire by the force of eternal time.  
27-29. If a h uman being is engaged in sinful, irreligious activities, either because of bad association or 
because of his failure to control his senses, then such a person will certainly develop a personality full of 
material desires. He thus becomes miserly toward oth ers, greedy and always anxious to exploit the bodies of 
women. When the mind is so polluted one becomes violent and aggressive and without the authority of 
Vedic injunctions slaughters innocent animals for sense gratification. Worshiping ghosts and spirits , the 
bewildered person falls fully into the grip of unauthorized activities and thus goes to hell, where he receives 
a material body infected by the darkest modes of nature. In such a degraded body, he unfortunately 
continues to perform inauspicious activ ities that greatly increase his future unhappiness, and therefore he 
again accepts a similar material body. What possible happiness can there be for one who engages in 
activities inevitably terminating in death?  
30. In all the planetary systems, from the h eavenly to the hellish, and for all of the great demigods who live 
for one thousand yuga cycles, there is fear of Me in My form of time. Even Brahma, who possesses the 
supreme life span of 311,040,000,000,000 years, is also afraid of Me.  
31. The material s enses create material activities, either pious or sinful, and the modes of nature set the 
material senses into motion. The living entity, being fully engaged by the material senses and modes of 
nature, experiences the various results of fruitive work.  
32. As long as the living entity thinks that the modes of material nature have separate existences, he will be 
obliged to take birth in many different forms and will experience varieties of material existence. Therefore, 
the living entity remains completely de pendent on fruitive activities under the modes of nature.  
33. The conditioned soul who remains dependent on fruitive activities under the material modes of nature 
will continue to fear Me, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, since I impose the results of o ne’s fruitive 
activities. Those who accept the material concept of life, taking the variegatedness of the modes of nature to 
be factual, devote themselves to material enjoyment and are therefore always absorbed in lamentation and 
grief.  
34. When there is a gitation and interaction of the material modes of nature, the living entities then describe 
Me in various ways such as all -powerful time, the Self, Vedic knowledge, the universe, one’s own nature, 
religious ceremonies and so on.  
35. Sri Uddhava said: O my Lord, a living entity situated within the material body is surrounded by the 
modes of nature and the happiness and distress that are born of activities caused by these modes. How is it 
possible that he is not bound by this material encirclement? It may als o be said that the living entity is 
ultimately transcendental and has nothing to do with the material world. Then how is he ever bound by 
material nature?  
36-37. O my Lord, Acyuta, the same living entity is sometimes described as eternally conditioned and at 
other times as eternally liberated. I am not able to understand, therefore, the actual situation of the living 
entity. You, my Lord, are the best of those who are expert in answering philosophical questions. Please 
explain to me the symptoms by which on e can tell the difference between a living entity who is eternally liberated and one who is eternally conditioned. In what various ways would they remain situated, enjoy life, 
eat, evacuate, lie down, sit or move about?  
Chapter Eleven The Symptoms of Condi tioned and Liberated Living Entities  
1. The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Uddhava, due to the influence of the material modes 
of nature, which are under My control, the living entity is sometimes designated as conditioned and 
sometimes as li berated. In fact, however, the soul is never really bound up or liberated, and since I am the 
supreme Lord of maya, which is the cause of the modes of nature, I also am never to be considered liberated 
or in bondage.  
2. Just as a dream is merely a creation  of one’s intelligence but has no actual substance, similarly, material 
lamentation, illusion, happiness, distress and the acceptance of the material body under the influence of 
maya are all creations of My illusory energy. In other words, material existen ce has no essential reality.  
3. O Uddhava, both knowledge and ignorance, being products of maya, are expansions of My potency. Both 
knowledge and ignorance are beginningless and perpetually award liberation and bondage to embodied 
living beings.  
4. O most intelligent Uddhava, the living entity, called jiva, is part and parcel of Me, but due to ignorance he 
has been suffering in material bondage since time immemorial. By knowledge, however, he can be 
liberated.  
5. Thus, My dear Uddhava, in the same material body we find opposing characteristics, such as great 
happiness and misery. That is because both the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is eternally liberated, 
as well as the conditioned soul are within the body. I shall now speak to you about their differ ent 
characteristics.  
6. By chance, two birds have made a nest together in the same tree. The two birds are friends and are of a 
similar nature. One of them, however, is eating the fruits of the tree, whereas the other, who does not eat the 
fruits, is in a superior position due to His potency.  
7. The bird who does not eat the fruits of the tree is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who by His 
omniscience perfectly understands His own position and that of the conditioned living entity, represented by 
the eat ing bird. That living entity, on the other hand, does not understand himself or the Lord. He is covered 
by ignorance and is thus called eternally conditioned, whereas the Personality of Godhead, being full of 
perfect knowledge, is eternally liberated.  
8. One who is enlightened in self -realization, although living within the material body, sees himself as 
transcendental to the body, just as one who has arisen from a dream gives up identification with the dream 
body. A foolish person, however, although not id entical with his material body but transcendental to it, 
thinks himself to be situated in the body, just as one who is dreaming sees himself as situated in an 
imaginary body.  
9. An enlightened person who is free from the contamination of material desire does not consider himself to 
be the performer of bodily activities; rather, he knows that in all such activities it is only the senses, born of 
the modes of nature, that are contac ting sense objects born of the same modes of nature.  
10. An unintelligent person situated within the body created by his previous fruitive activities thinks, “I am 
the performer of action.” Bewildered by false ego, such a foolish person is therefore bound up by fruitive 
activities, which are in fact carried out by the modes of nature.  
11. An enlightened person fixed in detachment engages his body in lying down, sitting, walking, bathing, 
seeing, touching, smelling, eating, hearing and so on, but is never en tangled by such activities. Indeed, remaining as a witness to all bodily functions, he merely engages his bodily senses with their objects and 
does not become entangled like an unintelligent person.  
12-13. Although the sky, or space, is the resting place o f everything, the sky does not mix with anything, nor 
is it entangled. Similarly, the sun is not at all attached to the water in which it is reflected within 
innumerable reservoirs, and the mighty wind blowing everywhere is not affected by the innumerable aromas 
and atmospheres through which it passes. In the same way, a self -realized soul is completely detached from 
the material body and the material world around it. He is like a person who has awakened and arisen from a 
dream. With expert vision sharpened  by detachment, the self -realized soul cuts all doubts to pieces through 
knowledge of the self and completely withdraws his consciousness from the expansion of material variety.  
14. A person is considered to be completely liberated from the gross and subtl e material bodies when all the 
functions of his vital energy, senses, mind and intelligence are performed without material desire. Such a 
person, although situated within the body, is not entangled.  
15. Sometimes for no apparent reason one’s body is attack ed by cruel people or violent animals. At other 
times and in other places, one will suddenly be offered great respect or worship. One who becomes neither 
angry when attacked nor satisfied when worshiped is actually intelligent.  
16. A saintly sage sees with  equal vision and therefore is not affected by that which is materially good or 
bad. Indeed, although he observes others performing good and bad work and speaking properly and 
improperly, the sage does not praise or criticize anyone.  
17. For the purpose of  maintaining his body, a liberated sage should not act, speak or contemplate in terms 
of material good or bad. Rather, he should be detached in all material circumstances, and taking pleasure in 
self-realization, he should wander about engaged in this libe rated life -style, appearing like a retarded person 
to outsiders.  
18. If through meticulous study one becomes expert in reading Vedic literature but makes no endeavor to fix 
one’s mind on the Supreme Personality of Godhead, then one’s endeavor is certainly like that of a man who 
works very hard to take care of a cow that gives no milk. In other words, the fruit of one’s laborious study of 
Vedic knowledge will simply be the labor itself. There will be no other tangible result.  
19. My dear Uddhava, that man is  certainly most miserable who takes care of a cow that gives no milk, an 
unchaste wife, a body totally dependent on others, useless children or wealth not utilized for the right 
purpose. Similarly, one who studies Vedic knowledge devoid of My glories is al so most miserable.  
20. My dear Uddhava, an intelligent person should never take to literatures that do not contain descriptions 
of My activities, which purify the whole universe. Indeed, I create, maintain and annihilate the entire 
material manifestation. Among all My pastime incarnations, the most beloved are Krsna and Balarama. Any 
so-called knowledge that does not recognize these activities of Mine is simply barren and is not acceptable 
to those who are actually intelligent.  
21. Coming to this conclusion  of all knowledge, one should give up the false conception of material variety 
that one imposes upon the soul and thus cease one’s material existence. The mind should be fixed on Me, 
since I am all -pervading.  
22. My dear Uddhava, if you are not able to fre e your mind from all material disturbance and thus absorb it 
completely on the spiritual platform, then perform all your activities as an offering to Me, without trying to 
enjoy the fruits.  
23-24. My dear Uddhava, narrations of My pastimes and qualities ar e all-auspicious and purify the entire 
universe. A faithful person who constantly hears, glorifies and remembers such transcendental activities, 
who through dramatic performances relives My pastimes, beginning with My appearance, and who takes 
full shelter  of Me, dedicating his religious, sensual and occupational activities for My satisfaction, certainly 
obtains unflinching devotional service to Me, the eternal Personality of Godhead.  25. One who has obtained pure devotional service by association with My d evotees always engages in 
worshiping Me. Thus he very easily goes to My abode, which is revealed by My pure devotees.  
26-27. Sri Uddhava said: My dear Lord, O Supreme Personality of Godhead, what type of person do You 
consider to be a true devotee, and wha t type of devotional service is approved by great devotees as worthy 
of being offered to Your Lordship? My dear ruler of the universal controllers, O Lord of Vaikuntha and 
almighty God of the universe, I am Your devotee, and because I love You I have no ot her shelter than You. 
Therefore please explain this to me.  
28. My dear Lord, as the Absolute Truth You are transcendental to material nature, and like the sky You are 
never entangled in any way. Still, being controlled by Your devotees’ love, You accept ma ny different 
forms, incarnating according to Your devotees’ desires.  
29-32. The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: O Uddhava, a saintly person is merciful and never injures 
others. Even if others are aggressive he is tolerant and forgiving toward all liv ing entities. His strength and 
meaning in life come from the truth itself, he is free from all envy and jealousy, and his mind is equal in 
material happiness and distress. Thus, he dedicates his time to work for the welfare of all others. His 
intelligence is never bewildered by material desires, and he has controlled his senses. His behavior is always 
pleasing, never harsh and always exemplary, and he is free from possessiveness. He never endeavors in 
ordinary, worldly activities, and he strictly controls h is eating. He therefore always remains peaceful and 
steady. A saintly person is thoughtful and accepts Me as his only shelter. Such a person is very cautious in 
the execution of his duties and is never subject to superficial transformations, because he is steady and 
noble, even in a distressing situation. He has conquered over the six material qualities —namely hunger, 
thirst, lamentation, illusion, old age and death. He is free from all desire for prestige and offers honor to 
others. He is expert in revivin g the Krsna consciousness of others and therefore never cheats anyone. Rather, 
he is a well -wishing friend to all, being most merciful. Such a saintly person must be considered the most 
learned of men. He perfectly understands that the ordinary religious d uties prescribed by Me in various 
Vedic scriptures possess favorable qualities that purify the performer, and he knows that neglect of such 
duties constitutes a discrepancy in one’s life. Having taken complete shelter at My lotus feet, however, a 
saintly p erson ultimately renounces such ordinary religious duties and worships Me alone. He is thus 
considered to be the best among all living entities.  
33. My devotees may or may not know exactly what I am, who I am and how I exist, but if they worship Me 
with un alloyed love, then I consider them to be the best of devotees.  
34-41. My dear Uddhava, one can give up false pride and prestige by engaging in the following devotional 
activities. One may purify oneself by seeing, touching, worshiping, serving, and offerin g prayers of 
glorification and obeisances to My form as the Deity and to My pure devotees. One should also glorify My 
transcendental qualities and activities, hear with love and faith the narrations of My glories and constantly 
meditate on Me. One should o ffer to Me whatever one acquires, and accepting oneself as My eternal 
servant, one should give oneself completely to Me. One should always discuss My birth and activities and 
enjoy life by participating in festivals, such as Janmastami, which glorify My pa stimes. In My temple, one 
should also participate in festivals and ceremonies by singing, dancing, playing musical instruments and 
discussing Me with other Vaisnavas. One should observe all the regularly celebrated annual festivals by 
attending ceremonies,  pilgrimages and making offerings. One should also observe religious vows such as 
Ekadasi and take initiation by the procedures mentioned in the Vedas, Pancaratra and other, similar 
literatures. One should faithfully and lovingly support the installation o f My Deity, and individually or in 
cooperation with others one should work for the construction of Krsna conscious temples and cities as well 
as flower gardens, fruit gardens and special areas to celebrate My pastimes. One should consider oneself to 
be My humble servant, without duplicity, and thus should help to clean the temple, which is My home. First 
one should sweep and dust thoroughly, and then one should further cleanse with water and cow dung. 
Having dried the temple, one should sprinkle scented wat er and decorate the temple with mandalas. One 
should thus act just like My servant. A devotee should never advertise his devotional activities; therefore his 
service will not be the cause of false pride. One should never use lamps that are offered to Me fo r other 
purposes simply because there is need of illumination, and similarly, one should never offer to Me anything 
that has been offered to or used by others. Whatever is most desired by one within this material world, and whatever is most dear to oneself —one should offer that very thing to Me. Such an offering qualifies one for 
eternal life.  
42. O saintly Uddhava, please know that you may worship Me in the sun, fire, brahmanas, cows, Vaisnavas, 
sky, wind, water, earth, individual soul and all living entit ies. 
43-45. My dear Uddhava, one should worship Me within the sun by chanting selected Vedic mantras and by 
performing worship and offering obeisances. One may worship Me within fire by offering oblations of ghee, 
and one may worship Me among the brahmanas  by respectfully receiving them as guests, even when 
uninvited. I can be worshiped within the cows by offerings of grass and other suitable grains and 
paraphernalia for the pleasure and health of the cows, and one may worship Me within the Vaisvavas by 
offering loving friendship to them and honoring them in all respects. Through steady meditation I am 
worshiped within the inner space of the heart, and within the air I can be worshiped by knowledge that 
prana, the life air, is the chief among elements. I am worshiped within water by offerings of water itself, 
along with other elements such as flowers and tulasi leaves, and one may worship Me within the earth by 
proper application of confidential seed mantras. One may worship Me within the individual living en tity by 
offering food and other enjoyable substances, and one may worship Me within all living entities by seeing 
the Supersoul within all of them, thus maintaining equal vision.  
46. Thus, in the previously mentioned places of worship and according to the processes I have described, 
one should meditate on My peaceful, transcendental form with four arms holding a conchshell, Sudarsana 
disc, club and lotus flower. In this way, one should worship Me with fixed attention.  
47. One who has executed sacrificial pe rformances and pious works for My satisfaction, and who thus 
worships Me with fixed attention, obtains unflinching devotional service unto Me. By the excellent quality 
of his service such a worshiper obtains realized knowledge of Me.  
48. My dear Uddhava, I am personally the ultimate shelter and way of life for saintly liberated persons, and 
thus if one does not engage in My loving devotional service, which is made possible by associating with My 
devotees, then for all practical purposes, o ne possesses no effective means for escaping from material 
existence.  
49. My dear Uddhava, O beloved of the Yadu dynasty, because you are My servant, well -wisher and friend, 
I shall now speak to you the most confidential knowledge. Please hear as I explain  these great mysteries to 
you. 
Chapter Twelve Beyond Renunciation and Knowledge  
1-2. The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Uddhava, by associating with My pure devotees 
one can destroy one’s attachment for all objects of material sense gratification. Such purifying association 
brings Me under the control of My devotee. One may perform the astanga -yoga system, engage in 
philosophical analysis of the elements of material nature, practice nonviolence and other ordinary principles 
of piety, chant the Vedas, perform penances, take to the renounced order of life, execute sacrificial 
performances and dig wells, plant trees and perform other public welfare activities, give in charity, carry out 
severe vows, worship the demigods, chant confidentia l mantras, visit holy places or accept major and minor 
disciplinary injunctions, but even by performing such activities one does not bring Me under his control.  
3-6. In every yuga many living entities entangled in the modes of passion and ignorance gained the 
association of My devotees. Thus, such living entities as the Daityas, Raksasas, birds, beasts, Gandharvas, 
Apsaras, Nagas, Siddhas, Caranas, Guhyakas and Vidyadharas, as well as such lower -class human beings as 
the vaisyas, sudras, women and others, w ere able to achieve My supreme abode. Vrtrasura, Prahlada 
Maharaja and others like them also achieved My abode by association with My devotees, as did 
personalities such as Vrsaparva, Bali Maharaja, Banasura, Maya, Vibhisana, Sugriva, Hanuman, Jambavan, 
Gajendra, Jatayu, Tuladhara, Dharma -vyadha, Kubja, the gopis in Vrndavana and the wives of the 
brahmanas who were performing sacrifice.  7. The persons I have mentioned did not undergo serious studies of the Vedic literature, nor did they 
worship great saintl y persons, nor did they execute severe vows or austerities. Simply by association with 
Me and My devotees, they achieved Me.  
8. The inhabitants of Vrndavana, including the gopis, cows, unmoving creatures such as the twin arjuna 
trees, animals, living entit ies with stunted consciousness such as bushes and thickets, and snakes such as 
Kaliya, all achieved the perfection of life by unalloyed love for Me and thus very easily achieved Me.  
9. Even though one engages with great endeavor in the mystic yoga system, philosophical speculation, 
charity, vows, penances, ritualistic sacrifices, teaching of Vedic mantras to others, personal study of the 
Vedas, or the renounced order of life, still one cannot achieve Me.  
10. The residents of Vrndavana, headed by the gopis, were always completely attached to Me with deepest 
love. Therefore, when My uncle Akrura brought My brother Balarama and Me to the city of Mathura, the 
residents of Vrndavana suffered extreme mental distress because of separation from Me and could not find  
any other source of happiness.  
11. Dear Uddhava, all of those nights that the gopis spent with Me, their most dearly beloved, in the land of 
Vrndavana seemed to them to pass in less than a moment. Bereft of My association, however, the gopis felt 
that tho se same nights dragged on forever, as if each night were equal to a day of Brahma.  
12. My dear Uddhava, just as great sages in yoga trance merge into self -realization, like rivers merging into 
the ocean, and are thus not aware of material names and forms, similarly, the gopis of Vrndavana were so 
completely attached to Me within their minds that they could not think of their own bodies, or of this world, 
or of their future lives. Their entire consciousness was simply bound up in Me.  
13. All those hundreds o f thousands of gopis, understanding Me to be their most charming lover and 
ardently desiring Me in that way, were unaware of My actual position. Yet by intimately associating with 
Me, the gopis attained Me, the Supreme Absolute Truth.  
14-15. Therefore, My dear Uddhava, abandon the Vedic mantras as well as the procedures of supplementary 
Vedic literatures and their positive and negative injunctions. Disregard that which has been heard and that 
which is to be heard. Simply take shelter of Me alone, for I am t he Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
situated within the heart of all conditioned souls. Take shelter of Me wholeheartedly, and by My grace be 
free from fear in all circumstances.  
16. Sri Uddhava said: O Lord of all masters of mystic power, I have heard Your  words, but the doubt in my 
heart does not go away; thus my mind is bewildered.  
17. The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Uddhava, the Supreme Lord gives life to every 
living being and is situated within the heart along with the life air and pri mal sound vibration. The Lord can 
be perceived in His subtle form within the heart by one’s mind, since the Lord controls the minds of 
everyone, even great demigods like Lord Siva. The Supreme Lord also assumes a gross form as the various 
sounds of the Ved as, composed of short and long vowels and consonants of different intonations.  
18. When sticks of kindling wood are vigorously rubbed together, heat is produced by contact with air, and a 
spark of fire appears. Once the fire is kindled, ghee is added and t he fire blazes. Similarly, I become 
manifest in the sound vibration of the Vedas.  
19. The functions of the working senses —the organ of speech, the hands, the legs, the genital and the 
anus—and the functions of the knowledge -acquiring senses —the nose, tongu e, eyes, skin and ears —along 
with the functions of the subtle senses of mind, intelligence, consciousness and false ego, as well as the 
function of the subtle pradhana and the interaction of the three modes of material nature —all these should 
be understood  as My materially manifest form.  20. When many seeds are placed in an agricultural field, innumerable manifestations of trees, bushes, 
vegetables and so on will arise from a single source, the soil. Similarly, the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, who gives life to all and is eternal, originally exists beyond the scope of the cosmic manifestation. 
In the course of time, however, the Lord, who is the resting place of the three modes of nature and the 
source of the universal lotus flower, in which the cosmic ma nifestation takes place, divides His material 
potencies and thus appears to be manifest in innumerable forms, although He is one.  
21. Just as woven cloth rests on the expansion of lengthwise and crosswise threads, similarly the entire 
universe is expanded on the lengthwise and crosswise potency of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and 
is situated within Him. The conditioned soul has been accepting material bodies since time immemorial, and 
these bodies are like great trees sustaining one’s material existen ce. Just as a tree first blossoms and then 
produces fruit, similarly the tree of material existence, one’s material body, produces the various results of 
material existence.  
22-23. This tree of material existence has two seeds, hundreds of roots, three low er trunks and five upper 
trunks. It produces five flavors and has eleven branches and a nest made by two birds. The tree is covered 
by three types of bark, gives two fruits and extends up to the sun. Those lusty after material enjoyment and 
dedicated to fa mily life enjoy one of the tree’s fruits, and swanlike men in the renounced order of life enjoy 
the other fruit. One who with the help of the bonafide spiritual masters can understand this tree to be a 
manifestation of the potency of the one Supreme Truth appearing in many forms actually knows the 
meaning of the Vedic literature.  
24. With steady intelligence you should develop unalloyed devotional service by careful worship of the 
spiritual master, and with the sharpened ax of transcendental knowledge you s hould cut off the subtle 
material covering of the soul. Upon realizing the Supreme Personality of Godhead, you should then give up 
that ax of analytic knowledge.  
Chapter Thirteen The Hamsa -avatara Answers the Questions of the Sons of Brahma  
1. The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: The three modes of material nature, namely goodness, passion 
and ignorance, pertain to material intelligence and not to the spirit soul. By development of material 
goodness one can conquer the modes of passion and ignorance, an d by cultivation of transcendental 
goodness one may free oneself even from material goodness.  
2. When the living entity becomes strongly situated in the mode of goodness, then religious principles, 
characterized by devotional service to Me, become prominen t. One can strengthen the mode of goodness by 
cultivation of those things that are already situated in goodness, and thus religious principles arise.  
3. Religious principles, strengthened by the mode of goodness, destroy the influence of passion and 
ignora nce. When passion and ignorance are overcome, their original cause, irreligion, is quickly vanquished.  
4. According to the quality of religious scriptures, water, one’s association with one’s children or with 
people in general, the particular place, the ti me, activities, birth, meditation, chanting of mantras, and 
purificatory rituals, the modes of nature become differently prominent.  
5. Among the ten items I have just mentioned, the great sages who understand Vedic knowledge have 
praised and recommended those that are in the mode of goodness, criticized and rejected those in the mode 
of ignorance, and shown indifference to those in the mode of passion.  
6. Until one revives one’s direct knowledge of the spirit soul an d drives away the illusory identification with 
the material body and mind caused by the three modes of nature, one must cultivate those things in the mode 
of goodness. By increasing the mode of goodness, one automatically can understand and practice religi ous 
principles, and by such practice transcendental knowledge is awakened.  
7. In a bamboo forest the wind sometimes rubs the bamboo stalks together, and such friction generates a 
blazing fire that consumes the very source of its birth, the bamboo forest. T hus, the fire is automatically calmed by its own action. Similarly, by the competition and interaction of the material modes of nature, the 
subtle and gross material bodies are generated. If one uses his mind and body to cultivate knowledge, then 
such enli ghtenment destroys the influence of the modes of nature that generated one’s body. Thus, like the 
fire, the body and mind are pacified by their own actions in destroying the source of their birth.  
8. Sri Uddhava said: My dear Krsna, generally human beings know that material life brings great future 
unhappiness, and still they try to enjoy material life. My dear Lord, how can one in knowledge act just like a 
dog, an ass or a goat?  
9-10. The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Uddhava, a person beref t of intelligence first 
falsely identifies himself with the material body and mind, and when such false knowledge arises within 
one’s consciousness, material passion, the cause of great suffering, pervades the mind, which by nature is 
situated in goodness.  Then the mind, contaminated by passion, becomes absorbed in making and changing 
many plans for material advancement. Thus, by constantly thinking of the modes of material nature, a 
foolish person is afflicted with unbearable material desires.  
11. One who does not control the material senses comes under the control of material desires and is thus 
bewildered by the strong waves of the mode of passion. Such a person executes material activities, although 
clearly seeing that the result will be future unhappine ss. 
12. Although the intelligence of a learned person may be bewildered by the modes of passion and ignorance, 
he should again carefully bring the mind under control. By clearly seeing the contamination of the modes of 
nature, he does not become attached.  
13. A person should be attentive and grave and never lazy or morose. Mastering the yoga procedures of 
breathing and sitting properly, one should practice fixing the mind on Me at dawn, noon and sunset, and 
thus gradually the mind should be completely absor bed in Me.  
14. The actual yoga system as taught by My devotees, headed by Sanaka -kumara, is simply this: Having 
withdrawn the mind from all other objects, one should directly and appropriately absorb it in Me.  
15. Sri Uddhava said: My dear Kesava, at what time and in what form did You instruct the science of yoga 
to Sanaka and his brothers? I now desire to know about these things.  
16. The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Once, the mental sons of Lord Brahma, namely, the sages 
headed by Sanaka, inquired from their father about the difficult subject matter of the supreme goal of yoga.  
17. The sages headed by Sanaka said: O Lord, people’s minds are naturally attracted to material sense 
objects, and similarly the sense objects in the form of desire enter wit hin the mind. Therefore, how can a 
person who desires liberation, who desires to cross over activities of sense gratification, destroy this mutual 
relationship between the sense objects and the mind? Please explain this to us.  
18. The Supreme Personality o f Godhead said: My dear Uddhava, Brahma himself, who is born directly 
from the body of the Lord and who is the creator of all living entities within the material world, being the 
best of the demigods, seriously contemplated the question of his sons headed by Sanaka. The intelligence of 
Brahma, however, was affected by his own activities of creation, and thus he could not discover the 
essential answer to this question.  
19. Lord Brahma desired to attain the answer to the question that was puzzling him, and th us he fixed his 
mind on Me, the Supreme Lord. At that time, in My form of Hamsa, I became visible to Lord Brahma.  
20. Thus seeing Me, the sages, placing Brahma in the lead, came forward and worshiped My lotus feet. 
Then they frankly asked Me, “Who are You? ” 21. My dear Uddhava, the sages, being eager to understand the ultimate truth of the yoga system, thus 
inquired from Me. Now please hear as I explain that which I spoke unto the sages.  
22. My dear brahmanas, if, when asking Me who I am, you believe that I  am also a jiva soul and that there is 
no ultimate difference between us —since all souls are ultimately one without individuality —then how is 
your question possible or appropriate? Ultimately, what is the real situation or resting place both of 
yourselves and of Me?  
23. If by asking Me “Who are You?” you were referring to the material body, then I must point out that all 
material bodies are constituted of five elements, namely earth, water, fire, air and ether. Thus, you should 
have asked, “Who are you five?” If you consider that all material bodies are ultimately one, being 
constituted essentially of the same elements, then your question is still meaningless, since there would be no 
deep purpose in distinguishing one body from another. Thus, it appears that in asking My identity, you are 
merely speaking words, without any real meaning or purpose.  
24. Within this world, whatever is perceived by the mind, speech, eyes or other senses is Me alone and 
nothing besides Me. All of you please understand this by a straightforward analysis of the facts.  
25. My dear sons, the mind has a natural proclivity to enter into the material sense objects, and similarly the 
sense objects enter into the mind; but both this material mind and the sense objects are merely designa tions 
that cover the spirit soul, who is part and parcel of Me.  
26. A person who has thus achieved Me by understanding that he is not different from Me realizes that the 
material mind is lodged within the sense objects because of constant sense gratificati on, and that the 
material objects are existing prominently within the material mind. Having understood My transcendental 
nature, he gives up both the material mind and its objects.  
27. Waking, sleeping and deep sleep are the three functions of the intellig ence and are caused by the modes 
of material nature. The living entity within the body is ascertained to possess characteristics different from 
these three states and thus remains us a witness to them.  
28. The spirit soul is trapped in the bondage of mater ial intelligence, which awards him constant 
engagement in the illusory modes of nature. But I am the fourth stage of consciousness, beyond 
wakefulness, dreaming and deep sleep. Becoming situated in Me, the soul should give up the bondage of 
material consci ousness. At that time, the living entity will automatically renounce the material sense objects 
and the material mind.  
29. The false ego of the living entity places him in bondage and awards him exactly the opposite of what he 
really desires. Therefore, an  intelligent person should give up his constant anxiety to enjoy material life and 
remain situated in the Lord, who is beyond the functions of material consciousness.  
30. According to My instructions, one should fix the mind on Me alone. If, however, one c ontinues to see 
many different values and goals in life rather than seeing everything within Me, then although apparently 
awake, one is actually dreaming due to incomplete knowledge, just as one may dream that one has wakened 
from a dream.  
31. Those states  of existence that are conceived of as separate from the Supreme Personality of Godhead 
have no actual existence, although they create a sense of separation from the Absolute Truth. Just as the seer 
of a dream imagines many different activities and rewards , similarly, because of the sense of an existence 
separate from the Lord’s existence, the living entity falsely performs fruitive activities, thinking them to be 
the cause of future rewards and destinations.  
32. While awake the living entity enjoys with al l of his senses the fleeting characteristics of the material 
body and mind; while dreaming he enjoys similar experiences within the mind; and in deep dreamless sleep 
all such experiences merge into ignorance. By remembering and contemplating the succession  of wakefulness, dreaming and deep sleep, the living entity can understand that he is one throughout the three 
stages of consciousness and is transcendental. Thus, he becomes the lord of the senses.  
33. You should consider how, by the influence of My illusory energy, these three states of the mind, caused 
by the modes of nature, have been artificially imagined to exist in Me. Having definitely ascertained the 
truth of the soul, you should utilize the shar pened sword of knowledge, acquired by logical reflection and 
from the instructions of sages and Vedic literatures, to completely cut off the false ego, which is the 
breeding ground of all doubts. All of you should then worship Me, who am situated within th e heart.  
34. One should see that the material world is a distinct illusion appearing in the mind, because material 
objects have an extremely flickering existence and are here today and gone tomorrow. They can be 
compared to the streaking red line created b y whirling a fiery stick. The spirit soul by nature exists in the 
single state of pure consciousness. However, in this world he appears in many different forms and stages of 
existence. The modes of nature divide the soul’s consciousness into normal wakeful ness, dreaming and 
dreamless sleep. All such varieties of perception, however, are actually maya and exist only like a dream.  
35. Having understood the temporary illusory nature of material things, and thus having pulled one’s vision 
away from illusion, on e should remain without material desires. By experiencing the happiness of the soul, 
one should give up material speaking and activities. If sometimes one must observe the material world, one 
should remember that it is not ultimate reality and therefore on e has given it up. By such constant 
remembrance up till the time of death, one will not again fall into illusion.  
36. Just as a drunken man does not notice if he is wearing his coat or shirt, similarly, one who is perfect in 
self-realization and who has th us achieved his eternal identity does not notice whether the temporary body is 
sitting or standing. Indeed, if by God’s will the body is finished or if by God’s will he obtains a new body, a 
self-realized soul does not notice, just as a drunken man does no t notice the situation of his outward dress.  
37. The material body certainly moves under the control of supreme destiny and therefore must continue to 
live along with the senses and vital air as long as one’s karma is in effect. A self -realized soul, howev er, 
who is awakened to the absolute reality and who is thus highly situated in the perfect stage of yoga, will 
never again surrender to the material body and its manifold manifestations, knowing it to be just like a body 
visualized in a dream.  
38. My dear brahmanas, I have now explained to you the confidential knowledge of Sankhya, by which one 
philosophically distinguishes matter from spirit, and of astanga -yoga, by which one links up with the 
Supreme. Please understand that I am the Supreme Personality of  Godhead, Visnu, and that I have appeared 
before you desiring to explain your actual religious duties.  
39. O best of the brahmanas, please know that I am the supreme shelter of the yoga system, analytic 
philosophy, virtuous action, truthful religious princ iples, power, beauty, fame and self -control.  
40. All superior transcendental qualities, such as being beyond the modes of nature, detached, the well -
wisher, the most dear, the Supersoul, equally situated everywhere, and free from material entanglement —all 
such qualities, free from the transformations of material qualities, find their shelter and worshipable object 
in Me.  
41.  [Lord Krsna continued:] My dear Uddhava, thus all of the doubts of the sages headed by Sanaka were 
destroyed by My words. Fully worsh iping Me with transcendental love and devotion, they chanted My 
glories with excellent hymns.  
42. The greatest of sages, headed by Sanaka Rsi, thus perfectly worshiped and glorified Me, and as Lord 
Brahma looked on, I returned to My own abode.  
Chapter Four teen Lord Krsna Explains the Yoga System to Sri Uddhava  1. Sri Uddhava said: My dear Krsna, the learned sages who explain Vedic literature recommend various 
processes for perfecting one’s life. Considering these varieties of viewpoint, my Lord, please tell  me 
whether all these processes are equally important, or whether one of them is supreme.  
2. My dear Lord, You have clearly explained the process of unalloyed devotional service, by which a 
devotee removes all material association from his life, enabling h im to fix his mind on You.  
3. The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: By the influence of time, the transcendental sound of Vedic 
knowledge was lost at the time of annihilation. Therefore, when the subsequent creation took place, I spoke 
the Vedic knowled ge to Brahma because I Myself am the religious principles enunciated in the Vedas.  
4. Lord Brahma spoke this Vedic knowledge to his eldest son, Manu, and the seven great sages headed by 
Bhrgu Muni then accepted the same knowledge from Manu.  
5-7. From the f orefathers headed by Bhrgu Muni and other sons of Brahma appeared many children and 
descendants, who assumed different forms as demigods, demons, human beings, Guhyakas, Siddhas, 
Gandharvas, Vidyadharas, Caranas, Kindevas, Kinnaras, Nagas, Kimpurusas, and so on. All of the many 
universal species, along with their respective leaders, appeared with different natures and desires generated 
from the three modes of material nature. Therefore, because of the different characteristics of the living 
entities within the universe, there are a great many Vedic rituals, mantras and rewards.  
8. Thus, due to the great variety of desires and natures among human beings, there are many different 
theistic philosophies of life, which are handed down through tradition, custom an d disciplic succession. 
There are other teachers who directly support atheistic viewpoints.  
9. O best among men, the intelligence of human beings is bewildered by My illusory potency, and thus, 
according to their own activities and whims, they speak in inn umerable ways about what is actually good for 
people.  
10. Some say that people will be happy by performing pious religious activities. Others say that happiness is 
attained through fame, sense gratification, truthfulness, self -control, peace, self -interest , political influence, 
opulence, renunciation, consumption, sacrifice, penance, charity, vows, regulated duties or strict disciplinary 
regulation. Each process has its proponents.  
11. All the persons I have just mentioned obtain temporary fruits from their  material work. Indeed, the 
meager and miserable situations they achieve bring future unhappiness and are based on ignorance. Even 
while enjoying the fruits of their work, such persons are filled with lamentation.  
12. O learned Uddhava, those who fix their  consciousness on Me, giving up all material desires, share with 
Me a happiness that cannot possibly be experienced by those engaged in sense gratification.  
13. One who does not desire anything within this world, who has achieved peace by controlling his s enses, 
whose consciousness is equal in all conditions and whose mind is completely satisfied in Me finds only 
happiness wherever he goes.  
14. One who has fixed his consciousness on Me desires neither the position or abode of Lord Brahma or 
Lord Indra, nor an empire on the earth, nor sovereignty in the lower planetary systems, nor the eightfold 
perfection of yoga, nor liberation from birth and death. Such a person desires Me alone.  
15. My dear Uddhava, neither Lord Brahma, Lord Siva, Lord Sankarsana, the god dess of fortune nor indeed 
My own self are as dear to Me as you are.  
16. With the dust of My devotees’ lotus feet I desire to purify the material worlds, which are situated within 
Me. Thus, I always follow the footsteps of My pure devotees, who are free from all personal desire, rapt in 
thought of My pastimes, peaceful, without any feelings of enmity, and of equal disposition everywhere.  17. Those who are without any desire for personal gratification, whose minds are always attached  to Me, 
who are peaceful, without false ego and merciful to all living entities, and whose consciousness is never 
affected by opportunities for sense gratification —such persons enjoy in Me a happiness that cannot be 
known or achieved by those lacking such detachment from the material world.  
18. My dear Uddhava, if My devotee has not fully conquered his senses, he may be harassed by material 
desires, but because of his unflinching devotion for Me, he will not be defeated by sense gratification.  
19. My dear U ddhava, just as a blazing fire turns firewood into ashes, similarly, devotion unto Me 
completely burns to ashes sins committed by My devotees.  
20. My dear Uddhava, the unalloyed devotional service rendered to Me by My devotees brings Me under 
their control . I cannot be thus controlled by those engaged in mystic yoga, Sankhya philosophy, pious work, 
Vedic study, austerity or renunciation.  
21. Only by practicing unalloyed devotional service with full faith in Me can one obtain Me, the Supreme 
Personality of G odhead. I am naturally dear to My devotees, who take Me as the only goal of their loving 
service. By engaging in such pure devotional service, even the dog -eaters can purify themselves from the 
contaminationof their low birth.  
22. Neither religious activit ies endowed with honesty and mercy nor knowledge obtained with great 
penance can completely purify one’s consciousness if they are bereft of loving service to Me.  
23. If one’s hairs do not stand on end, how can the heart melt? And if the heart does not mel t, how can tears 
of love flow from the eyes? If one does not cry in spiritual happiness, how can one render loving service to 
the Lord? And without such service, how can the consciousness be purified?  
24. A devotee whose speech is sometimes choked up, whos e heart melts, who cries continually and 
sometimes laughs, who feels ashamed and cries out loudly and then dances —a devotee thus fixed in loving 
service to Me purifies the entire universe.  
25. Just as gold, when smelted in fire, gives up its impurities and returns to its pure brilliant state, similarly, 
the spirit soul, absorbed in the fire of bhakti -yoga, is purified of all contamination caused by previous 
fruitive activities and returns to its  original position of serving Me in the spiritual world.  
26. When a diseased eye is treated with medicinal ointment it gradually recovers its power to see. Similarly, 
as a conscious living entity cleanses himself of material contamination by hearing and ch anting the pious 
narrations of My glories, he regains his ability to see Me, the Absolute Truth, in My subtle spiritual form.  
27. The mind of one meditating upon the objects of sense gratification is certainly entangled in such objects, 
but if one constant ly remembers Me, then the mind is absorbed in Me.  
28. Therefore, one should reject all material processes of elevation, which are like the mental creations of a 
dream, and should completely absorb one’s mind in Me. By constantly thinking of Me, one becomes  
purified.  
29. Being conscious of the eternal self, one should give up association with women and those intimately 
associated with women. Sitting fearlessly in a solitary place, one should concentrate the mind on Me with 
great attention.  
30. Of all kinds o f suffering and bondage arising from various attachments, none is greater than the 
suffering and bondage arising from attachment to women and intimate contact with those attached to 
women.  31. Sri Uddhava said: My dear lotus -eyed Krsna, by what process sho uld one who desires liberation 
meditate upon You, of what specific nature should his meditation be, and upon which form should he 
meditate? Kindly explain to me this topic of meditation.  
32-33. The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Sitting on a level se at that is not too high or too low, 
keeping the body straight and erect yet comfortable, placing the two hands on one’s lap and focusing the 
eyes on the tip of one’s nose, one should purify the pathways of breathing by practicing the mechanical 
exercises o f puraka, kumbhaka and recaka, and then one should reverse the procedure (recaka, kumbhaka, 
puraka). Having fully controlled the senses, one may thus practice pranayama step by step.  
34. Beginning from the muladhara -cakra, one should move the life air cont inuously upward like the fibers in 
the lotus stalk until one reaches the heart, where the sacred syllable om is situated like the sound of a bell. 
One should thus continue raising the sacred syllable upward the distance of twelve angulas, and there the 
omkara should be joined together with the fifteen vibrations produced with anusvara.  
35. Being fixed in the omkara, one should carefully practice the pranayama system ten times at each sunrise, 
noon and sunset. Thus, after one month one will have conquered th e life air.  
36-42. Keeping the eyes half closed and fixed on the tip of one’s nose, being enlivened and alert, one should 
meditate on the lotus flower situated within the heart. This lotus has eight petals and is situated on an erect 
lotus stalk. One shoul d meditate on the sun, moon and fire, placing them one after the other within the whorl 
of that lotus flower. Placing My transcendental form within the fire, one should meditate upon it as the 
auspicious goal of all meditation. That form is perfectly propo rtioned, gentle and cheerful. It possesses four 
beautiful long arms, a charming, beautiful neck, a handsome forehead, a pure smile and glowing, shark -
shaped earrings suspended from two identical ears. That spiritual form is the color of a dark rain cloud a nd 
is garbed in golden -yellowish silk. The chest of that form is the abode of Srivatsa and the goddess of 
fortune, and that form is also decorated with a conchshell, disc, club, lotus flower and garland of forest 
flowers. The two brilliant lotus feet are d ecorated with ankle bells and bracelets, and that form exhibits the 
Kaustubha gem along with an effulgent crown. The upper hips are beautified by a golden belt, and the arms 
are decorated with valuable bracelets. All of the limbs of that beautiful form cap ture the heart, and the face 
is beautified by merciful glancing. Pulling the senses back from the sense objects, one should be grave and 
self-controlled and should use the intelligence to strongly fix the mind upon all of the limbs of My 
transcendental bod y. Thus one should meditate upon that most delicate transcendental form of Mine.  
43. One should then pull the consciousness back from all the limbs of that transcendental body. At that time, 
one should meditate only on the wonderfully smiling face of the L ord. 
44. Being established in meditation on the Lord’s face, one should then withdraw the consciousness and fix 
it in the sky. Then giving up such meditation, one should become established in Me and give up the process 
of meditation altogether.  
45. One who  has completely fixed his mind on Me should see Me within his own soul and should see the 
individual soul within Me, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thus, he sees the individual souls united 
with the Supreme Soul, just as one sees the sun’s rays comple tely united with the sun.  
46. When the yogi thus controls his mind by intensely concentrated meditation, his illusory identification 
with material objects, knowledge and activities is very quickly extinguished.  
Chapter Fifteen Lord Krsna’s Description of M ystic Yoga Perfections  
1. The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Uddhava, the mystic perfections of yoga are acquired 
by a yogi who has conquered his senses, steadied his mind, conquered the breathing process and fixed his 
mind on Me.  1. Sri Uddhava said: My dear Lord Acyuta, by what process can mystic perfection be achieved, and what is 
the nature of such perfection? How many mystic perfections are there? Please explain these things to me. 
Indeed, You are the bestower of all mystic perfec tions.  
3. The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: The masters of the yoga system have declared that there are 
eighteen types of mystic perfection and meditation, of which eight are primary, having their shelter in Me, 
and ten are secondary, appearing from  the material mode of goodness.  
4-5. Among the eight primary mystic perfections, the three by which one transforms one’s own body are 
anima, becoming smaller than the smallest; mahima, becoming greater than the greatest; and laghima, 
becoming lighter than the lightest. Through the perfection of prapti one acquires whatever one desires, and 
through pr akamya-siddhi one experiences any enjoyable object, either in this world or the next. Through 
isita-siddhi one can manipulate the subpotencies of m aya, and thro ugh the controlling potency called vasita -
siddhi one is unimpeded by the three modes of nature. One who has acquired kamavasayita -siddhi can 
obtain anything from anywhere, to the highest possible limit. My dear gentle Uddhava,  these eight mystic 
perfection s are considered to be naturally existing and  unexcelled within this world.  
6-7. The ten secondary mystic perfections arising from the modes of nature are the powers of freeing oneself 
from hunger and thirst and other bodily disturbances, hearing and seein g things far away, moving the body 
at the speed of the mind, assuming any form one desires, entering the bodies of others, dying when one 
desires, witnessing the pastimes between the demigods and the celestial girls called Apsaras, completely 
executing one ’s determination and giving orders whose fulfillment is unimpeded.  
8-9. The power to know past, present and future; tolerance of heat, cold and other dualities; knowing the 
minds of others; checking the influence of fire, sun, water, poison, and so on; and  remaining unconquered 
by others —these constitute five perfections of the mystic process of yoga and meditation. I am simply 
listing these here according to their names and characteristics. Now please learn from Me how specific 
mystic perfections arise fro m specific meditations and also of the particular processes involved.  
10. One who worships Me in My atomic form pervading all subtle elements, fixing his mind on that alone, 
obtains the mystic perfection called anima.  
11. One who absorbs his mind in the pa rticular form of the mahat -tattva and thus meditates upon Me as the 
Supreme Soul of the total material existence achieves the mystic perfection called mahima. By further 
absorbing the mind in the situation of each individual element such as the sky, air, f ire, and so on, one 
progressively acquires the greatness of each material element.  
12. I exist within everything, and I am therefore the essence of the atomic constituents of material elements. 
By attaching his mind to Me in this form, the yogi may achieve  the perfection called laghima, by which he 
realizes the subtle atomic substance of time.  
13. Fixing his mind completely in Me within the element of false ego generated from the mode of goodness, 
the yogi obtains the power of mystic acquisition, by which h e becomes the proprietor of the senses of all 
living entities. He obtains such perfection because his mind is absorbed in Me.  
14. One who concentrates all mental activities in Me as the Supersoul of that phase of the mahat -tattva 
which manifests the chain of fruitive activities obtains from Me, whose appearance is beyond material 
perception, the most excellent mystic perfection called prakamya.  
15. One who places his consciousness on Visnu, the Supersoul, the prime mover and Supreme Lord of the 
external ene rgy consisting of three modes, obtains the mystic perfection of controlling other conditioned 
souls, their material bodies and their bodily designations.  
16. The yogi who places his mind in My form of Narayana, known as the fourth factor, full of all opule nces, 
becomes endowed with My nature and thus obtains the mystic perfection called vasita.  17. One who fixes his pure mind on Me in My manifestation as the impersonal Brahman obtains the greatest 
happiness, wherein all his desires are completely fulfilled.  
18. A human being who concentrates on Me as the upholder of religious principles, the personification of 
purity and the Lord of Svetadvipa obtains the pure existence in which he is freed from the six waves of 
material disturbance, namely hunger, thirst, d ecay, death, grief and illusion.  
19. That purified living entity who fixes his mind on the extraordinary sound vibrations occurring within Me 
as the personified sky and total life air is then able to perceive within the sky the speaking of all living 
entities. 
20. Merging one’s sight into the sun planet and then the sun planet into one’s eyes, one should meditate on 
Me as existing within the combination of sun and vision; thus one acquires the power to see any distant 
thing.  
21. The yogi who completely abso rbs his mind in Me, and who then makes use of the wind that follows the 
mind to absorb the material body in Me, obtains through the potency of meditation on Me the mystic 
perfection by which his body immediately follows his mind wherever it goes.  
22. When the yogi, applying his mind in a certain way, desires to assume a particular form, that very form 
immediately appears. Such perfection is possible by absorbing the mind in the shelter of My inconceivable 
mystic potency, by which I assume innumerable f orms.  
23. When a perfect yogi desires to enter another’s body, he should meditate upon himself within the other 
body, and then, giving up his own gross body, he should enter the other’s body through the pathways of air, 
as easily as a bee leaves one flower  and flies into another.  
24. The yogi who has achieved the mystic perfection called svacchanda -mrtyu blocks the anus with the heel 
of the foot and then lifts the soul from the heart to the chest, to the neck and finally to the head. Situated 
within the bra hma-randhra, the yogi then gives up his material body and guides the spirit soul to the selected 
destination.  
25. The yogi who desires to enjoy in the pleasure gardens of the demigods should meditate on the purified 
mode of goodness, which is situated with in Me, and then the heavenly women, generated from the mode of 
goodness, will approach him in airplanes.  
26. A yogi who has faith in Me, absorbing his mind in Me and knowing that My purpose is always fulfilled, 
will always achieve his purpose by the very m eans he has determined to follow.  
27. A person who perfectly meditates on Me acquires My nature of being the supreme ruler and controller. 
His order, like Mine, can never be frustrated by any means.  
28. A yogi who has purified his existence by devotion to Me and who thus expertly knows the process of 
meditation obtains knowledge of past, present and future. He can therefore see the birth and death of himself 
and others.  
29. Just as the bodies of aquatics cannot be injured by water, similarly, the body of a yogi whose 
consciousness is pacified by devotion to Me and who is fully developed in yoga science cannot be injured 
by fire, sun, water, poison, and so forth.  
30. My devotee becomes unconquerable by medi tating on My opulent incarnations, which are decorated 
with Srivatsa and various weapons and are endowed with imperial paraphernalia such as flags, ornamental 
umbrellas and fans.  31. A learned devotee who worships Me through yoga meditation certainly obtai ns in all respects the mystic 
perfections that I have described.  
32. For a sage who has conquered his senses, breathing and mind, who is self -controlled and always 
absorbed in meditation on Me, what mystic perfection could possibly be difficult to achieve?  
33. Learned experts in devotional service state that the mystic perfections of yoga that I have mentioned are 
actually impediments and are a waste of time for one who is practicing the supreme yoga, by which one 
achieves all perfection in life directly fr om Me.  
34. Whatever mystic perfections can be achieved by good birth, herbs, austerities and mantras can all be 
achieved by devotional service to Me; indeed, one cannot achieve the actual perfection of yoga by any other 
means.  
35. My dear Uddhava, I am the  cause, the protector and the Lord of all mystic perfections, of the yoga 
system, of analytic knowledge, of pure activity and of the community of learned Vedic teachers.  
36. Just as the same material elements exist within and outside of all material bodies , similarly, I cannot be 
covered by anything else. I exist within everything as the Supersoul and outside of everything in My all -
pervading feature.  
Chapter Sixteen The Lord’s Opulence  
1. Sri Uddhava said: My dear Lord, You are beginningless and endless, t he Absolute Truth Himself, 
unlimited by anything else. You are the protector and life -giver, the destruction and creation of all things 
that exist.  
2. My dear Lord, although it is difficult for the impious to understand that You are situated in all superio r 
and inferior creations, those brahmanas who are actual knowers of the Vedic conclusion worship You in 
truth.  
3. Please tell me of the perfections that great sages achieve by worshiping You with devotion. Also, kindly 
explain which of Your different forms  they worship.  
4. O my Lord, maintainer of all, although You are the Supersoul of the living entities, You remain hidden. 
Thus being bewildered by You, the living entities cannot see You, although You are seeing them.  
5. O supremely potent Lord, please exp lain to me Your innumerable potencies, which You manifest on the 
earth, in heaven, in hell and indeed in all directions. I offer my humble obeisances at Your lotus feet, which 
are the shelter of all holy places.  
6. The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: O best of those who know how to inquire, on the Battlefield 
of Kuruksetra, Arjuna, desiring to fight with his rivals, asked Me the same question that you are now posing.  
7. On the Battlefield of Kuruksetra Arjuna thought that killing his relatives would be  an abominable, 
irreligious activity, motivated only by his desire to acquire a kingdom. He therefore desisted from the battle, 
thinking, “I would be the killer of my relatives. They would be destroyed.” Thus Arjuna was afflicted with 
mundane consciousness . 
8. At that time I enlightened Arjuna, the tiger among men, with logical arguments, and thus in the front of 
the battle Arjuna addressed Me with questions in the same way that you are now inquiring.  9. My dear Uddhava, I am the Supersoul of all living ent ities, and therefore I am naturally their well -wisher 
and supreme controller. Being the creator, maintainer and annihilator of all entities, I am not different from 
them.  
10. I am the ultimate goal of all those seeking progress, and I am time among those w ho exert control. I am 
the equilibrium of the modes of material nature, and I am natural virtue among the pious.  
11. Among things possessing qualities I am the primary manifestation of nature, and among great things I 
am the total material creation. Among subtle things I am the spirit soul, and of things that are difficult to 
conquer I am the mind.  
12. Among the Vedas I am their original teacher, Lord Brahma, and of all mantras I am the three -lettered 
omkara. Among letters I am the first letter, ”a,” and am ong sacred meters I am the Gayatri mantra.  
13. Among the demigods I am Indra, and among the Vasus I am Agni, the god of fire. I am Visnu among 
the sons of Aditi, and among the Rudras I am Lord Siva.  
14. Among saintly brahmanas I am Bhrgu Muni, and I am Man u among saintly kings. I am Narada Muni 
among saintly demigods, and I am Kamadhenu among cows.  
15. I am Lord Kapila among perfected beings and Garuda among birds. I am Daksa among the progenitors 
of mankind, and I am Aryama among the forefathers.  
16. My dear Uddhava, among the demoniac sons of Diti know Me to be Prahlada Maharaja, the saintly lord 
of the asuras. Among the stars and herbs I am their lord, Candra (the moon), and among Yaksas and 
Raksasas I am the lord of wealth, Kuvera.  
17. I am Airavata  among lordly elephants, and among aquatics I am Varuna, the lord of the seas. Among all 
things that heat and illuminate I am the sun, and among human beings I am the king.  
18. Among horses I am Uccaihsrava, and I am gold among metals. I am Yamaraja among those who 
suppress and punish, and among serpents I am Vasuki.  
19. O sinless Uddhava, among the best of snakes I am Anantadeva, and among those animals with sharp 
horns and teeth I am the lion. Among the social orders I am the fourth, or the renounced orde r of life, and 
among the occupational divisions I am the first, the brahmanas.  
20. Among sacred and flowing things I am the holy Ganges, and among steady bodies of water I am the 
ocean. Among weapons I am the bow, and of the wielders of weapons I am Lord S iva. 
21. Among residences I am Mount Sumeru, and of impervious places I am the Himalayas. Among trees I 
am the holy fig tree, and among plants I am those that bear grains.  
22. Among priests I am Vasistha Muni, and among those highly situated in Vedic cultu re I am Brhaspati. I 
am Kartikeya among great military leaders, and among those advancing in superior ways of life I am the 
great personality Lord Brahma.  
23. Among sacrifices I am study of the Veda, and I am nonviolence among vows. Among all things that 
purify I am the wind, fire, the sun, water and speech.  
24. Among the eight progressive states of yoga I am the final stage, samadhi, in which the soul is 
completely separated from illusion. Among those desiring victory I am prudent political counsel, and am ong 
processes of expert discrimination I am the science of the soul, by which one distinguishes spirit from 
matter. Among all speculative philosophers I am diversity of perception.  25. Among ladies I am Satarupa, and among male personalities I am her husba nd, Svayambhuva Manu. I 
am Narayana among the sages and Sanat -kumara among brahmacaris.  
26. Among religious principles I am renunciation, and of all types of security I am consciousness of the 
eternal soul within. Of secrets I am pleasant speech and silenc e, and among sexual pairs I am Brahma.  
27. Among the vigilant cycles of time I am the year, and among seasons I am spring. Among months I am 
Margasirsa, and among lunar houses I am the auspicious Abhijit.  
28. Among ages I am the Satya -yuga, the age of truth, and among steady sages I am Devala and Asita. 
Among those who have divided the Vedas I am Krsna Dvaipayana Vedavyasa, and among learned scholars 
I am Sukracarya, the knower of spiritual science.  
29. Among t hose entitled to the name Bhagavan I am Vasudeva, and indeed, you, Uddhava, represent Me 
among the devotees. I am Hanuman among the Kimpurusas, and among the Vidyadharas I am Sudarsana.  
30. Among jewels I am the ruby, and among beautiful things I am the lo tus cup. Among all types of grass I 
am the sacred kusa, and of oblations I am ghee and other ingredients obtained from the cow.  
31. Among the enterprising I am fortune, and among the cheaters I am gambling. I am the forgiveness of the 
tolerant and the good  qualities of those in the mode of goodness.  
32. Of the powerful I bodily and mental strength, and I am the devotional activities of My devotees. My 
devotees worship Me in nine different forms, among which I am the original and primary Vasudeva.  
33. Among the Gandharvas I am Visvavasu, and I am Purvacitti among the heavenly Apsaras. I am the 
steadiness of mountains and the fragrant aroma of the earth.  
34. I am the sweet taste of water, and among brilliant things I am the sun. I am the effulgence of the sun,  
moon and stars, and I am the transcendental sound that vibrates in the sky.  
35. Among those dedicated to brahminical culture I am Bali Maharaja, the son of Virocana, and I am Arjuna 
among heroes. Indeed, I am the creation, maintenance and annihilation of all living entities.  
36. I am the functions of the five working senses —the legs, speech, anus, hands and sex organs —as well as 
those of the five knowledge -acquiring senses —touch, sight, taste, hearing and smell. I am also the potency 
by which each of the s enses experiences its particular sense object.  
37. I am form, taste, aroma, touch and sound; false ego; the mahat -tattva; earth, water, fire, air and sky; the 
living entity; material nature; the modes of goodness, passion and ignorance; and the transcenden tal Lord. 
All these items, along with knowledge of their individual symptoms and the steady conviction that results 
from this knowledge, represent Me.  
38. As the Supreme Lord I am the basis of the living entity, of the modes of nature and of the mahat -tattva. 
Thus I am everything, and nothing whatsoever can exist without Me.  
39. Even though over a period of time I might count all the atoms of the universe, I could not count all of 
My opulences which I manifest within innumerable universes.  
40. Whatever powe r, beauty, fame, opulence, humility, renunciation, mental pleasure, fortune, strength, 
tolerance or spiritual knowledge there may be is simply an expansion of My opulence.  
41. I have briefly described to you all My spiritual opulences and also the extraord inary material features of 
My creation, which are perceived by the mind and defined in different ways according to circumstances.  42. Therefore, control your speaking, subdue the mind, conquer the life air, regulate the senses and through 
purified intelligence bring your rational faculties under control. In this way you will never again fall onto the 
path of material existence.  
43. A transcendentalist who does not completely control his words and mind by supe rior intelligence will 
find that his spiritual vows, austerities and charity flow away just as water flows out of an unbaked clay pot.  
44. Being surrendered to Me, one should control the speech, mind and life air, and then through loving 
devotional intelli gence one will completely fulfill the mission of life.  
Chapter Seventeen Lord Krsna’s Description of the Varnasrama System  
1-2. Sri Uddhava said: My dear Lord, previously You described the principles of devotional service that are 
to be practiced by follow ers of the varnasrama system and even ordinary, unregulated human beings. My 
dear lotus -eyed Lord, now please explain to me how all human beings can achieve loving service unto You 
by the execution of their prescribed duties.  
3-4. My dear Lord, O mighty -armed one, previously in Your form of Lord Hamsa You spoke to Lord 
Brahma those religious principles that bring supreme happiness to the practitioner. My dear Madhava, now 
much time has passed, and that which You previously instructed will soon practically c ease to exist, O 
subduer of the enemy.  
5-6. My dear Lord Acyuta, there is no speaker, creator and protector of supreme religious principles other 
than Your Lordship, either on the earth or even in the assembly of Lord Brahma, where the personified 
Vedas re side. Thus, my dear Lord Madhusudana, when You, who are the very creator, protector and speaker 
of spiritual knowledge, abandon the earth, who will again speak this lost knowledge?  
7. Therefore, my Lord, since You are the knower of all religious principles , please describe to me the human 
beings who may execute the path of loving service to You and how such service is to be rendered.  
8. Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said: Sri Uddhava, the best of devotees, thus inquired from the Lord. Hearing his 
question, the Perso nality of Godhead, Sri Krsna, was pleased and for the welfare of all conditioned souls 
spoke those religious principles that are eternal.  
9. The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Uddhava, your question is faithful to religious 
principles and thu s gives rise to the highest perfection in life, pure devotional service, for both ordinary 
human beings and the followers of the varnasrama system. Now please learn from Me those supreme 
religious principles.  
10. In the beginning, in Satya -yuga, there is o nly one social class, called hamsa, to which all human beings 
belong. In that age all people are unalloyed devotees of the Lord from birth, and thus learned scholars call 
this first age Krta -yuga, or the age in which all religious duties are perfectly fulf illed. 
11. In Satya -yuga the undivided Veda is expressed by the syllable om, and I am the only object of mental 
activities. I become manifest as the four -legged bull of religion, and thus the inhabitants of Satya -yuga, 
fixed in austerity and free from all sins, worship Me as Lord Hamsa.  
12. O greatly fortunate one, at the beginning of Treta -yuga Vedic knowledge appeared from My heart, 
which is the abode of the air of life, in three divisions —as Rg, Sama and Yajur. Then from that knowledge I 
appeared as thre efold sacrifice.  
13. In Treta -yuga the four social orders were manifested from the universal form of the Personality of 
Godhead. The brahmanas appeared from the Lord’s face, the ksatriyas from the Lord’s arms, the vaisyas 
from the Lord’s thighs and the sud ras from the legs of that mighty form. Each social division was 
recognized by its particular duties and behavior.  14. The married order of life appeared from the loins of My universal form, and the celibate students came 
from My heart. The forest -dwelling retired order of life appeared from My chest, and the renounced order of 
life was situated within the head of My universal form.  
15. The various occupational and social divisions of human society appeared according to inferior and 
superior natures manifest  in the situation of the individual’s birth.  
16. Peacefulness, self -control, austerity, cleanliness, satisfaction, tolerance, simple straightforwardness, 
devotion to Me, mercy and truthfulness are the natural qualities of the brahmanas.  
17. Dynamic power, bodily strength, determination, heroism, tolerance, generosity, great endeavor, 
steadiness, devotion to the brahmanas and leadership are the natural qualities of the ksatriyas.  
18. Faith in Vedic civilization, dedication to charity, freedom from hypocrisy,  service to the brahmanas and 
perpetually desiring to accumulate more money are the natural qualities of the vaisyas.  
19. Service without duplicity to the brahmanas, cows, demigods and other worshipable personalities, and 
complete satisfaction with whateve r income is obtained in such service, are the natural qualities of sudras.  
20. Dirtiness, dishonesty, thievery, faithlessness, useless quarrel, lust, anger and hankering constitute the 
nature of those in the lowest position outside the vanasrama system.  
21. Nonviolence, truthfulness, honesty, desire for the happiness and welfare of all others and freedom from 
lust, anger and greed constitute duties for all members of society.  
22. The twice -born member of society achieves second birth through the sequence of  purificatory 
ceremonies culminating in Gayatri initiation. Being summoned by the spiritual master, he should reside 
within the guru’s asrama and with a self -controlled mind carefully study the Vedic literature.  
23. The brahmacari should regularly dress wi th a belt of straw and deerskin garments. He should wear 
matted hair, carry a rod and waterpot and be decorated with akña beads and a sacred thread. Carrying pure 
kusa grass in his hand, he should never accept a luxurious or sensuous sitting place. He shou ld not 
unnecessarily polish his teeth, nor should he bleach and iron his clothes.  
24. A brahmacari should always remain silent while bathing, eating, attending sacrificial performances, 
chanting japa or passing stool and urine. He should not cut his nails and hair, including the armpit and pubic 
hair. 
25. One observing the vow of celibate brahmacari life should never pass semen. If the semen by chance 
spills out by itself, the brahmacari should immediately take bath in water, control his b reath by pranayama 
and chant the Gayatri mantra.  
26. Purified and fixed in consciousness, the brahmacari should worship the fire -god, sun, acarya, cows, 
brahmanas, guru, elderly respectable persons and demigods. He should perform such worship at sunrise an d 
sunset, without speaking but by silently chanting or murmuring the appropriate mantras.  
27. One should know the acarya as Myself and never disrespect him in any way. One should not envy him, 
thinking him an ordinary man, for he is the representative of a ll the demigods.  
28. In the morning and evening one should collect foodstuffs and other articles and deliver them to the 
spiritual master. Then, being self -controlled, one should accept for oneself that which is allotted by the 
acarya.  29. While engaged in serving the spiritual master one should remain as a humble servant, and thus when the 
guru is walking the servant should humbly walk behind. When the guru lies down to sleep, the servant 
should also lie down nearby, and when the guru has a wakened, the servant should sit near him, massaging 
his lotus feet and rendering other, similar services. When the guru is sitting down on his asana, the servant 
should stand nearby with folded hands, awaiting the guru’s order. In this way one should alway s worship 
the spiritual master.  
30. Until the student has completed his Vedic education he should remain engaged in the asrama of the 
spiritual master, should remain completely free of material sense gratification and should not break his vow 
of celibacy [ brahmacarya].  
31. If the brahmacari student desires to ascend to the Maharloka or Brahmaloka planets, then he should 
completely surrender his activities to the spiritual master and, observing the powerful vow of perpetual 
celibacy, dedicate himself to supe rior Vedic studies.  
32. Thus enlightened in Vedic knowledge by service to the spiritual master, freed from all sins and duality, 
one should worship Me as the Supersoul, as I appear within fire, the spiritual master, one’s own self and all 
living entities.  
33. Those who are not married —sannyasis, vanaprasthas and brahmacaris —should never associate with 
women by glancing, touching, conversing, joking or sporting. Neither should they ever associate with any 
living entity engaged in sexual activities.  
34-35. My  dear Uddhava, general cleanliness, washing the hands, bathing, performing religious services at 
sunrise, noon and sunset, worshiping Me, visiting holy places, chanting japa, avoiding that which is 
untouchable, uneatable or not to be discussed, and remembe ring My existence within all living entities as 
the Supersoul —these principles should be followed by all members of society through regulation of the 
mind, words and body.  
36. A brahmana observing the great vow of celibacy becomes brilliant like fire and b y serious austerity 
burns to ashes the propensity to perform material activities. Free from the contamination of material desire, 
he becomes My devotee.  
37. A brahmacari who has completed his Vedic education and desires to enter household life should offer  
proper remuneration to the spiritual master, bathe, cut his hair, put on proper clothes, and so on. Then, 
taking permission from the guru, he should go back to his home.  
38. A brahmacari desiring to fulfill his material desires should live at home with hi s family, and a 
householder who is eager to purify his consciousness should enter the forest, whereas a purified brahmana 
should accept the renounced order of life. One who is not surrendered to Me should move progressively 
from one asrama to another, neve r acting otherwise.  
39. One who desires to establish family life should marry a wife of his own caste, who is beyond reproach 
and younger in age. If one desires to accept many wives he must marry them after the first marriage, and 
each wife should be of a successively lower caste.  
40. All twice -born men —brahmanas, ksatriyas and vaisyas —must perform sacrifice, study the Vedic 
literature and give charity. Only the brahmanas, however, accept charity, teach the Vedic knowledge and 
perform sacrifice on behalf of  others.  
41. A brahmana who considers that accepting charity from others will destroy his austerity, spiritual 
influence and fame should maintain himself by the other two brahminical occupations, namely teaching 
Vedic knowledge and performing sacrifice. If  the brahmana considers that those two occupations also 
compromise his spiritual position, then he should collect rejected grains in agricultural fields and live 
without any dependence on others.  42. The body of a brahmana is not intended to enjoy insignif icant material sense gratification; rather, by 
accepting difficult austerities in his life, a brahmana will enjoy unlimited happiness after death.  
43. A brahmana householder should remain satisfied in mind by gleaning rejected grains from agricultural 
fields and marketplaces. Keeping himself free of personal desire, he should practice magnanimous religious 
principles, with consciousness absorbed in Me. In this way a brahmana may stay at home as a householder 
without very much attachment and thus achieve lib eration.  
44. Just as a ship rescues those who have fallen into the ocean, similarly, I very quickly rescue from all 
calamities those persons who uplift brahmanas and devotees suffering in a poverty -stricken condition.  
45. Just as the chief bull elephant pr otects all other elephants in his herd and defends himself as well, 
similarly, a fearless king, just like a father, must save all of the citizens from difficulty and also protect 
himself.  
46. An earthly king who protects himself and all citizens by removin g all sins from his kingdom will 
certainly enjoy with Lord Indra in airplanes as brilliant as the sun.  
47. If a brahmana cannot support himself through his regular duties and is thus suffering, he may adopt the 
occupation of a merchant and overcome his des titute condition by buying and selling material things. If he 
continues to suffer extreme poverty even as a merchant, then he may adopt the occupation of a ksatriya, 
taking sword in hand. But he cannot in any circumstances become like a dog, accepting an o rdinary master.  
48. A king or other member of the royal order who cannot maintain himself by his normal occupation may 
act as a vaisya, may live by hunting or may act as a brahmana by teaching others Vedic knowledge. But he 
may not under any circumstances adopt the profession of a sudra.  
49. A vaisya, or mercantile man, who cannot maintain himself may adopt the occupation of a sudra, snd a 
sudra who cannot find a master can engage in simple activities like making baskets and mats of straw. 
However, all memb ers of society who have adopted inferior occupations in emergency situations must give 
up those substitute occupations when the difficulties have passed.  
50. One in the grhastha order of life should daily worship the sages by Vedic study, the forefathers b y 
offering the mantra svadha, the demigods by chanting svaha, all living entities by offering shares of one’s 
meals, and human beings by offering grains and water. Thus considering the demigods, sages, forefathers, 
living entities and human beings to be ma nifestations of My potency, one should daily perform these five 
sacrifices.  
51. A householder should comfortably maintain his dependents either with money that comes of its own 
accord or with that gathered by honest execution of one’s duties. According to one’s means, one should 
perform sacrifices and other religious ceremonies.  
52. A householder taking care of many dependent family members should not become materially attached to 
them, nor should he become mentally unbalanced, consider ing himself to be the lord. An intelligent 
householder should see that all possible future happiness, just like that which he has already experienced, is 
temporary.  
53. The association of children, wife, relatives and friends is just like the brief meeting  of travelers. With 
each change of body one is separated from all such associates, just as one loses the objects one possesses in 
a dream when the dream is over.  
54. Deeply considering the actual situation, a liberated soul should live at home just like a guest, without 
any sense of proprietorship or false ego. In this way he will not be bound or entangled by domestic affairs.  55. A householder devotee who worships Me by execution of his family duties may remain at home, go to a 
holy place or, if he has a r esponsible son, take sannyasa.  
56. But a householder whose mind is attached to his home and who is thus disturbed by ardent desires to 
enjoy his money and children, who is lusty after women, who is possessed of a miserly mentality and who 
unintelligently t hinks, ”Everything is mine and I am everything,” is certainly bound in illusion.  
57. ”O my poor elderly parents, and my wife with a mere infant in her arms, and my other young children! 
Without me they have absolutely no one to protect them and will suffer  unbearably. How can my poor 
relatives possibly live without me?”  
58. Thus, because of his foolish mentality, a householder whose heart is overwhelmed by family attachment 
is never satisfied. Constantly meditating on his relatives, he dies and enters into the darkness of ignorance.  
Chapter Eighteen Description of Varnasrama -dharma 
1. The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: One who desires to adopt the third order of life, vanaprastha, 
should enter the forest with a peaceful mind, leaving his wife with his mature sons, or else taking her along 
with him.  
2. Having adopted the vanaprastha order of life, one should arrange one’s sustenance by eating 
uncontaminated bulbs, roots and fruits that grow in the forest. One may dress oneself with tree bark, grass, 
leaves or animal skins.  
3. The vanaprastha should not groom the hair on his head, body or face, should not manicure his nails, 
should not pass stool and urine at irregular times and should not make a special endeavor for dental hygiene. 
He should be content to  take bath in water three times daily and should sleep on the ground.  
4. Thus engaged as a vanaprastha, one should execute penance during the hottest summer days by subjecting 
oneself to burning fires on four sides and the blazing sun overhead; during the rainy season one should 
remain outside, subjecting oneself to torrents of rain; and in the freezing winter one should remain 
submerged in water up to one’s neck.  
5. One may eat foodstuffs prepared with fire, such as grains, or fruits ripened by time. One m ay grind one’s 
food with mortar and stone or with one’s own teeth.  
6. The vanaprastha should personally collect whatever he requires for his bodily maintenance, carefully 
considering the time, place and his own capacity. He should never collect provisions for the future.  
7. One who has accepted the vanaprastha order of life should perform seasonal sacrifices by offering 
oblations of caru and sacrificial cakes prepared from rice and other grains found in the forest. The 
vanaprastha, however, may never offer animal sacrifices to Me, even those sacrifices mentioned in the 
Vedas.  
8. The vanaprastha should perform the agnihotra, darsa and paurnamasa sacrifices, as he did while in the 
grhastha -asrama. He should also perform the vows and sacrifices of caturmasya, s ince all of these rituals are 
enjoined for the vanaprastha -asrama by expert knowers of the Vedas.  
9. The saintly vanaprastha, practicing severe penances and accepting only the bare necessities of life, 
becomes so emaciated that he appears to be mere skin a nd bones. Thus worshiping Me through severe 
penances, he goes to the Maharloka planet and then directly achieves Me.  
10. One who with long endeavor executes this painful but exalted penance, which awards ultimate 
liberation, simply to achieve insignificant  sense gratification must be considered the greatest fool.  11. If the vanaprastha is overtaken by old age and because of his trembling body is no longer able to execute 
his prescribed duties, he should place the sacrificial fire within his heart by meditat ion. Then, fixing his 
mind on Me, he should enter into the fire and give up his body.  
12. If the vanaprastha, understanding that even promotion to Brahmaloka is a miserable situation, develops 
complete detachment from all possible results of fruitive activ ities, then he may take the sannyasa order of 
life. 
13. Having worshiped Me according to scriptural injunctions and having given all one’s property to the 
sacrificial priest, one should place the fire sacrifice within oneself. Thus, with the mind completel y 
detached, one should enter the sannyasa order of life.  
14. ”This man taking sannyasa is going to surpass us and go back home, back to Godhead.” Thus thinking, 
the demigods create stumbling blocks on the path of the sannyasi by appearing before him in the shape of 
his former wife or other women and attractive objects. But the s sannyasi should pay the demigods and their 
manifestations no heed.  
15. If the sannyasi desires to wear something besides a mere kaupina, he ma y use another cloth around his 
waist and hips to cover the kaupina. Otherwise, if there is no emergency, he should not accept anything 
besides his danda and waterpot.  
16. A saintly person should step or place his foot on the ground only after verifying with his eyes that there 
are no living creatures, such as insects, who might be injured by his foot. He should drink water only after 
filtering it through a portion of his cloth, and he should speak only words that possess the purity of truth. 
Similarly, he should perform only those activities his mind has carefully ascertained to be pure.  
17. One who has not accepted the three internal disciplines of avoiding useless speech, avoiding useless 
activities and controlling the life air can never be co nsidered a sannyasi merely because of his carrying 
bamboo rods.  
18. Rejecting those houses that are polluted and untouchable, one should approach without previous 
calculation seven houses and be satisfied with that which is obtained there by begging. Accor ding to 
necessity, one may approach each of the four occupational orders of society.  
19. Taking the food gathered through begging, one should leave the populated areas and go to a reservoir of 
water in a secluded place. There, having taken a bath and washe d one’s hands thoroughly, one should 
distribute portions of the food to others who may request it. One should do this without speaking. Then, 
having thoroughly cleansed the remnants, one should eat everything on one’s plate, leaving nothing for 
future cons umption.  
20. Without any material attachment, with senses fully controlled, remaining enthusiastic, and satisfied in 
realization of the Supreme Lord and his own self, the saintly person should travel about the earth alone. 
Having equal vision everywhere, h e should be steady on the spiritual platform.  
21. Dwelling in a safe and solitary place, his mind purified by constant thought of Me, the sage should 
concentrate on the soul alone, realizing it to be nondifferent from Me.  
22. By steady knowledge a sage sho uld clearly ascertain the nature of the soul’s bondage and liberation. 
Bondage occurs when the senses are deviated to sense gratification, and complete control of the senses 
constitutes liberation.  
23. Therefore, completely controlling the five senses and the mind by Krsna consciousness, a sage, having 
experienced spiritual bliss within the self, should live detached from insignificant material sense 
gratification.  24. The sage should travel in sanctified places, by flowing rivers and within the solitude of  mountains and 
forests. He should enter the cities, towns and pasturing grounds and approach ordinary working men only to 
beg his bare sustenance.  
25. One in the vanaprastha order of life should always practice taking charity from others, for one is thereb y 
freed from illusion and quickly becomes perfect in spiritual life. Indeed, one who subsists on food grains 
obtained in such a humble manner purifies his existence.  
26. One should never see as ultimate reality those material things which obviously will pe rish. With 
consciousness free from material attachment, one should retire from all activities meant for material 
progress in this life and the next.  
27. One should logically consider the universe, which is situated within the Lord, and one’s own material 
body, which is composed of mind, speech and life air, to be ultimately products of the Lord’s illusory 
energy. Thus situated in the self, one should give up one’s faith in these things and should never again make 
them the object of one’s meditation.  
28. A l earned transcendentalist dedicated to the cultivation of knowledge and thus detached from external 
objects, or My devotee who is detached even from desire for liberation —both neglect those duties based on 
external rituals or paraphernalia. Thus their condu ct is beyond the range of rules and regulations.  
29. Although most wise, the paramahamsa should enjoy life like a child, oblivious to honor and dishonor; 
although most expert, he should behave like a stunted, incompetent person; although most learned, he 
should speak like an insane person; and although a scholar learned in Vedic regulations, he should behave in 
an unrestricted manner.  
30. A devotee should never engage in the fruitive rituals mentioned in the karma -kanda section of the 
Vedas, nor should he b ecome atheistic, acting or speaking in opposition to Vedic injunctions. Similarly, he 
should never speak like a mere logician or skeptic or take any side whatsoever in useless arguments.  
31. A saintly person should never let others frighten or disturb him and, similarly, should never frighten or 
disturb other people. He should tolerate the insults of others and should never himself belittle anyone. He 
should never create hostility with anyone for the sake of the material body, for he would thus be no better  
than an animal.  
32. The one Supreme Lord is situated within all material bodies and within everyone’s soul. Just as the 
moon is reflected in innumerable reservoirs of water, the Supreme Lord, although one, is present within 
everyone. Thus every material b ody is ultimately composed of the energy of the one Supreme Lord.  
33. If at times one does not obtain proper food one should not be depressed, and when one obtains 
sumptuous food one should not rejoice. Being fixed in determination, one should understand b oth situations 
to be under the control of God.  
34. If required, one should endeavor to get sufficient foodstuffs, because it is always necessary and proper to 
maintain one’s health. When the senses, mind and life air are fit, one can contemplate spiritual truth, and by 
understanding the truth one is liberated.  
35. A sage should accept the food, clothing and bedding —be they of excellent or inferior quality —that 
come of their own accord.  
36. Just as I, the Supreme Lord, execute regulative duties by My own fre e will, similarly, one who has 
realized knowledge of Me should maintain general cleanliness, purify his hands with water, take bath and 
execute other regulative duties not by force but by his own free will.  37. A realized soul no longer sees anything as se parate from Me, for his realized knowledge of Me has 
destroyed such illusory perception. Since the material body and mind were previously accustomed to this 
kind of perception, it may sometimes appear to recur; but at the time of death the self -realized so ul achieves 
opulences equal to Mine.  
38. One who is detached from sense gratification, knowing its result to be miserable, and who desires 
spiritual perfection, but who has not seriously analyzed the process for obtaining Me, should approach a 
bona fide an d learned spiritual master.  
39. Until a devotee has clearly realized spiritual knowledge, he should continue with great faith and respect 
and without envy to render personal service to the guru, who is nondifferent from Me.  
40-41. One who has not controlle d the six forms of illusion [lust, anger, greed, excitement, false pride and 
intoxication], whose intelligence, the leader of the senses, is extremely attached to material things, who is 
bereft of knowledge and detachment, who adopts the sannyasa order of life to make a living, who denies the 
worshipable demigods, his own self and the Supreme Lord within himself, thus ruining all religious 
principles, and who is still infected by material contamination, is deviated and lost both in this life and the 
next. 
42. The main religious duties of a sannyasi are equanimity and nonviolence, whereas for the vanaprastha 
austerity and philosophical understanding of the difference between the body and soul are prominent. The 
main duties of a householder are to give shelter  to all living entities and perform sacrifices, and the 
brahmacari is mainly engaged in serving the spiritual master.  
43. A householder may approach his wife for sex only at the time prescribed for begetting children. 
Otherwise, the householder should practice celibacy, austerity, cleanliness of mind and body, satisfaction in 
his natural position, and friendship toward all living entities. Worship of Me is to be practiced by all human 
beings, regardl ess of social or occupational divisions.  
44. One who worships Me by his prescribed duty, having no other object of worship, and who remains 
conscious of Me as present in all living entities, achieves unflinching devotional service unto Me.  
45. My dear Uddh ava, I am the Supreme Lord of all worlds, and I create and destroy this universe, being its 
ultimate cause. I am thus the Absolute Truth, and one who worships Me with unfailing devotional service 
comes to Me.  
46. Thus, one who has purified his existence by  execution of his prescribed duties, who fully understands 
My supreme position and who is endowed with scriptural and realized knowledge, very soon achieves Me.  
47. Those who are followers of this varnasrama system accept religious principles according to authorized 
traditions of proper conduct. When such varnasrama duties are dedicated to Me in loving service, they 
award the supreme perfection of life.  
48. My dear saintly Uddhava, I have now described to you, just as you inquired, the means by which My 
devotee, perfectly engaged in his prescribed duty, can come back to Me, the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead.  
Chapter Nineteen The Perfection of Spiritual Knowledge  
1. The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: A self -realized person who has cultivated scriptural  
knowledge up to the point of enlightenment and who is free from impersonal speculation, understanding the 
material universe to be simply illusion, should surrender unto Me both that knowledge and the means by 
which he achieved it.  2. For learned, self -realized philosophers I am the only object of worship, the desired goal of life, the means 
for achieving that goal, and the settled conclusion of all knowledge. Indeed, because I am the cause of their 
happiness and their freedom from unhappiness, such learned  souls have no effective purpose or dear object 
in life except Me.  
3. Those who have achieved complete perfection through philosophical and realized knowledge recognize 
My lotus feet to be the supreme transcendental object. Thus the learned transcendentali st is most dear to Me, 
and by his perfect knowledge he maintains Me in happiness.  
4. That perfection which is produced by a small fraction of spiritual knowledge cannot be duplicated by 
performing austerities, visiting holy places, chanting silent prayers,  giving in charity or engaging in other 
pious activities.  
5. Therefore, My dear Uddhava, through knowledge you should understand your actual self. Then, 
advancing by clear realization of Vedic knowledge, you should bworship Me in the mood of loving 
devotio n. 
6. Formerly, great sages, through the sacrifice of Vedic knowledge and spiritual enlightenment, worshiped 
Me within themselves, knowing Me to be the Supreme Lord of all sacrifice and the Supersoul in everyone’s 
heart. Thus coming to Me, these sages achi eved the supreme perfection.  
7. My dear Uddhava, the material body and mind, composed of the three modes of material nature, attach 
themselves to you, but they are actually illusion, since they appear only at the present, having no original or 
ultimate exi stence. How is it possible, therefore, that the various stages of the body, namely birth, growth, 
reproduction, maintenance, dwindling and death, can have any relation to your eternal self? These phases 
relate only to the material body, which previously di d not exist and ultimately will not exist. The body exists 
merely at the present moment.  
8. Sri Uddhava said: O Lord of the universe! O form of the universe! Please explain to me that process of 
knowledge which automatically brings detachment and direct pe rception of the truth, which is 
transcendental, and which is traditional among great spiritual philosophers. This knowledge, sought by 
elevated personalities, describes loving devotional service unto Your Lordship.  
9. My dear Lord, for one who is being tormented on the terrible path of birth and death and is constantly 
overwhelmed by the threefold miseries, I do not see any possible shelter other than Your two lotus feet, 
which are just like a refreshing umbrella that p ours down showers of delicious nectar.  
10. O almighty Lord, please be merciful and uplift this hopeless living entity who has fallen into the dark 
hole of material existence, where the snake of time has bitten him. In spite of such abominable conditions, 
this poor living entity has tremendous desire to relish the most insignificant material happiness. Please save 
me, my Lord, by pouring down the nectar of Your instructions, which awaken one to spiritual freedom.  
11. The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Uddhava, just as you are now inquiring from Me, 
similarly, in the past King Yudhisthira, who considered no one his enemy, inquired from the greatest of the 
upholders of religious principles, Bhisma, while all of us were carefully listening.  
12. Whe n the great Battle of Kuruksetra had ended, King Yudhisthira was overwhelmed by the death of 
many beloved well -wishers, and thus, after listening to instructions about many religious principles, he 
finally inquired about the path of liberation.  
13. I will now speak unto you those religious principles of Vedic knowledge, detachment, self -realization, 
faith and devotional service that were heard directly from the mouth of Bhismadeva.  
14. I personally approve of that knowledge by which one sees the combination  of nine, eleven, five and 
three elements in all living entities, and ultimately one element within those twenty -eight.  15. When one no longer sees the twenty -eight separated material elements, which arise from a single cause, 
but rather sees the cause its elf, the Personality of Godhead —at that time one’s direct experience is called 
vijnana, or self -realization.  
16. Commencement, termination and maintenance are the stages of material causation. That which 
consistently accompanies all these material phases f rom one creation to another and remains alone when all 
material phases are annihilated is the one eternal.  
17. From the four types of evidence —Vedic knowledge, direct experience, traditional wisdom and logical 
induction —one can understand the temporary, in substantial situation of the material world, by which one 
becomes detached from the duality of this world.  
18. An intelligent person should see that any material activity is subject to constant transformation and that 
even on the planet of Lord Brahma there is thus simply unhappiness. Indeed, a wise man can understand that 
just as all that he has seen is temporary, similarly, all things within the universe have a beginning and an 
end. 
19. O sinless Uddhava, because you love Me, I previously explained to you the process of devotional 
service. Now I will again explain the supreme process for achieving loving service unto Me.  
20-24. Firm faith in the blissful narration of My pastimes, consta nt chanting of My glories, unwavering 
attachment to ceremonial worship of Me, praising Me through beautiful hymns, great respect for My 
devotional service, offering obeisances with the entire body, performing first -class worship of My devotees, 
consciousne ss of Me in all living entities, offering of ordinary, bodily activities in My devotional service, 
use of words to describe My qualities, offering the mind to Me, rejection of all material desires, giving up 
wealth for My devotional service, renouncing mat erial sense gratification and happiness, and performing all 
desirable activities such as charity, sacrifice, chanting, vows and austerities with the purpose of achieving 
Me—these constitute actual religious principles, by which those human beings who have actually 
surrendered themselves to Me automatically develop love for Me. What other purpose or goal could remain 
for My devotee?  
25. When one’s peaceful consciousness, strengthened by the mode of goodness, is fixed on the Personality 
of Godhead, one achiev es religiosity, knowledge, detachment and opulence.  
26. When consciousness is fixed on the material body, home and other, similar objects of sense gratification, 
one spends one’s life chasing after material objects with the help of the senses. Consciousnes s, thus 
powerfully affected by the mode of passion, becomes dedicated to impermanent things, and in this way 
irreligion, ignorance, attachment and wretchedness arise.  
27. Actual religious principles are stated to be those that lead one to My devotional ser vice. Real knowledge 
is the awareness that reveals My all -pervading presence. Detachment is complete disinterest in the objects of 
material sense gratification, and opulence is the eight mystic perfection, such as anima -siddhi.  
28-32. Sri Uddhava said: My dear Lord Krsna, O chastiser of the enemies, please tell me how many types of 
disciplinary regulations and regular daily duties there are. Also, my Lord, tell me what is mental 
equilibrium, what is self -control, and what is the actual meaning of tolerance and steadfastness. What are 
charity, austerity and heroism, and how are reality and truth to he described? What is renunciation, and what 
is wealth? What is desirable, what is sacrifice, and what is religious remuneration? My dear Kesava, O most 
fortunate one, how am I to understand the strength, opulence and profit of a particular person? What is the 
best education, what is actual humility, and what is real beauty? What are happiness and unhappiness? Who 
is learned, and who is a fool? What are the true and  the false paths in life, and what are heaven and hell? 
Who is indeed a true friend, and what is one’s real home? Who is a rich man, and who is a poor man? Who 
is wretched, and who is an actual controller? O Lord of the devotees, kindly explain these matte rs to me, 
along with their opposites.  33-35. The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Nonviolence, truthfulness, not coveting or stealing the 
property of others, detachment, humility, freedom from possessiveness, trust in the principles of religion, 
celiba cy, silence, steadiness, forgiveness and fearlessness are the twelve primary disciplinary principles. 
Internal cleanliness, external cleanliness, chanting the holy names of the Lord, austerity, sacrifice, faith, 
hospitality, worship of Me, visiting holy pl aces, acting and desiring only for the supreme interest, 
satisfaction, and service to the spiritual master are the twelve elements of regular prescribed duties. These 
twenty -four elements bestow all desired benedictions upon those persons who devotedly cul tivate them.  
36-39. Absorbing the intelligence in Me constitutes mental equilibrium, and complete discipline of the 
senses is self -control. Tolerance means patiently enduring unhappiness, and steadfastness occurs when one 
conquers the tongue and genitals. The greatest charity is to give up all aggression toward others, and 
renunciation of lust is understood to be real austerity. Real heroism is to conquer one’s natural tendency to 
enjoy material life, and reality is seeing the Supreme Personality of Godhead  everywhere. Truthfulness 
means to speak the truth in a pleasing way, as declared by great sages. Cleanliness is detachment in fruitive 
activities, whereas renunciation is the sannyasa order of life. The true desirable wealth for human beings is 
religiousn ess, and I, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, am sacrifice. Religious remuneration is devotion 
to the acarya with the purpose of acquiring spiritual instruction, and the greatest strength is the pranayama 
system of breath control.  
40-45. Actual opulence is My own nature as the Personality of Godhead, through which I exhibit the six 
unlimited opulences. The supreme gain in life is devotional service to Me, and actual education is nullifying 
the false perception of duality within the soul. Real modesty is t o be disgusted with improper activities, and 
beauty is to possess good qualities such as detachment. Real happiness is to transcend material happiness 
and unhappiness, and real misery is to be implicated in searching for sex pleasure. A wise man is one who  
knows the process of freedom from bondage, and a fool is one who identifies with his material body and 
mind. The real path in life is that which leads to Me, and the wrong path is sense gratification, by which 
consciousness is bewildered. Actual heaven is  the predominance of the mode of goodness, whereas hell is 
the predominance of ignorance. I am everyone’s true friend, acting as the spiritual master of the entire 
universe, and one’s home is the human body. My dear friend Uddhava, one who is enriched with  good 
qualities is actually said to be rich, and one who is unsatisfied in life is actually poor. A wretched person is 
one who cannot control his senses, whereas one who is not attached to sense gratification is a real controller. 
One who attaches himself to sense gratification is the opposite, a slave. Thus, Uddhava, I have elucidated all 
of the matters about which you inquired. There is no need for a more elaborate description of these good and 
bad qualities, since to constantly see good and bad is itself  a bad quality. The best quality is to transcend 
material good and evil.  
Chapter Twenty Pure Devotional Service Surpasses Knowledge and Detachment  
1. Sri Uddhava said: My dear lotus -eyed Krsna, You are the Supreme Lord, and thus the Vedic literatures, 
consisting of positive and negative injunctions, constitute Your order. Such literatures focus upon the good 
and bad qualities of work.  
2. According to Vedic literature, the superior and inferior varieties found in the human social system, 
varnasrama, are due to pious and sinful modes of family planning. Thus piety and sin are constant points of 
reference in the Vedic analysis of the components of a given situation —namely the material ingredients, 
place, age and time. Indeed, the Vedas reveal the existence of m aterial heaven and hell, which are certainly 
based on piety and sin.  
3. Without seeing the difference between piety and sin, how can one understand Your own instructions in 
the form of Vedic literatures, which order one to act piously and forbid one to act  sinfully? Furthermore, 
without such authorized Vedic literatures, which ultimately award liberation, how can human beings 
achieve the perfection of life?  
4. My dear Lord, in order to understand those things beyond direct experience —such as spiritual liber ation 
or attainment of heaven and other material enjoyments beyond our present capacity —and in general to 
understand the means and end of all things, the forefathers, demigods and human beings must consult the 
Vedic literatures, which are Your own laws, fo r these constitute the highest evidence and revelation.  5. My dear Lord, the distinction observed between piety and sin comes from Your own Vedic knowledge 
and does not arise by itself. If the same Vedic literature subsequently nullifies such distinction b etween piety 
and sin, there will certainly be confusion.  
6. The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Uddhava, because I desire that human beings may 
achieve perfection, I have presented three paths of advancement —the path of knowledge, the path of work 
and the path of devotion. Besides these three there is absolutely no other means of elevation.  
7. Among these three paths, jnana -yoga, the path of philosophical speculation, is recommended for those 
who are disgusted with material life and are thus de tached from ordinary, fruitive activities. Those who are 
not disgusted with material life, having many desires yet to fulfill, should seek perfection through the path 
of karma -yoga. 
8. If somehow or other by good fortune one develops faith in hearing and c hanting My glories, such a 
person, being neither very disgusted with nor attached to material life, should achieve perfection through the 
path of loving devotion to Me.  
9. As long as one is not satiated by fruitive activity and has not awakened his taste f or devotional service by 
sravanam kirtanam visnoh one has to act according to the regulative principles of the Vedic injunctions.  
10. My dear Uddhava, a person who is situated in his prescribed duty, properly worshiping by Vedic 
sacrifices but not desiring  the fruitive result of such worship, will not go to the heavenly planets; similarly, 
by not performing forbidden activities he will not go to hell.  
11. One who is situated in his prescribed duty, free from sinful activities and cleansed of material 
contam ination, in this very life obtains transcendental knowledge or, by fortune, devotional service unto Me.  
12. The residents of both heaven and hell desire human birth on the earth planet because human life 
facilitates the achievement of transcendental knowle dge and love of Godhead, whereas neither heavenly nor 
hellish bodies efficiently provide such opportunities.  
13. A human being who is wise should never desire promotion to heavenly planets or residence in hell. 
Indeed, a human being should also never desir e permanent residence on the earth, for by such absorption in 
the material body one becomes foolishly negligent of one’s actual self -interest.  
14. A wise person, knowing that although the material body is subject to death it can still award the 
perfection of one’s life, should not foolishly neglect to take advantage of this opportunity before death 
arrives.  
15. Without attachment, a bird gives up the tree in which his nest was constructed when that tree is cut down 
by cruel me n who are like death personified, and thus the bird achieves happiness in another place.  
16. Knowing that one’s duration of life is being similarly cut down by the passing of days and nights, one 
should be shaken by fear. In this way, giving up all materia l attachment and desire, one understands the 
Supreme Lord and achieves perfect peace.  
17. The human body, which can award all benefit in life, is automatically obtained by the laws of nature, 
although it is a very rare achievement. This human body can be c ompared to a perfectly constructed boat 
having the spiritual master as the captain and the instructions of the Personality of Godhead as favorable 
winds impelling it on its course. Considering all these advantages, a human being who does not utilize his 
human life to cross the ocean of material existence must be considered the killer of his own soul.  
18. A transcendentalist, having become disgusted and hopeless in all endeavors for material happiness, 
completely controls the senses and develops detachment. By spiritual practice he should then fix the mind 
on the spiritual platform without deviation.  19. Whenever the mind, being concentrated on the spiritual platform, is suddenly deviated from its spiritual 
position, one should carefully bring it under the co ntrol of the self by following the prescribed means.  
20. One should never lose sight of the actual goal of mental activities, but rather, conquering the life air and 
senses and utilizing intelligence strengthened by the mode of goodness, one should bring t he mind under the 
control of the self.  
21. An expert horseman, desiring to tame a headstrong horse, first lets the horse have 
his way for a moment and then, pulling the reins, gradually places the horse on the 
desired path. Similarly, the supreme yoga proc ess is that by which one carefully 
observes the movements and desires of the mind and gradually brings them under full 
control.  
22. Until one’s mind is fixed in spiritual satisfaction, one should analytically study the temporary nature of 
all material objects, whether cosmic, earthly or atomic. One should constantly observe the process of 
creation through the natural progressive function and the process of annihilation through the regressive 
function.  
23. When a person is disgusted with the temporary, illusory nature of this world and is thus detached from 
it, his mind, guided by the instructions of his spiritual master, considers again and again the nature of this 
world and eventually gives up the false identif ication with matter.  
24. Through the various disciplinary regulations and the purificatory procedures of the yoga system, through 
logic and spiritual education or through worship and adoration of Me, one should constantly engage his 
mind in remembering the  Personality of Godhead, the goal of yoga. No other means should be employed for 
this purpose.  
25. If, because of momentary inattention, a yogi accidentally commits an abominable activity, then by the 
very practice of yoga he should burn to ashes the sinfu l reaction, without at any time employing any other 
procedure.  
26. It is firmly declared that the steady adherence of transcendentalists to their respective spiritual positions 
constitutes real piety and that sin occurs when a transcendentalist neglects hi s prescribed duty. One who 
adopts this standard of piety and sin, sincerely desiring to give up all past association with sense 
gratification, is able to subdue materialistic activities, which are by nature impure.  
27-28. Having awakened faith in the narra tions of My glories, being disgusted with all material activities, 
knowing that all sense gratification leads to misery, but still being unable to renounce all sense enjoyment, 
My devotee should remain happy and worship Me with great faith and conviction. Even though he is 
sometimes engaged in sense enjoyment, My devotee knows that all sense gratification leads to a miserable 
result, and he sincerely repents such activities.  
29. When an intelligent person engages constantly in worshiping Me through loving d evotional service as 
described by Me, his heart becomes firmly situated in Me. Thus all material desires within the heart are 
destroyed.  
30. The knot in the heart is pierced, all misgivings are cut to pieces and the chain of fruitive actions is 
terminated when I am seen as the Supreme Personality of Godhead.  
31. Therefore, for a devotee engaged in My loving service, with mind fixed on Me, the cultivation of 
knowledge and renunciation is generally not the means of achieving the highest perfection within this  world.  
32-33. Everything that can be achieved by fruitive activities, penance, knowledge, detachment, mystic yoga, 
charity, religious duties and all other means of perfecting life is easily achieved by My devotee through loving service unto Me. If somehow  or other My devotee desires promotion to heaven, liberation, or 
residence in My abode, he easily achieves such benedictions.  
34. Because My devotees possess saintly behavior and deep intelligence, they completely dedicate 
themselves to Me and do not desir e anything besides Me. Indeed, even if I offer them liberation from birth 
and death, they do not accept it.  
35. It is said that complete detachment is the highest stage of freedom. Therefore, one who has no personal 
desire and does not pursue personal rewa rds can achieve loving devotional service unto Me.  
36. Material piety and sin, which arise from the good and evil of this world, cannot exist within My 
unalloyed devotees, who, being free from material hankering, maintain steady spiritual consciousness in all 
circumstances. Indeed, such devotees have achieved Me, the Supreme Lord, who am beyond anything that 
can be conceived by material intelligence.  
37. Persons who seriously follow these methods of achieving Me, which I have personally taught, attain 
freed om from illusion, and upon reaching My personal abode they perfectly understand the Absolute Truth.  
Chapter Twenty -One Lord Krsna’s Explanation of the Vedic Path  
1. The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Those who give up these methods for achieving Me, which 
consist of devotional service, analytic philosophy and regulated execution of prescribed duties, and instead, 
being moved by the material senses, cultivate insignificant sense gratification, certainly undergo the 
continual cycle of mate rial existence.  
2. Steadiness in one’s own position is declared to be actual piety, whereas deviation from one’s position is 
considered impiety. In this way the two are definitely ascertained.  
3. O sinless Uddhava, in order to understand what is proper in life one must evaluate a given object within 
its particular category. Thus, in analyzing religious principles one must consider purity and impurity. 
Similarly, in one’s ordinary dealings one must distinguish between good and bad, and to insure one’s 
physic al survival one must recognize that which is auspicious and inauspicious.  
4. I have revealed this way of life for those bearing the burden of mundane religious principles.  
5. Earth, water, fire, air and ether are the five basic elements that constitute the  bodies of all conditioned 
souls, from Lord Brahma himself down to the nonmoving creatures. These elements all emanate from the 
one Personality of Godhead.  
6. My dear Uddhava, although all material bodies are composed of the same five elements and are thus  
equal, the Vedic literatures conceive of different names and forms in relation to such bodies so that the 
living entities may achieve their goal of life.  
7. O saintly Uddhava, in order to restrict materialistic activities, I have established that which is  proper and 
improper among all material things, including time, space and all physical objects.  
8. Among places, those bereft of the spotted antelope, those devoid of devotion to the brahmanas, those 
possessing spotted antelopes but bereft of respectable m en, provinces like Kikata and places where 
cleanliness and purificatory rites are neglected, where meat -eaters are prominent or where the earth is 
barren, are all considered to be contaminated lands.  
9. A specific time is considered pure when it is appropr iate, either by its own nature or through achievement 
of suitable paraphernalia, for the performance of one’s prescribed duty. That time which impedes the 
performance of one’s duty is considered impure.  10. An object’s purity or impurity is established by application of another object, by words, by rituals, by the 
effects of time or according to relative magnitude.  
11. Impure things may or may not impose sinful reactions upon a person, depending on that person’s 
strength or weakness, intelligence, wealth, l ocation and physical condition.  
12. Various objects such as grains, wooden utensils, things made of bone, thread, liquids, objects derived 
from fire, skins and earthy objects are all purified by time, by the wind, by fire, by earth and by water, either 
separately or in combination.  
13. A particular purifying agent is considered appropriate when its application removes the bad odor or dirty 
covering of some contaminated object and makes it resume its original nature.  
14. The self can be cleansed by bathing, charity, austerity, age, personal strength, purificatory rituals, 
prescribed duties and, above all, by remembrance of Me. The brahmana and other twice -born men should be 
duly purified before performing their specific activities.  
15. A mantra is purified wh en chanted with proper knowledge, and one’s work is purified when offered to 
Me. Thus by purification of the place, time, substance, doer, mantras and work, one becomes religious, and 
by negligence of these six items one is considered irreligious.  
16. Some times piety becomes sin, and sometimes what is ordinarily sin becomes piety on the strength of 
Vedic injunctions. Such special rules in effect eradicate the clear distinction between piety and sin.  
17. The same activities that would degrade an elevated per son do not cause falldown for those who are 
already fallen. Indeed, one who is lying on the ground cannot possibly fall further. The material association 
that is dictated by one’s own nature is considered a good quality.  
18. By refraining from a particular  sinful or materialistic activity, one becomes freed from its bondage. Such 
renunciation is the basis of religious and auspicious life for human beings and drives away all suffering, 
illusion and fear.  
19. One who accepts material sense objects as desirabl e certainly becomes attached to them. From such 
attachment lust arises, and this lust creates quarrel among men.  
20. From quarrel arises intolerable anger, followed by the darkness of ignorance. This ignorance quickly 
overtakes a man’s broad intelligence.  
21. O saintly Uddhava, a person bereft of real intelligence is considered to have lost everything. Deviated 
from the actual purpose of his life, he becomes dull, just like a dead person.  
22. Because of absorption in sense gratification, one cannot recogniz e himself or others. Living uselessly in 
ignorance like a tree, one is merely breathing just like a bellows.  
23. Those statements of scripture promising fruitive rewards do not prescribe the ultimate good for men hut 
are merely enticements for executing be neficial religious duties, like promises of candy spoken to induce a 
child to take beneficial medicine.  
24. Simply by material birth, human beings become attached within their minds to personal sense 
gratification, long duration of life, sense activities, bodily strength, sexual potency and friends and family. 
Their minds are thus absorbed in that which defeats their actual self -interest.  25. Those ignorant of their real self -interest are wandering on the path of material existence, gradually 
heading toward darkness. Why would the Vedas further encourage them in sense gratification if they, 
although foolish, submissively pay heed to Vedic injunctions?  
26. Persons with perverted intelligence do not understand this actual pur pose of Vedic knowledge and 
instead propagate as the highest Vedic truth the flowery statements of the Vedas that promise material 
rewards. Those in actual knowledge of the Vedas never speak in that way.  
27. Those who are full of lust, avarice and greed mi stake mere flowers to be the actual fruit of life. 
Bewildered by the glare of fire and suffocated by its smoke, they cannot recognize their own true identity.  
28. My dear Uddhava, persons dedicated to sense gratification obtained through honoring the Vedic  rituals 
cannot understand that I am situated in everyone’s heart and that the entire universe is nondifferent from Me 
and emanates from Me. Indeed, they are just like persons whose eyes are covered by fog.  
29-30. Those who are sworn to sense gratification  cannot understand the confidential conclusion of Vedic 
knowledge as explained by Me. Taking pleasure in violence, they cruelly slaughter innocent animals in 
sacrifice for their own sense gratification and thus worship demigods, forefathers and leaders amo ng ghostly 
creatures. Such passion for violence, however, is never encouraged within the process of Vedic sacrifice.  
31. Just as a foolish businessman gives up his real wealth in useless business speculation, foolish persons 
give up all that is actually va luable in life and instead pursue promotion to material heaven, which although 
pleasing to hear about is actually unreal, like a dream. Such bewildered persons imagine within their hearts 
that they will achieve all material blessings.  
32. Those established  in material passion, goodness and ignorance worship the particular demigods and 
other deities, headed by Indra, who manifest the same modes of passion, goodness or ignorance. They fail, 
however, to properly worship Me.  
33-34. The worshipers of demigods th ink, “We shall worship the demigods in this life, and by our sacrifices 
we shall go to heaven and enjoy there. When that enjoyment is finished we shall return to this world and 
take birth as great householders in aristocratic families.” Being excessively p roud and greedy, such persons 
are bewildered by the flowery words of the Vedas. They are not attracted to topics about Me, the Supreme 
Lord.  
35. The Vedas, divided into three divisions, ultimately reveal the living entity as pure spirit soul. The Vedic 
seers and mantras, however, deal in esoteric terms, and I also am pleased by such confidential descriptions.  
36. The transcendental sound of the Vedas is very difficult to comprehend and manifests on different levels 
within the prana, senses and mind. This Ve dic sound is unlimited, very deep and unfathomable, just like the 
ocean.  
37. As the unlimited, unchanging and omnipotent Personality of Godhead dwelling within all living beings, 
I personally establish the Vedic sound vibration in the form of omkara within  all living entities. It is thus 
perceived subtly, just like a single strand of fiber on a lotus stalk.  
38-40. Just as a spider brings forth from its heart its web and emits it through its mouth, the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead manifests Himself as the reverberating primeval vital air, comprising all sacred 
Vedic meters and full of transcendental pleasure. Thus the Lord, from the ethereal sky of His heart, creates 
the great and limitless Vedic sound by the agency of His mind, which conceives of variegate d sounds such 
as the sparsas. The Vedic sound branches out in thousands of directions, adorned with the different letters 
expanded from the syllable om: the consonants, vowels, sibilants and semivowels. The Veda is then 
elaborated by many verbal varieties,  expressed in different meters, each having four more syllables than the 
previous one. Ultimately the Lord again withdraws His manifestation of Vedic sound within Himself.  41. The Vedic meters are Gayatri, Usnik, Anustup, Brhati, Pankti, Tristup, Jagati, A ticchanda, Atyasti, 
Atijagati and Ativirat.  
42. In the entire world no one but Me actually understands the confidential purpose of Vedic knowledge. 
Thus people do not know what the Vedas are actually prescribing in the ritualistic injunctions of karma -
kand a, or what object is actually being indicated in the formulas of worship found in the upasana -kanda, or 
that which is elaborately discussed through various hypotheses in the jnana -kanda section of the Vedas.  
43. I am the ritualistic sacrifice enjoined by t he Vedas, and I am the worshipable Deity. It is I who am 
presented as various philosophical hypotheses, and it is I alone who am then refuted by philosophical 
analysis. The transcendental sound vibration thus establishes Me as the essential meaning of all Vedic 
knowledge. The Vedas, elaborately analyzing all material duality as nothing but My illusory potency, 
ultimately completely negate this duality and achieve their own satisfaction.  
Chapter Twenty -Two Enumeration of the Elements of Material Creation  
1-3. Uddhava inquired: My dear Lord, O master of the universe, how many different elements of creation 
have been enumerated by the great sages? I have heard You personally describe a total of twenty -eight —
God, the jiva soul, the mahat -tattva, false ego, the f ive gross elements, the ten senses, the mind, the five 
subtle objects of perception and the three modes of nature. But some authorities say that there are twenty -six 
elements, while others cite twenty -five or else seven, nine, six, four or eleven, and even  others say that there 
are seventeen, sixteen or thirteen. What did each of these sages have in mind when he calculated the creative 
elements in such different ways? O supreme eternal, kindly explain this to me.  
4. Lord Krsna replied: Because all material elements are present everywhere, it is reasonable that different 
learned brahmanas have analyzed them in different ways. All such philosophers spoke under the shelter of 
My mystic potency, and thus they could say anything without contradicting the truth.  
5. When philosophers argue, “I don’t choose to analyze this particular case in the same way that you have,” 
it is simply My own insurmountable energies that are motivating their analytic disagreements.  
6. By interaction of My energies different opinions ari se. But for those who have fixed their intelligence on 
Me and controlled their senses, differences of perception disappear, and consequently the very cause for 
argument is removed.  
7. O best among men, because subtle and gross elements mutually enter into one another, philosophers may 
calculate the number of basic material elements in different ways, according to their personal desire.  
8. All subtle material elements are actually present within their gross effects; similarly, all gross elements 
are present within their subtle causes, since material creation takes place by progressive manifestation of 
elements from subtle to gross. Thus we can find all material elements within any single element.  
9. Therefore, no matter which of these thinkers is speaking, an d regardless of whether in their calculations 
they include material elements within their previous subtle causes or else within their subsequent manifest 
products, I accept their conclusions as authoritative, because a logical explanation can always be giv en for 
each of the different theories.  
10. Because a person who has been covered by ignorance since time immemorial is not capable of effecting 
his own self -realization, there must be some other personality who is in factual knowledge of the Absolute 
Truth  and can impart this knowledge to him.  
11. According to knowledge in the material mode of goodness, there is no qualitative difference between the 
living entity and the supreme controller. The imagination of qualitative difference between them is useless 
speculation.  12. Nature exists originally as the equilibrium of the three material modes, which pertain only to nature, not 
to the transcendental spirit soul. These modes —goodness, passion and ignorance —are the effective causes 
of the creation, maintenance  and destruction of this universe.  
13. In this world the mode of goodness is recognized as knowledge, the mode of passion as fruitive work, 
and the mode of darkness as ignorance. Time is perceived as the agitated interaction of the material modes, 
and the totality of functional propensity is embodied by the primeval sutra, or mahat -tattva.  
14. I have described the nine basic elements as the enjoying soul, nature, nature’s primeval manifestation of 
the mahat -tattva, false ego, ether, air, fire, water and ear th. 
15. Hearing, touch, sight, smell and taste are the five knowledge acquiring senses, My dear Uddhava, and 
speech, the hands, the genitals, the anus and the legs constitute the five working senses. The mind belongs to 
both these categories.  
16. Sound, to uch, taste, smell and form are the objects of the knowledge -acquiring senses, and movement, 
speech, excretion and manufacture are functions of the working senses.  
17. In the beginning of creation nature assumes, by the modes of goodness, passion and ignora nce, its form 
as the embodiment of all subtle causes and gross manifestations within the universe. The Supreme 
Personality of Godhead does not enter the interaction of material manifestation but merely glances upon 
nature.  
18. As the material elements, hea ded by the mahat -tattva, are transformed, they receive their specific 
potencies from the glance of the Supreme Lord, and being amalgamated by the power of nature, they create 
the universal egg.  
19. According to some philosophers there are seven elements, n amely earth, water, fire, air and ether, along 
with the conscious spirit soul and the Supreme Soul, who is the basis of both the material elements and the 
ordinary spirit soul. According to this theory, the body, senses, life air and all material phenomena  are 
produced from these seven elements.  
20. Other philosophers state that there are six elements —the five physical elements (earth, water, fire, air 
and ether) and the sixth element, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That Supreme Lord, endowed with 
the elements that He has brought forth from Himself, creates this universe and then personally enters within 
it. 
21. Some philosophers propose the existence of four basic elements, of which three —fire, water and earth —
emanate from the fourth, the Self. Once ex isting, these elements produce the cosmic manifestation, in which 
all material creation takes place.  
22. Some calculate the existence of seventeen basic elements, namely the five gross elements, the five 
objects of perception, the five sensory organs, the mind, and the soul as the seventeenth element.  
23. According to the calculation of sixteen elements, the only difference from the previous theory is that the 
soul is identified with the mind. If we think in terms of five physical elements, five senses, the  mind, the 
individual soul and the Supreme Lord, there are thirteen elements.  
24. Counting eleven, there are the soul, the gross elements and the senses. Eight gross and subtle elements 
plus the Supreme Lord would make nine.  
25. Thus great philosophers hav e analyzed the material elements in many different ways. All of their 
proposals are reasonable, since they are all presented with ample logic. Indeed, such philosophical brilliance 
is expected of the truly learned.  26. Sri Uddhava inquired: Although nature and the living entity are constitutionally distinct, O Lord Krsna, 
there appears to be no difference between them, because they are found residing within one another. Thus 
the soul appears to be within nature and natur e within the soul.  
27. O lotus -eyed Krsna, O omniscient Lord, kindly cut this great doubt out of my heart with Your own 
words, which exhibit Your great skill in reasoning.  
28. From You alone the knowledge of the living beings arises, and by Your potency th at knowledge is 
stolen away. Indeed, no one but Yourself can understand the real nature of Your illusory potency.  
29. The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: O best among men, material nature and its enjoyer are 
clearly distinct. This manifest creation un dergoes constant transformation, being founded upon the agitation 
of the modes of nature.  
30. My dear Uddhava, My material energy, comprising three modes and acting through them, manifests the 
varieties of creation along with varieties of consciousness for  perceiving them. The manifest result of 
material transformation is understood in three aspects: adhyatmic, adhidaivic and adhibhautic.  
31. Sight, visible form and the reflected image of the sun within the aperture of the eye all work together to 
reveal on e another. But the original sun standing in the sky is self -manifested. Similarly, the Supreme Soul, 
the original cause of all entities, who is thus separate from all of them, acts by the illumination of His own 
transcendental experience as the ultimate so urce of manifestation of all mutually manifesting objects.  
32. Similarly, the sense organs, namely the skin, ears, eyes, tongue and nose —as well as the functions of the 
subtle body, namely conditioned consciousness, mind, intelligence and false ego —can all  be analyzed in 
terms of the threefold distinction of sense, object of perception and presiding deity.  
33. When the three modes of nature are agitated, the resultant transformation appears as the element false 
ego in three phases —goodness, passion and igno rance. Generated from the mahat -tattva, which is itself 
produced from the unmanifest pradhana, this false ego becomes the cause of all material illusion and 
duality.  
34. The speculative argument of philosophers —“This world is real,” “No, it is not real” —is based upon 
incomplete knowledge of the Supreme Soul and is simply aimed at understanding material dualities. 
Although such argument is useless, persons who have turned their attention away from Me, their own true 
Self, are unable to give it up.  
35-36. Sri  Uddhava said: O supreme master, the intelligence of those dedicated to fruitive activities is 
certainly deviated from You. Please explain to me how such persons accept superior and inferior bodies by 
their materialistic activities and then give up such bo dies. O Govinda, this topic is very difficult for foolish 
persons to understand. Being cheated by illusion in this world, they generally do not become aware of these 
facts.  
37. Lord Krsna said: The material mind of men is shaped by the reactions of fruitiv e work. Along with the 
five senses, it travels from one material body to another. The spirit soul, although different from this mind, 
follows it.  
38. The mind, bound to the reactions of fruitive work, always meditates on the objects of the senses, both 
those that are seen in this world and those that are heard about from Vedic authority. Consequently, the 
mind appears to come into being and to suffer annihilation along with its objects of perception, and thus its 
ability to distinguish past and future is lo st. 
39. When the living entity passes from the present body to the next body, which is created by his own 
karma, he becomes absorbed in the pleasurable and painful sensations of the new body and completely forgets the experience of the previous body. This total forgetfulness of one’s previous material identity, 
which comes about for one reason or another, is called death.  
40. O most charitable Uddhava, what is called birth is simply a person’s total identification with a new 
body. One accepts the  new body just as one completely accepts the experience of a dream or a fantasy as 
reality.  
41. Just as a person experiencing a dream or daydream does not remember his previous dreams or 
daydreams, a person situated in his present body, although having exi sted prior to it, thinks that he has only 
recently come into being.  
42. Because the mind, which is the resting place of the senses, has created the identification with a new 
body, the threefold material variety of high, middle and low class appears as if p resent within the reality of 
the soul. Thus the self creates external and internal duality, just as a man might give birth to a bad son.  
43. My dear Uddhava, material bodies are constantly undergoing creation and destruction by the force of 
time, whose swi ftness is imperceptible. But because of the subtle nature of time, no one sees this.  
44. The different stages of transformation of all material bodies occur just like those of the flame of a 
candle, the current of a river, or the fruits of a tree.  
45. Alth ough the illumination of a lamp consists of innumerable rays of light undergoing constant creation, 
transformation and destruction, a person with illusory intelligence who sees the light for a moment will 
speak falsely, saying, “This is the light of the la mp.” As one observes a flowing river, ever -new water passes 
by and goes far away, yet a foolish person, observing one point in the river, falsely states, “This is the water 
of the river.” Similarly, although the material body of a human being is constantly  undergoing 
transformation, those who are simply wasting their lives falsely think and say that each particular stage of 
the body is the person’s real identity  
46. A person does not actually take birth out of the seed of past activities, nor, being immorta l, does he die. 
By illusion the living being appears to be born and to die, just as fire in connection with firewood appears to 
begin and then cease to exist.  
47. Impregnation, gestation, birth, infancy, childhood, youth, middle age, old age and death are the nine ages 
of the body.  
48. Although the material body is different from the self, because of the ignorance due to material 
association one falsely identifies oneself with the superior and inferior bodily conditions. Sometimes a 
fortunate person is able  to give up such mental concoction.  
49. By the death of one’s father or grandfather one can surmise one’s own death, and by the birth of one’s 
son one can understand the condition of one’s own birth. A person who thus realistically understands the 
creation  and destruction of material bodies is no longer subject to these dualities.  
50. One who observes the birth of a tree from its seed and the ultimate death of the tree after maturity 
certainly remains a distinct observer separate from the tree. In the same way, the witness of the birth and 
death of the material body remains separate from it.  
51. An unintelligent man, failing to distinguish himself from material nature, thinks nature to be real. By 
contact with it he becomes completely bewildered and enters i nto the cycle of material existence.  
52. Made to wander because of his fruitive work, the conditioned soul, by contact with the mode of 
goodness, takes birth among the sages or demigods. By contact with the mode of passion he becomes a 
demon or human being , and by association with the mode of ignorance he takes birth as a ghost or in the 
animal kingdom.  53. Just as one may imitate persons whom one sees dancing and singing, similarly the soul, although never 
the doer of material activities, becomes captivate d by material intelligence and is thus forced to imitate its 
qualities.  
54-55. The soul’s material life, his experience of sense gratification, is actually false, O descendant of 
Dasarha, just like trees’ appearance of quivering when the trees are reflecte d in agitated water, or like the 
earth’s appearance of spinning due to one’s spinning his eyes around, or like the world of a fantasy or 
dream.  
56. For one who is meditating on sense gratification, material life, although lacking factual existence, does 
not go away, just as the unpleasant experiences of a dream do not.  
57. Therefore, O Uddhava, do not try to enjoy sense gratification with the material senses. See how illusion 
based on material dualities prevents one from realizing the self.  
58-59. Even thou gh neglected, insulted, ridiculed or envied by bad men, or even though repeatedly agitated 
by being beaten, tied up or deprived of one’s occupation, spat upon or polluted with urine by ignorant 
people, one who desires the highest goal in life should in spi te of all these difficulties use his intelligence to 
keep himself safe on the spiritual platform.  
60. Sri Uddhava said: O best of all speakers, please explain to me how I may properly understand this.  
61. O soul of the universe, the conditioning of one’s p ersonality in material life is very strong, and therefore 
it is very difficult even for learned men to tolerate the offenses committed against them by ignorant people. 
Only Your devotees, who are fixed in Your loving service and who have achieved peace by residing at Your 
lotus feet, are able to tolerate such offenses.  
Chapter Twenty -Three The Song of the Avanti Brahmana.  
1. Sukadeva Gosvami said: Lord Mukunda, the chief of the Dasarhas, having thus been respectfully 
requested by the best of His devotees, S ri Uddhava, first acknowledged the fitness of his servant’s 
statements. Then the Lord, whose glorious exploits are most worthy of being heard, began to reply to him.  
2. Lord Sri Krsna said: O disciple of Brhaspati, there is virtually no saintly man in this  world capable of 
resettling his own mind after it has been disturbed by the insulting words of uncivilized men.  
3. Sharp arrows which pierce one’s chest and reach the heart do not cause as much suffering as the arrows of 
harsh, insulting words that become lodged within the heart when spoken by uncivilized men.  
4. My dear Uddhava, in this regard a most pious story is told, and I shall now describe it to you. Please listen 
with careful attention.  
5. Once a certain sannyasi was insulted in many ways by impious men. However, with determination he 
remembered that he was suffering the fruit of his own previous karma. I will narrate to you his story and that 
which he spoke.  
6. In the country of Avanti th ere once lived a certain brahmana who was very rich and gifted with all 
opulences, and who was engaged in the occupation of commerce. But he was a miserly person —lusty, 
greedy and very prone to anger.  
7. In his home, devoid of religiosity and lawful sense gratification, the family members and guests were 
never properly respected, even with words. He would not even allow sufficient gratification for his own 
body at the suitable times.  8. Since he was so hardhearted and miserly, his sons, in -laws, wife, daughters and servants began to feel 
inimical toward him. Becoming disgusted, they would never treat him with affection.  
9. In this way the presiding deities of the five family sacrifices be came angry at the brahmana, who, being 
niggardly, guarded his wealth like a Yaksa, who had no good destination either in this world or the next, and 
who was totally deprived of religiosity and sense enjoyment.  
10. O magnanimous Uddhava, by his neglect of t hese demigods he depleted his stock of piety and all his 
wealth. The accumulation of his repeated exhaustive endeavors was totally lost.  
11. Some of the wealth of this so -called brahmana was taken away by his relatives, My dear Uddhava, some 
by thieves, so me by the whims of providence, some by the effects of time, some by ordinary men and some 
by government authorities.  
12. Finally, when his property was completely lost, he who never engaged in religiosity or sense enjoyment 
became ignored by his family mem bers. Thus he began to feel unbearable anxiety.  
13. Having lost all his wealth, he felt great pain and lamentation. His throat choked up with tears, and he 
meditated for a long time on his fortune. Then a powerful feeling of renunciation came over him.  
14. The brahmana spoke as follows: O what great misfortune! I have simply tormented myself uselessly, 
struggling so hard for money that was not even intended for religiosity or material enjoyment.  
15. Generally, the wealth of misers never allows them any happ iness. In this life it causes their self -torment, 
and when they die it sends them to hell.  
16. Whatever pure fame is possessed by the famous and whatever praiseworthy qualities are found in the 
virtuous are destroyed by even a small amount of greed, just a s one’s attractive physical beauty is ruined by 
a trace of white leprosy.  
17. In the earning, attainment, increase, protection, expense, loss and enjoyment of wealth, all men 
experience great labor, fear, anxiety and delusion.  
18-19. Theft, violence, speak ing lies, duplicity, lust, anger, perplexity, pride, quarreling, enmity, 
faithlessness, envy and the dangers caused by women, gambling and intoxication are the fifteen undesirable 
qualities that contaminate men because of greed for wealth. Although these q ualities are undesirable, men 
falsely ascribe value to them. One desiring to achieve the real benefit of life should therefore remain aloof 
from undesirable material wealth.  
20. Even a man’s brothers, wife, parents and friends united with him in love will immediately break off their 
affectionate relationships and become enemies over a single coin.  
21. For even a small amount of money these relatives and friends become very agitated and their anger is 
inflamed. Acting as rivals, they quickly give up all sent iments of goodwill and will reject one at a moment’s 
notice, even to the point of committing murder.  
22. Those who obtain human life, which is prayed for even by the demigods, and in that human birth 
become situated as first -class brahmanas, are extremely fortunate. If they disregard this important 
opportunity, they are certainly killing their own self -interest and thus achieve a most unfortunate end.  
23. What mortal man, having achieved this human life, which is the very gateway to both heaven and 
liberati on, would willingly become attached to that abode of worthlessness, material property?  24. One who fails to distribute his wealth to the proper shareholders —the demigods, sages, forefathers and 
ordinary living entities, as well as his immediate relatives, in-laws and own self —is maintaining his wealth 
simply like a Yaksa and will fall down.  
25. Discriminating persons are able to utilize their money, youth and strength to achieve perfection. But I 
have feverishly squandered these in the useless endeavor for further wealth. Now that I am an old man, what 
can I achieve?  
26. Why must an intelligent man suffer by his constant vain efforts to get wealth? Indeed, this whole world 
is most bewildered by someone’s illusory potency.  
27. For one who is in the grips of d eath, what is the use of wealth or those who offer it, sense gratification or 
those who offer it, or, for that matter, any type of fruitive activity, which simply causes one to again take 
birth in the material world?  
28. The Supreme Personality of Godhead,  Lord Hari, who contains within Himself all the demigods, must 
be satisfied with me. Indeed, He has brought me to this suffering condition and forced me to experience 
detachment, which is the boat to carry me over this ocean of material life.  
29. If there is any time remaining in my life, I will perform austerities and force my body to subsist on the 
bare necessities. Without further confusion I shall pursue that which constitutes my entire self -interest in 
life, and I shall remain satisfied within the self . 
30. Thus may the presiding demigods of these three worlds kindly show their mercy upon me. Indeed, 
Maharaja Khatvanga was able to achieve the spiritual world in a single moment.  
31. Lord Sri Krsna continued: His mind thus determined, that most excellent Avanti brahmana was able to 
untie the knots of desire within his heart. He then assumed the role of a peaceful and silent sannyasi 
mendicant.  
32. He wandered about the earth, keeping h is intelligence, senses and life air under control. To beg charity 
he traveled alone to various cities and villages. He did not advertise his advanced spiritual position and thus 
was not recognized by others.  
33. O kind Uddhava, seeing him as an old, dirty  beggar, rowdy persons would dishonor him with many 
insults.  
34. Some of these persons would take away his sannyasi rod, and some the waterpot which he was using as 
a begging bowl. Some took his deerskin seat, some his chanting beads, and some would steal his torn, 
ragged clothing. Displaying these things before him, they would pretend to offer them back but would then 
hide them again.  
35. When he was sitting on the bank of a river about to partake of the food that he had collected by his 
begging, such sinf ul rascals would come and pass urine on it, and they would dare to spit on his head.  
36. Although he had taken a vow of silence, they would try to make him speak, and if he did not speak they 
would beat him with sticks. Others would chastise him, saying, “ This man is just a thief.” And others would 
bind him up with rope, shouting, ”Tie him up! Tie him up!”  
37. They would criticize and insult him, saying, “This man is just a hypocrite and a cheat. He makes a 
business of religion simply because he lost all hi s wealth and his family threw him out.”  
38-39. Some would ridicule him by saying, ”Just see this greatly powerful sage! He is as steadfast as the 
Himalaya Mountains. By practice of silence he strives for his goal with great determination, just like a duck. ” Other persons would pass foul air upon him, and sometimes others would bind this twice -born 
brahmana in chains and keep him captive like a pet animal.  
40. The brahmana understood that all his suffering —from other living beings, from the higher forces of 
nature and from his own body —was unavoidable, being allotted to him by providence.  
41. Even while being insulted by these low -class men who were trying to effect his downfall, he remained 
steady in his spiritual duties. Fixing his resolution in the mode of  goodness, he began to chant the following 
song.  
42. The brahmana said: These people are not the cause of my happiness and distress. Neither are the 
demigods, my own body, the planets, my past work, or time. Rather, it is the mind alone that causes 
happine ss and distress and perpetuates the rotation of material life.  
43. The powerful mind actuates the functions of the material modes, from which evolve the different kinds 
of material activities in the modes of goodness, ignorance and passion. From the activi ties in each of these 
modes develop the corresponding statuses of life.  
44. Although present along with the struggling mind within the material body, the Supersoul is not 
endeavoring, because He is already endowed with transcendental enlightenment. Acting as my friend, He 
simply witnesses from His transcendental position. I, the infinitesimal spirit soul, on the other hand, have 
embraced this mind, which is the mirror reflecting the image of the material world. Thus I have become 
engaged in enjoying objects  of desire and am entangled due to contact with the modes of nature.  
45. Charity, prescribed duties, observance of major and minor regulative principles, hearing from scripture, 
pious works and purifying vows all have as their final aim the subduing of the  mind. Indeed, concentration 
of the mind on the Supreme is the highest yoga.  
46. If one’s mind is perfectly fixed and pacified, then tell me what need does one have to perform ritualistic 
charity and other pious rituals? And if one’s mind remains uncontrol led, lost in ignorance, then of what use 
are these engagements for him?  
47. All the senses have been under the control of the mind since time immemorial, and the mind himself 
never comes under the sway of any other. He is stronger than the strongest, and h is godlike power is 
fearsome. Therefore, anyone who can bring the mind under control becomes the master of all the senses.  
48. Failing to conquer this irrepressible enemy, the mind, whose urges are intolerable and who torments the 
heart, many people are co mpletely bewildered and create useless quarrel with others. Thus they conclude 
that other people are either their friends, their enemies or parties indifferent to them.  
49. Persons who identify with this body, which is simply the product of the material mi nd, are blinded in 
their intelligence, thinking in terms of ”I” and ”mine.” Because of their illusion of ”this is I, but that is 
someone else,” they wander in endless darkness.  
50. If you say that these people are the cause of my happiness and distress, th en where is the place of the 
soul in such a conception? This happiness and distress pertain not to the soul but to the interactions of 
material bodies. If someone bites his tongue with his own teeth, at whom can he become angry in his 
suffering?  
51. If you  say that the demigods who rule the bodily senses cause suffering, still, how can such suffering 
apply to the spirit soul? This acting and being acted upon are merely interactions of the changeable senses 
and their presiding deities. When one limb of the b ody attacks another, with whom can the person in that 
body be angry?  52. If the soul himself were the cause of happiness and distress, then we could not blame others, since 
happiness and distress would be simply the nature of the soul. According to this th eory, nothing except the 
soul actually exists, and if we were to perceive something besides the soul, that would be illusion. 
Therefore, since happiness and distress do not actually exist in this concept, why become angry at oneself or 
others?  
53. And if we examine the hypothesis that the planets are the immediate cause of suffering and happiness, 
then also where is the relationship with the soul, who is eternal? After all, the effect of the planets applies 
only to things that have taken birth. Expe rt astrologers have moreover explained how the planets are only 
causing pain to each other. Therefore, since the living entity is distinct from these planets and from the 
material body, against whom should he vent his anger?  
54. If we assume that fruitive work is the cause of happiness and distress, we still are not dealing with the 
soul. The idea of material work arises when there is a spiritual actor who is conscious and a material body 
that undergoes the transformation of happiness and distress as a reac tion to such work. Since the body has 
no life, it cannot be the actual recipient of happiness and distress, nor can the soul, who is ultimately 
completely spiritual and aloof from the material body. Since karma thus has no ultimate basis in either the 
body  or the soul, at whom can one become angry?  
55. If we accept time as the cause of happiness and distress, that experience still cannot apply to the spirit 
soul, since time is a manifestation of the Lord’s spiritual potency and the living entities are also expansions 
of the Lord’s spiritual potency manifesting through time. Certainly a fire does not burn its own flames or 
sparks, nor does the cold harm its own snowflakes or hail. In fact, the spirit soul is transcendental and 
beyond the experience of materia l happiness and distress. At whom, therefore, should one become angry?  
56. The false ego gives shape to illusory material existence and thus experiences material happiness and 
distress. The spirit soul, however, is transcendental to material nature; he can  never actually be affected by 
material happiness and distress in any place, under any circumstance or by the agency of any person. A 
person who understands this has nothing whatsoever to fear from the material creation.  
57. I shall cross over the insurmountable ocean of nescience by being firmly fixed in the service of the lotus 
feet of Krsna. This was approved by the previous acaryas, who were fixed in firm devotion to the Lord, 
Paramatma, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.  
58. Lord Sri Krsna said: Thus becoming detached upon the loss of his property, this sage gave up his 
moroseness. He left home, taking sannyasa, and began to travel about the earth. Even when insulted by 
foolish rascals he remained unswerved from his duty and chanted this song.  
59. No other force besides his own mental confusion makes the soul experience happiness and distress. His 
perception of friends, neutral parties and enemies and the whole material life he builds around this 
perception are simply crea ted out of ignorance.  
60. My dear Uddhava, fixing your intelligence on Me, you should thus completely control the mind. This is 
the essence of the science of yoga.  
61. Anyone who listens to or recites to others this song of the sannyasi, which presents sci entific knowledge 
of the Absolute, and who thus meditates upon it with full attention, will never again be overwhelmed by the 
dualities of material happiness and distress.  
Chapter Twenty -Four The Philosophy of Sankhya  
1. Lord Sri Krsna said: Now I shall de scribe to you the science of Sankhya, which has been perfectly 
established by ancient authorities. By understanding this science a person can immediately give up the 
illusion of material duality.  2. Originally, during the Krta -yuga, when all men were very expert in spiritual discrimination, and also 
previous to that, during the period of annihilation, the seer existed alone, nondifferent from the seen object.  
3. That one Absolute Truth, remaining free from material dualities and inaccessible to ordinary spe ech and 
mind, divided Himself into two categories —the material nature and the living entities who are trying to 
enjoy the manifestations of that nature.  
4. Of these two categories of manifestation, one is material nature, which embodies both the subtle cau ses 
and manifests products of matter. The other is the conscious living entity, designated as the enjoyer.  
5. When material nature was agitated by My glance, the three material modes —goodness, passion and 
ignorance —became manifest to fulfill the pending de sires of the conditioned souls.  
6. From these modes arose the primeval sutra, along with the mahat -tattva. By the transformation of the 
mahat -tattva was generated the false ego, the cause of the living entities’ bewilderment.  
7. False ego, which is the cau se of physical sensation, the senses, and the mind, encompasses both spirit and 
matter and manifests, in three varieties: in the modes of goodness, passion and ignorance.  
8. From false ego in the mode of ignorance came the subtle physical perceptions, from  which the gross 
elements were generated. From false ego in the mode of passion came the senses, and from false ego in the 
mode of goodness arose the eleven demigods.  
9. Impelled by Me, all these elements combined to function in an orderly fashion and toge ther gave birth to 
the universal egg, which is My excellent place of residence.  
10. I Myself appeared within that egg, which was floating on the causal water, and from My navel arose the 
universal lotus, the birthplace of self -born Brahma.  
11. Lord Brahma,  the soul of the universe, being endowed with the mode of passion, performed great 
austerities by My mercy and thus created the three planetary divisions, called Bhur, Bhuvar and Svar, along 
with their presiding deities.  
12. Heaven was established as the r esidence of the demigods, Bhuvarloka as that of the ghostly spirits, and 
the earth system as the place of human beings and other mortal creatures. Those mystics who strive for 
liberation are promoted beyond these three divisions.  
13. Lord Brahma created th e region below the earth for the demons and the Naga snakes. In this way the 
destinations of the three worlds were arranged as the corresponding reactions for different kinds of work 
performed within the three modes of nature.  
14. By mystic yoga, great aus terities and the renounced order of life, the pure destinations of Maharloka, 
Janoloka, Tapoloka and Satyaloka are attained. But by devotional yoga, one achieves My transcendental 
abode.  
15. All results of fruitive work have been arranged within this world  by Me, the supreme creator acting as 
the force of time. Thus one sometimes rises up toward the surface of this mighty river of the modes of 
nature and sometimes again submerges.  
16. Whatever features visibly exist within this world —small or great, thin or  stout —certainly contain both 
the material nature and its enjoyer, the spirit soul.  
17. Gold and earth are originally existing as ingredients. From gold one may fashion golden ornaments such 
as bracelets and earrings, and from earth one may fashion clay po ts and saucers. The original ingredients gold and earth exist before the products made from them, and when the products are eventually destroyed, 
the original ingredients, gold and earth, will remain. Thus, since the ingredients are present in the beginnin g 
and at the end, they must also be present in the middle phase, taking the form of a particular product to 
which we assign for convenience a particular name, such as bracelet, earring, pot or saucer. We can 
therefore understand that since the ingredient c ause exists before the creation of a product and after the 
product’s destruction, the same ingredient cause must be present during the manifest phase, supporting the 
product as the basis of its reality.  
18. A material object, itself composed of an essentia l ingredient, creates another material object through 
transformation. Thus one created object becomes the cause and basis of another created object. A particular 
thing may thus be called real in that it possesses the basic nature of another object that con stitutes its origin 
and final state.  
19. The material universe may be considered real, having nature as its original ingredient and final state. 
Lord Maha -Visnu is the resting place of nature, which becomes manifest by the power of time. Thus nature, 
the almighty Visnu and time are not different from Me, the Supreme Absolute Truth.  
20. As long as the Supreme Personality of Godhead continues to glance upon nature, the material world 
continues to exist, perpetually manifesting through procreation the great and variegated flow of universal 
creation.  
21. I am the basis of the universal form, which displays endless variety through the repeated creation, 
maintenance and destruction of the planetary sys tems. Originally containing within itself all planets in their 
dormant state, My universal form manifests the varieties of created existence by arranging the coordinated 
combination of the five elements.  
22-27. At the time of annihilation, the mortal body of the living being becomes merged into food. Food 
merges into the grains, and the grains merge back into the earth. The earth merges into its subtle sensation, 
fragrance. Fragrance merges into water, and water further merges into its own quality, taste. T hat taste 
merges into fire, which merges into form. Form merges into touch, and touch merges into ether. Ether 
finally merges into the sensation of sound. The senses all merge into their own origins, the presiding 
demigods, and they, O gentle Uddhava, merg e into the controlling mind, which itself merges into false ego 
in the mode of goodness. Sound becomes one with false ego in the mode of ignorance, and all -powerful 
false ego, the first of all the physical elements, merges into the total nature. The total material nature, the 
primary repository of the three basic modes, dissolves into the modes. These modes of nature then merge 
into the unmanifest form of nature, and that unmanifest form merges into time. Time merges into the 
Supreme Lord, present in the fo rm of the omniscient Maha -purusa, the original activator of all living beings. 
That origin of all life merges into Me, the unborn Supreme Soul, who remains alone, established within 
Himself. It is from Him that all creation and annihilation are manifested.  
28. Just as the rising sun removes the darkness of the sky, similarly, this scientific knowledge of cosmic 
annihilation removes all illusory duality from the mind of a serious student. Even if illusion somehow enters 
his heart, it cannot remain there.  
29. Thus I, the perfect seer of everything material and spiritual, have spoken this knowledge of Sankhya, 
which destroys the illusion of doubt by scientific analysis of creation and annihilation.  
Chapter Twenty -Five The Three Modes of Nature and Beyond  
1. The  Supreme Personality of Godhead said: O best among men, please listen as I describe to you how the 
living entity attains a particular nature by association with individual material modes.  
2-5. Mind and sense control, tolerance, discrimination, sticking to one’s prescribed duty, truthfulness, 
mercy, careful study of the past and future, satisfaction in any condition, generosity, renunciation of sense 
gratification, faith in the spiritual master, being embarrassed at improper action, charity, simplicity, 
humb leness and satisfaction within oneself are qualities of the mode of goodness. Material desire, great endeavor, audacity, dissatisfaction even in gain, false pride, praying for material advancement, considering 
oneself different and better than others, sens e gratification, rash eagerness to fight, a fondness for hearing 
oneself praised, the tendency to ridicule others, advertising one’s own prowess and justifying one’s actions 
by one’s strength are qualities of the mode of passion. Intolerant anger, stingine ss, speaking without 
scriptural authority, violent hatred, living as a parasite, hypocrisy, chronic fatigue, quarrel, lamentation, 
delusion, unhappiness, depression, sleeping too much, false expectations, fear and laziness constitute the 
major qualities of  the mode of ignorance. Now please hear about the combination of these three modes.  
6. My dear Uddhava, the combination of all three modes is present in the mentality of ”I” and ”mine.” The 
ordinary transactions of this world, which are carried out through  the agency of the mind, the objects of 
perception, the senses and the vital airs of the physical body, are also based on the combination of the 
modes.  
7. When a person devotes himself to religiosity, economic development and sense gratification, the faith , 
wealth and sensual enjoyment obtained by his endeavors display the interaction of the three modes of 
nature.  
8. When a man desires sense gratification, being attached to family life, and when he consequently becomes 
established in religious and occupatio nal duties, the combination of the modes of nature is manifest.  
9. A person exhibiting qualities such as self -control is understood to be predominantly in the mode of 
goodness. Similarly, a passionate person is recognized by his lust, and one in ignorance is recognized by 
qualities such as anger.  
10. Any person, whether man or woman, who worships Me with loving devotion, offering his or her 
prescribed duties unto Me without material attachment, is understood to be situated in goodness.  
11. When a person wor ships Me by his prescribed duties with the hope of gaining material benefit, his 
nature should be understood to be in passion, and one who worships Me with the desire to commit violence 
against others is in ignorance.  
12. The three modes of material nature —goodness, passion and ignorance —influence the living entity but 
not Me. Manifesting within his mind, they induce the living entity to become attached to material bodies and 
other created objects. In this way the living en tity is bound up.  
13. When the mode of goodness, which is luminous, pure and auspicious, predominates over passion and 
ignorance, a man becomes endowed with happiness, virtue, knowledge and other good qualities.  
14. When the mode of passion, which causes a ttachment, separatism and activity, conquers ignorance and 
goodness, a man begins to work hard to acquire prestige and fortune. Thus in the mode of passion he 
experiences anxiety and struggle.  
15. When the mode of ignorance conquers passion and goodness, i t covers one’s consciousness and makes 
one foolish and dull. Falling into lamentation and illusion, a person in the mode of ignorance sleeps 
excessively, indulges in false hopes, and displays violence toward others.  
16. When consciousness becomes clear and  the senses are detached from matter, one experiences 
fearlessness within the material body and detachment from the material mind. You should understand this 
situation to be the predominance of the mode of goodness, in which one has the opportunity to real ize Me.  
17. You should discern the mode of passion by its symptoms —the distortion of the intelligence because of 
too much activity, the inability of the perceiving senses to disentangle themselves from mundane objects, an 
unhealthy condition of the working  physical organs, and the unsteady perplexity of the mind.  18. When one’s higher awareness fails and finally disappears and one is thus unable to concentrate his 
attention, his mind is ruined and manifests ignorance and depression. You should understand th is situation 
to be the predominance of the mode of ignorance.  
19. With the increase of the mode of goodness, the strength of the demigods similarly increases. When 
passion increases, the demoniac become strong. And with the rise of ignorance, O Uddhava, th e strength of 
the most wicked increases.  
20. It should be understood that alert wakefulness comes from the mode of goodness, sleep with dreaming 
from the mode of passion, and deep, dreamless sleep from the mode of ignorance. The fourth state of 
consciousne ss pervades these three and is transcendental.  
21. Learned persons dedicated to Vedic culture are elevated by the mode of goodness to higher and higher 
positions. The mode of ignorance, on the other hand, forces one to fall headfirst into lower and lower births. 
And by the mode of passion one continues transmigrating through human bodies.  
22. Those who leave this world in the mode of goodness go to the heavenly planets, those who pass away in 
the mode of passion r emain in the world of human beings, and those dying in the mode of ignorance must 
go to hell. But those who are free from the influence of all modes of nature come to Me.  
23. Work performed as an offering to Me, without consideration of the fruit, is consi dered to be in the mode 
of goodness. Work performed with a desire to enjoy the results is in the mode of passion. And work 
impelled by violence and envy is in the mode of ignorance.  
24. Absolute knowledge is in the mode of goodness, knowledge based on dual ity is in the mode of passion, 
and foolish, materialistic knowledge is in the mode of ignorance. Knowledge based upon Me, however, is 
understood to be transcendental.  
25. Residence in the forest is in the mode of goodness, residence in a town is in the mod e of passion, 
residence in a gambling house displays the quality of ignorance, and residence in a place where I reside is 
transcendental.  
26. A worker free of attachment is in the mode of goodness, a worker blinded by personal desire is in the 
mode of pass ion, and a worker who has completely forgotten how to tell right from wrong is in the mode of 
ignorance. But a worker who has taken shelter of Me is understood to be transcendental to the modes of 
nature.  
27. Faith directed toward spiritual life is in the mode of goodness, faith rooted in fruitive work is in the 
mode of passion, faith residing in irreligious activities is in the mode of ignorance, but faith in My 
devotional service is purely transcendental.  
28. Food that is wholesome, pure and obtained with out difficulty is in the mode of goodness, food that gives 
immediate pleasure to the senses is in the mode of passion, and food that is unclean and causes distress is in 
the mode of ignorance.  
29. Happiness derived from the self is in the mode of goodness,  happiness based on sense gratification is in 
the mode of passion, and happiness based on delusion and degradation is in the mode of ignorance. But that 
happiness found within Me is transcendental.  
30. Therefore material substance, place, result of activit y, time, knowledge, work, the performer of work, 
faith, state of consciousness, species of life and destination after death are all based on the three modes of 
material nature.  31. O best of human beings, all states of material being are related to the int eraction of the enjoying soul and 
material nature. Whether seen, heard of or only conceived within the mind, they are without exception 
constituted of the modes of nature.  
32. O gentle Uddhava, all these different phases of conditioned life arise from work  born of the modes of 
material nature. The living entity who conquers these modes, manifested from the mind, can dedicate 
himself to Me by the process of devotional service and thus attain pure love for Me.  
33. Therefore, having achieved this human form of  life, which allows one to develop full knowledge, those 
who are intelligent should free themselves from all contamination of the modes of nature and engage 
exclusively in loving service to Me.  
34. A wise sage, free from all material association and unbewi ldered, should subdue his senses and worship 
Me. He should conquer the modes of passion and ignorance by engaging himself only with things in the 
mode of goodness.  
35. Then, being fixed in devotional service, the sage should also conquer the material mode of goodness by 
indifference toward the modes. Thus pacified within his mind, the spirit soul, freed from the modes of 
nature, gives up the very cause of his conditioned life and attains Me.  
36. Freed from the subtle conditioning of the mind and from the mo des of nature born of material 
consciousness, the living entity becomes completely satisfied by experiencing My transcendental form. He 
no longer searches for enjoyment in the external energy, nor does he contemplate or remember such 
enjoyment within himse lf. 
Chapter Twenty -Six The Aila -Gita 
1. The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Having achieved this human form of life, which affords one 
the opportunity to realize Me, and being situated in My devotional service, one can achieve Me, the 
reservoir of all  pleasure and the Supreme Soul of all existence, residing within the heart of every living 
being.  
2. A person fixed in transcendental knowledge is freed from conditioned life by giving up his false 
identification with the products of the material modes of nature. Seeing these products as simply illusion, he 
avoids entanglement with the modes of nature, although constantly among them. Because the modes of 
nature and their products are simply not real, he does not accept them.  
3. One should never associate wi th materialists, those dedicated to gratifying their genitals and bellies. By 
following them one falls into the deepest pit of darkness, just like a blind man who follows another blind 
man. 
4. The following song was sung by the famous emperor Purarava. Whe n deprived of his wife, Urvasi, he 
was at first bewildered, but by controlling his lamentation he began to feel detachment.  
5. When she was leaving him, even though he was naked he ran after her just like a madman and called out 
in great distress, ”O my wi fe, O terrible lady! Please stop!”  
6. Although for many years Purarava had enjoyed sex pleasure in the evening hours, still he was not 
satisfied by such insignificant enjoyment. His mind was so attracted to Urvasi that he did not notice how the 
nights were  coming and going.  
7. King Aila said: Alas, just see the extent of my delusion! This goddess was embracing me and held my 
neck in her grip. My heart was so polluted by lust that I had no idea how my life was passing.  8. That lady cheated me so much that I did not even see the rising or setting of the sun. Alas, for so many 
years I passed my days in vain!  
9. Alas, although I am supposed to be a mighty emperor, the crown jewel of all kings on this earth, just see 
how my bewilderment has rendered me a toy anim al in the hands of women!  
10. Although I was a powerful lord with great opulence, that woman gave me up as if I were no more than 
an insignificant blade of grass. And still, naked and without shame, I followed her, crying out to her like a 
madman.  
11. Where are my so -called great influence, power and sovereignty? Just like an ass being kicked in the face 
by his she -ass, I ran after that woman, who had already given me up.  
12. What is the use of a big education or the practice of austerities and renuncia tion, and what is the use of 
studying religious scriptures, of living in solitude and silence, if, after all that, one’s mind is stolen by a 
woman?  
13. To hell with me! I am such a fool that I didn’t even know what was good for me, although I arrogantly 
thought I was highly intelligent. Although I achieved the exalted position of a lord, I allowed myself to be 
conquered by women as if I were a bullock or a jackass.  
14. Even after I had served the so -called nectar of the lips of Urvasi for many years, my lus ty desires kept 
rising again and again within my heart and were never satisfied, just like a fire that can never be 
extinguished by the oblations of ghee poured into its flames.  
15. Who but the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who lies beyond material perce ption and is the Lord of 
self-satisfied sages, can possibly save my consciousness, which has been stolen by a prostitute?  
16. Because I allowed my intelligence to become dull and because I failed to control my senses, the great 
confusion in my mind did not  go away, even though Urvasi herself gave me wise counsel with well -spoken 
words.  
17. How can I blame her for my trouble when I myself am ignorant of my real, spiritual nature? I did not 
control my senses, and so I am like a person who mistakenly sees a ha rmless rope as a snake.  
18. What is this polluted body anyway —so filthy and full of bad odors? I was attracted by the fragrance and 
beauty of a woman’s body, but what are those so -called attractive features? They are simply a false covering 
created by illusion.  
19-20. One can never decide whose property the body actually is. Does it belong to one’s parents, who have 
given birth to it, to one’s wife, who gives it pleasure, or to one’s employer, who orders the body around? Is 
it the property of the funera l fire or of the dogs and jackals who may ultimately devour it? Is it the property 
of the indwelling soul, who partakes in its happiness and distress, or does the body belong to intimate 
friends who encourage and help it? Although a man never definitely as certains the proprietor of the body, he 
becomes most attached to it. The material body is a polluted material form heading toward a lowly 
destination, yet when a man stares at the face of a woman he thinks, “What a good -looking lady! What a 
charming nose s he’s got, and see her beautiful smile!”  
21. What difference is there between ordinary worms and persons who try to enjoy this material body 
composed of skin, flesh, blood, muscle, fat, marrow, bone, stool, urine and pus?  
22. Yet even one who theoretically understands the actual nature of the body should never associate with 
women or with men attached to women. After all, the contact of the senses with their objects inevitably 
agitates the mind.  23. Because the mind is not disturbed by that which is neither seen nor heard, the mind of a person who 
restricts the material senses will automatically be checked in its material activities and become pacified.  
24. Therefore one should never let his senses associate freely with women or with men attached to women. 
Even those who are highly learned cannot trust the six enemies of the mind; what to speak, then, of foolish 
persons like me.  
25. The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Having thus chanted this song, Maharaja Pururava, eminent 
among the demigods and human b eings, gave up the position he had achieved in the planet of Urvasi. His 
illusion cleansed away by transcendental knowledge, he understood Me to be the Supreme Soul within his 
heart and so at last achieved peace.  
26. An intelligent person should therefore reject all bad association and instead take up the association of 
saintly devotees, whose words cut off the excessive attachment of one’s mind.  
27. My devotees fix their minds on Me and do not depend upon anything material. They are always 
peaceful, endowe d with equal vision, and free from possessiveness, false ego, duality and greed.  
28. O greatly fortunate Uddhava, in the association of such saintly devotees there is constant discussion of 
Me, and those partaking in this chanting and hearing of My glories  are certainly purified of all sins.  
29. Whoever hears, chants and respectfully takes to heart these topics about Me becomes faithfully 
dedicated to Me and thus achieves My devotional service.  
30. What more remains to be accomplished for the perfect devote e after achieving devotional service unto 
Me, the Supreme Absolute Truth, whose qualities are innumerable and who am the embodiment of all 
ecstatic experience?  
31. Just as cold, fear and darkness are eradicated for one who has approached the sacrificial fi re, so dullness, 
fear and ignorance are destroyed for one engaged in serving the devotees of the Lord.  
32. The devotees of the Lord, peacefully fixed in absolute knowledge, are the ultimate shelter for those who 
are repeatedly rising and falling within the  fearful ocean of material life. Such devotees are just like a strong 
boat that comes to rescue persons who are at the point of drowning.  
33. Just as food is the life of all creatures, just as I am the ultimate shelter for the distressed, and just as 
religion is the wealth of those who are passing away from this world, so My devotees are the only refuge of 
persons fearful of falling into a miserable condition of life.  
34. My devotees bestow divine eyes, whereas the sun allows only external sight, and that o nly when it is 
risen in the sky. My devotees are one’s real worshipable deities and real family; they are one’s own self, and 
ultimately they are nondifferent from Me.  
35. Thus losing his desire to be on the same planet as Urvasi, Maharaja Pururava began t o wander the earth 
free of all material association and completely satisfied within the self.  
Chapter Twenty -Seven Lord Krsna’s Instructions on the Process of Deity Worship  
1. Sri Uddhava said: My dear Lord, O master of the devotees, please explain to me the prescribed method of 
worshiping You in Your Deity form. What are the qualifications of those devotees who worship the Deity, 
on what basis is such worship established, and what is the specific method of worship?  
2. All the great sages repeatedly declar e that such worship brings the greatest benefit possible in human life. 
This is the opinion of Narada Muni, the great Vyasadeva and my own spiritual master, Brhaspati.  3-4. O most magnanimous Lord, the instructions on this process of Deity worship first em anated from Your 
lotus mouth. Then they were spoken by the great Lord Brahma to his sons, headed by Bhrgu, and by Lord 
Siva to his wife, Parvati. This process is accepted by and appropriate for all the occupational and spiritual 
orders of society. Therefor e I consider worship of You in Your Deity form to be the most beneficial of all 
spiritual practices, even for women and sudras.  
5. O lotus -eyed one, O Supreme Lord of all lords of the universe, please explain to Your devoted servant 
this means of liberatio n from the bondage of work.  
6. The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Uddhava, there is no end to the innumerable Vedic 
prescriptions for executing Deity worship; so I shall explain this topic to you briefly, one step at a time.  
7. One should car efully worship Me by selecting one of the three methods by which I receive sacrifice: 
Vedic, tantric or mixed.  
8. Now please listen faithfully as I explain exactly how a person who has achieved twice -born status through 
the relevant Vedic prescriptions sho uld worship Me with devotion.  
9. A twice -born person should worship Me, his worshipable Lord, without duplicity, offering appropriate 
paraphernalia in loving devotion to My Deity form or to a form of Me appearing upon the ground, in fire, in 
the sun, in wa ter or within the worshiper’s own heart.  
10. One should first purify his body by cleansing his teeth and bathing. Then one should perform a second 
cleansing by smearing the body with earth and chanting both Vedic and tantric mantras.  
11. Fixing the mind on  Me, one should worship Me by his various prescribed duties, such as chanting the 
Gayatri mantra at the three junctures of the day. Such performances are enjoined by the Vedas and purify 
the worshiper of reactions to fruitive activities.  
12. The Deity form  of the Lord is said to appear in eight varieties —stone, wood, metal, earth, paint, sand, 
the mind or jewels.  
13. The Deity form of the Lord, who is the shelter of all living entities, can be established in two ways: 
temporarily or permanently. But a perma nent Deity, having been called, can never be sent away, My dear 
Uddhava.  
14. The Deity that is temporarily established can optionally be called forth and sent away, but these two 
rituals should always be performed when the Deity is traced upon the ground. Bathing should be done with 
water except if the Deity is made of clay, paint or wood, in which cases a thorough cleansing without water 
is enjoined.  
15. One should worship Me in My Deity forms by offering the most excellent paraphernalia. But a devotee 
completely freed from material desire may worship Me with whatever he is able to obtain, and may even 
worship Me within his heart with mental paraphernalia.  
16-17. In worshiping the temple Deity, my dear Uddhava, bathing and decoration are the most pleasing 
offerings. For the Deity traced on sacred ground, the process of tattva -vinyasa is most dear. Oblations of 
sesame and barley soaked in ghee are the preferred offering to the sacrificial fire, whereas worship 
consisting of upasthana and arghya is preferred f or the sun. One should worship Me in the form of water by 
offering water itself. Actually, whatever is offered to Me with faith by My devotee —even if only a little 
water —is most dear to Me.  
18. Even very opulent presentations do not satisfy Me if they are offered by nondevotees. But I am pleased 
by any insignificant offering made by My loving devotees, and I am certainly most pleased when nice 
presentations of fragrant oil, incense, flowers and palatable foods are offered with love.  19. After cleansing hims elf and collecting all the paraphernalia, the worshiper should arrange his own seat 
with blades of kusa grass whose tips point eastward. He should then sit facing either east or north, or else, if 
the Deity is fixed in one place, he should sit directly fac ing the Deity.  
20. The devotee should sanctify the various parts of his body by touching them and chanting mantras. He 
should do the same for My Deity forms and then with his hands he should clean the Deity of old flowers and 
the remnants of previous offer ings. He should properly prepare the sacred pot and the vessel containing 
water for sprinkling.  
21. Then, with the water of that proksaniya vessel he should sprinkle the area where the Deity is being 
worshiped, the offerings that are going to be presented,  and his own body. Next he should decorate with 
various auspicious substances three vessels filled with water.  
22. The worshiper should then purify those three vessels. He should sanctify the vessel holding water for 
washing the Lord’s feet by chanting hrd ayaya namah, the vessel containing water for arghya by chanting 
sirase svaha, and the vessel containing water for washing the Lord’s mouth by chanting sikhayai vasat. Also, 
the Gayatri mantra should be chanted for all three vessels.  
23. The worshiper shoul d meditate upon My subtle form —which is situated within the worshiper’s own 
body, now purified by air and fire —as the source of all living entities. This form of the Lord is experienced 
by self -realized sages in the last part of the vibration of the sacred  syllable om.  
24. The devotee conceives of the Supersoul, whose presence surcharges the devotee’s body, in the form 
corresponding to his realization. Thus the devotee worships the Lord to his full capacity and becomes fully 
absorbed in Him. By touching the  various limbs of the Deity and chanting appropriate mantras, the devotee 
should invite the Supersoul to join the Deity’s form, and then the devotee should worship Me.  
25-26. The worshiper should first imagine My seat as decorated with the personified deit ies of religion, 
knowledge, renunciation and opulence and with My nine spiritual energies. He should think of the Lord’s 
sitting place as an eight -petaled lotus, effulgent on account of the saffron filaments within its whorl. Then, 
following the regulation s of both the Vedas and the tantras, he should offer Me water for washing the feet, 
water for washing the mouth, arghya and other items of worship. By this process he achieves both material 
enjoyment and liberation.  
27. One should worship, in order, the Lo rd’s Sudarsana disc, His Pancajanya conchshell, His club, sword, 
bow, arrows and plow, His musala weapon, His Kaustubha gem, His flower garland and the Srivatsa curl of 
hair on His chest.  
28. One should worship the Lord’s associates Nanda and Sunanda, Garuda, Pracanda and Canda, Mahabala 
and Bala, and Kumuda and Kumudeksana.  
29. With offerings such as proksana one should worship Durga, Vinayaka, Vyasa, Visvaksena, the spiritual 
masters and the various demigods. All these personalities should be in their proper places facing the Deity of 
the Lord.  
30-31. The worshiper should bathe the Deity every day, as opulently as his assets permit, using waters 
scente d with sandalwood, usira root, camphor, kunkuma and aguru. He should also chant various Vedic 
hymns, such as the anuvaka known as Svarna -gharma, the Mahapurusa -vidya, the Purusa -sukta and various 
songs of the Sama Veda, such as the Rajana and the Rohinya.  
32. My devotee should then lovingly decorate Me with clothing, a brahmana thread, various ornaments, 
marks of tilaka and garlands, and he should anoint My body with fragrant oils, all in the prescribed manner.  
33. The worshiper should faithfully present Me  with water for washing My feet and mouth, fragrant oils, 
flowers and unbroken grains, along with incense, lamps and other offerings.  34. Within his means, the devotee should arrange to offer Me sugar candy, sweet rice, ghee, saskuli [rice -
flour cakes], ap upa [various sweet cakes], modaka [steamed rice -flour dumplings filled with sweet coconut 
and sugar], samyava [wheat cakes made with ghee and milk and covered with sugar and spices], yogurt, 
vegetable soups and other palatable foods.  
35. On special occasio ns, and daily if possible, the Deity should be massaged with ointment, shown a 
mirror, offered a eucalyptus stick for brushing His teeth, bathed with the five kinds of nectar, offered all 
kinds of opulent foods, and entertained with singing and dancing.  
36. In an arena constructed according to scriptural injunctions, the devotee should perform a fire sacrifice, 
utilizing the sacred belt, the sacrificial pit and the altar mound. When igniting the sacrificial fire, the devotee 
should bring it to a blaze with wood piled up by his own hands.  
37. After spreading kusa grass on the ground and sprinkling it with water, one should perform the 
anvadhana ritual according to the prescribed rules. Then one should arrange the items to be offered as 
oblations and should sa nctify them with water from the sprinkling vessel. The worshiper should next 
meditate upon Me within the fire.  
38-41. The intelligent devotee should meditate upon that form of the Lord whose color is like molten gold, 
whose four arms are resplendent with t he conchshell, disc, club and lotus flower, and who is always 
peaceful and dressed in a garment colored like the filaments within a lotus flower. His helmet, bracelets, belt 
and fine arm ornaments shine brilliantly. The symbol of Srivatsa is on His chest, along with the glowing 
Kaustubha gem and a garland of forest flowers. The devotee should then worship that Lord by taking pieces 
of firewood soaked in the sacrificial ghee and throwing them into the fire. He should perform the ritual of 
aghara, presenting into the fire the various items of oblation drenched in ghee. He should then offer to 
sixteen demigods, beginning with Yamaraja, the oblation called svisti -krt, reciting the basic mantras of each 
deity and the sixteen -line Purusa -sukta hymn. Pouring one ob lation after each line of the Purusa -sukta, he 
should utter the particular mantra naming each deity.  
42. Having thus worshiped the Lord in the sacrificial fire, the devotee should offer his obeisances to the 
Lord’s personal associates by bowing down and sh ould then present offerings to them. He should then chant 
quietly the mula -mantra of the Deity of the Lord, remembering the Absolute Truth as the Supreme 
Personality, Narayana.  
43. Once again he should offer the Deity water for washing His mouth, and he sh ould give the remnants of 
the Lord’s food to Visvaksena. Then he should present the Deity with fragrant perfume for the mouth and 
prepared betel nut.  
44. Singing along with others, chanting loudly and dancing, acting out My transcendental pastimes, and 
hearing and telling stories about Me, the devotee should for some time absorb himself in such festivity.  
45. The devotee should offer homage to the Lord with all kinds of hymns and prayers, both from the 
Puranas and from other ancient scriptures, and also fro m ordinary traditions. Praying, ”O Lord, please be 
merciful to me! ”he should fall down flat like a rod to offer his obeisances.  
46. Placing his head at the feet of the Deity, he should then stand with folded hands before the Lord and 
pray, ”O my Lord, ple ase protect me, who am surrendered unto You. I am most fearful of this ocean of 
material existence, standing as I am in the mouth of death.”  
47. Praying in this way, the devotee should respectfully place upon his head the remnants I offer to him. 
And if th e particular Deity is meant to be sent away at the end of the worship, then this should be performed, 
the devotee once again placing the light of the Deity’s presence inside the light of the lotus within his own 
heart.  48. Whenever one develops faith in Me —in My form as the Deity or in other bona fide manifestations —one 
should worship Me in that form. I certainly exist both within all created beings and also separately in My 
original form, since I am the Supreme Soul of all.  
49. By worshiping Me through the  various methods prescribed in the Vedas and tantras, one will gain from 
Me his desired perfection in both this life and the next.  
50. The devotee should more fully establish My Deity by solidly constructing a temple, along with beautiful 
gardens. These ga rdens should be set aside to provide flowers for the regular daily worship, special Deity 
processions and holiday observances.  
51. One who offers the Deity gifts of land, markets, cities and villages so that the regular daily worship and 
special festivals of the Deity may go on continually will achieve opulence equal to My own.  
52. By installing the Deity of the Lord one becomes king of the entire earth, by building a temple for the 
Lord one becomes ruler of the three worlds, by worshiping and serving the D eity one goes to the planet of 
Lord Brahma, and by performing all three of these activities one achieves a transcendental form like My 
own. 
53. But one who simply engages in devotional service with no consideration of fruitive results attains Me. 
Thus whoe ver worships Me according to the process I have described will ultimately attain pure devotional 
service unto Me.  
54. Anyone who steals the property of the demigods or the brahmanas, whether originally given to them by 
himself or someone else, must live as  a worm in stool for one hundred million years.  
55. Not only the performer of the theft but also anyone who assists him, instigates the crime, or simply 
approves of it must also share the reaction in the next life. According to their degree of participatio n, they 
each must suffer a proportionate consequence.  
Chapter Twenty -Eight Jnana -yoga 
1. The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: One should neither praise nor criticize the conditioned nature 
and activities of other persons. Rather, one should see this world as simply the combination of material 
nature and the enjoying souls, all based on the one Absolute Truth.  
2. Whoever indulges in praising or criticizing the qualities and behavior of others will quickly become 
deviated from his own best interest  by his entanglement in illusory dualities.  
3. Just as the embodied spirit soul loses external consciousness when his senses are overcome by the illusion 
of dreaming or the deathlike state of deep sleep, so a person experiencing material duality must encou nter 
illusion and death.  
4. That which is expressed by material words or meditated upon by the material mind is not ultimate truth. 
What, therefore, is actually good or bad within this insubstantial world of duality, and how can the extent of 
such good and  bad be measured?  
5. Although shadows, echoes and mirages are only illusory reflections of real things, such reflections do 
cause a semblance of meaningful or comprehensible perception. In the same way, although the identification 
of the conditioned soul w ith the material body, mind and ego is illusory, this identification generates fear 
within him even up to the moment of death.  
6-7. The Supersoul alone is the ultimate controller and creator of this world, and thus He alone is also the 
created. Similarly, the Soul of all existence Himself both maintains and is maintained, withdraws and is 
withdrawn. No other entity can be properly ascertained as separate from Him, the Supreme Soul, who nonetheless is distinct from everything and everyone else. The appearanc e of the threefold material nature, 
which is perceived within Him, has no actual basis. Rather, you should understand that this material nature, 
composed of the three modes, is simply the product of His illusory potency.  
8. One who has properly understood the process of becoming firmly fixed in theoretical and realized 
knowledge, as described herein by Me, does not indulge in material criticism or praise. Like the sun, he 
wanders freely throughout this world.  
9. By direct perception, logical deduction, scri ptural testimony and personal realization, one should know 
that this world has a beginning and an end and so is not the ultimate reality. Thus one should live in this 
world without attachment.  
10. Sri Uddhava said: My dear Lord, it is not possible for this  material existence to be the experience of 
either the soul, who is the seer, or of the body, which is the seen object. On the one hand, the spirit soul is 
innately endowed with perfect knowledge, and on the other hand, the material body is not a conscious , 
living entity. To whom, then, does this experience of material existence pertain?  
11. The spirit soul is inexhaustible, transcendental, pure, self -luminous and never covered by anything 
material. It is like fire. But the nonliving material body, like fir ewood, is dull and unaware. So in this world, 
who is it that actually undergoes the experience of material life?  
12. The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: As long as the foolish spirit soul remains attracted to the 
material body, senses and vital force,  his material existence continues to flourish, although it is ultimately 
meaningless.  
13. Actually, the living entity is transcendental to material existence. But because of his mentality of lording 
it over material nature, his material existential conditi on does not cease, and, just as in a dream, he is 
affected by all sorts of disadvantages.  
14. Although while dreaming a person experiences many undesirable things, upon awakening he is no 
longer confused by the dream experiences.  
15. Lamentation, elation, fear, anger, greed, confusion and hankering, as well as birth and death, are 
experiences of the false ego and not of the pure soul.  
16. The living entity who falsely identifies with his body, senses, life air and mind, and who dwells within 
these coverings , assumes the form of his own materially conditioned qualities and work. He is designated 
variously in relation to the total material energy, and thus, under the strict control of supreme time, he is 
forced to run here and there within material existence.  
17. Although the false ego has no factual basis, it is perceived in many forms —as the functions of the mind, 
speech, life air and bodily faculties. But with the sword of transcendental knowledge, sharpened by worship 
of a bona fide spiritual master, a sobe r sage will cut off this false identification and live in this world free 
from all material attachment.  
18. Real spiritual knowledge is based on the discrimination of spirit from matter, and it is cultivated by 
scriptural evidence, austerity, direct percep tion, reception of the Puranas’ historical narrations, and logical 
inference. The Absolute Truth, which alone was present before the creation of the universe and which alone 
will remain after its destruction, is also the time factor and the ultimate cause.  Even in the middle stage of 
this creation’s existence, the Absolute Truth alone is the actual reality.  
19. Gold alone is present before its manufacture into gold products, the gold alone remains after the 
products’ destruction, and the gold alone is the e ssential reality while it is being utilized under various 
designations. Similarly, I alone exist before the creation of this universe, after its destruction and during its 
maintenance.  20. The material mind manifests in three phases of consciousness —wakefu lness, sleep and deep sleep —
which are products of the three modes of nature. The mind further appears in three different roles —the 
perceiver, the perceived and the regulator of perception. Thus the mind is manifested variously throughout 
these threefold de signations. But it is the fourth factor, existing separately from all this, that alone 
constitutes the Absolute Truth.  
21. That which did not exist in the past and will not exist in the future also has no existence of its own for 
the period of its duration, but is only a superficial designation. In My opinion, whatever is created and 
revealed by something else is ultimately only that other thing.  
22. Although thus not existing in reality, this manifestat ion of transformations created from the mode of 
passion appears real because the self -manifested, self -luminous Absolute Truth exhibits Himself in the form 
of the material variety of the senses, the sense objects, the mind and the elements of physical natu re. 
23. Thus clearly understanding by discriminating logic the unique position of the Absolute Truth, one 
should expertly refute one’s misidentification with matter and cut to pieces all doubts about the identity of 
the self. Becoming satisfied in the soul ’s natural ecstasy, one should desist from all lusty engagements of the 
material senses.  
24. The material body made of earth is not the true self; nor are the senses, their presiding demigods or the 
air of life; nor is the external air, water or fire or on e’s mind. All these are simply matter. Similarly, neither 
one’s intelligence, material consciousness nor ego, nor the elements of ether or earth, nor the objects of 
sense perception, nor even the primeval state of material equilibrium can be considered the  actual identity of 
the soul.  
25. For one who has properly realized My personal identity as the Supreme Godhead, what credit is there if 
his senses —mere products of the material modes —are perfectly concentrated in meditation? And on the 
other hand, what bl ame is incurred if his senses happen to become agitated? Indeed, what does it mean to 
the sun if the clouds come and go?  
26. The sky may display the various qualities of the air, fire, water and earth that pass through it, as well as 
such qualities as heat and cold, which continually come and go with the seasons. Yet the sky is never 
entangled with any of these qualities. Similarly, the Supreme Absolute Truth is never entangled with the 
contaminations of goo dness, passion and ignorance, which cause the material transformations of the false 
ego. 
27. Nevertheless, until by firmly practicing devotional service to Me one has completely eliminated from his 
mind all contamination of material passion, one must very carefully avoid associating with the material 
modes, which are produced by My illusory energy.  
28. Just as an improperly treated disease recurs and gives repeated distress to the patient, the mind that is not 
completely purified of its perverted tendencies  will remain attached to material things and repeatedly 
torment the imperfect yogi.  
29. Sometimes the progress of imperfect transcendentalists is checked by attachment to family members, 
disciples or others, who are sent by envious demigods for that purpos e. But on the strength of their 
accumulated advancement, such imperfect transcendentalists will resume their practice of yoga in the next 
life. They will never again be trapped in the network of fruitive work.  
30. An ordinary living entity performs materia l work and is transformed by the reaction to such work. Thus 
he is driven by various desires to continue working fruitively up to the very moment of his death. A wise 
person, however, having experienced his own constitutional bliss, gives up all material d esires and does not 
engage in fruitive work.  31. The wise man, whose consciousness is fixed in the self, does not even notice his own bodily activities. 
While standing, sitting, walking, lying down, urinating, eating or performing other bodily functions, h e 
understands that the body is acting according to its own nature.  
32. Although a self -realized soul may sometimes see an impure object or activity, he does not accept it as 
real. By logically understanding impure sense objects to be based on illusory mate rial duality, the intelligent 
person sees them to be contrary to and distinct from reality, in the same way that a man awakening from 
sleep views his fading dream.  
33. Material nescience, which expands into many varieties by the activities of the modes of nature, is 
wrongly accepted by the conditioned soul to be identical with the self. But through the cultivation of 
spiritual knowledge, My dear Uddhava, this same nescience fades away at the time of liberation. The eternal 
self, on the other hand, is never assumed and never abandoned.  
34. When the sun rises it destroys the darkness covering men’s eyes, but it does not create the objects they 
then see before them, which in fact were existing all along. Similarly, potent and factual realization of Me 
will dest roy the darkness covering a person’s true consciousness.  
35. The Supreme Lord is self -luminous, unborn and immeasurable. He is pure transcendental consciousness 
and perceives everything. One without a second, He is realized only after ordinary words cease.  By Him the 
power of speech and the life airs are set into motion.  
36. Whatever apparent duality is perceived in the self is simply the confusion of the mind. Indeed, such 
supposed duality has no basis to rest upon apart from one’s own soul.  
37. The dualit y of the five material elements is perceived only in terms of names and forms. Those who say 
this duality is real are pseudoscholars vainly proposing fanciful theories without basis in fact.  
38. The physical body of the endeavoring yogi who is not yet matu re in his practice may sometimes be 
overcome by various disturbances. Therefore the following process is recommended.  
39. Some of these obstructions may be counteracted by yogic meditation or by sitting postures, practiced 
together with concentration on co ntrolled breathing, and others may be counteracted by special austerities, 
mantras or medicinal herbs.  
40. These inauspicious disturbances can be gradually removed by constant remembrance of Me, by 
congregational hearing and chanting of My holy names, or b y following in the footsteps of the great masters 
of yoga.  
41. By various methods, some yogis free the body from disease and old age and keep it perpetually youthful. 
Thus they engage in yoga for the purpose of achieving material mystic perfections.  
42. Th is mystic bodily perfection is not valued very highly by those expert in transcendental knowledge. 
Indeed, they consider endeavor for such perfection useless, since the soul, like a tree, is permanent, but the 
body, like a tree’s fruit, is subject to destr uction.  
43. Although the physical body may be improved by various processes of yoga, an intelligent person who 
has dedicated his life to Me does not place his faith in the prospect of perfecting his physical body through 
yoga, and in fact he gives up such procedures.  
44. The yogi who has taken shelter of Me remains free from hankering because he experiences the 
happiness of the soul within. Thus while executing this process of yoga, he is never defeated by obstacles.  
Chapter Twenty -Nine Bhakti -yoga 1. Sri U ddhava said: My dear Lord Acyuta, I fear that the method of yoga described by You is very difficult 
for one who cannot control his mind. Therefore please explain to me in simple terms how someone can 
more easily execute it.  
2. O lotus -eyed Lord, generally those yogis who try to steady the mind experience frustration because of 
their inability to perfect the state of trance. Thus they weary in their attempt to bring the mind under control.  
3. Therefore, O lotus -eyed Lord of the universe, swanlike men happily  take shelter of Your lotus feet, the 
source of all transcendental ecstasy. But those who take pride in their accomplishments in yoga and karma 
fail to take shelter of You and are defeated by Your illusory energy.  
4. My dear infallible Lord, it is not very  astonishing that You intimately approach Your servants who have 
taken exclusive shelter of You. After all, during Your appearance as Lord Ramacandra, even while great 
demigods like Brahma were vying to place the effulgent tips of their helmets upon the cu shion where Your 
lotus feet rested, You displayed special affection for monkeys such as Hanuman because they had taken 
exclusive shelter of You.  
5. Who, then, could dare reject You, the very Soul, the most dear object of worship, and the Supreme Lord 
of all—You who give all possible perfections to the devotees who take shelter of You? Who could be so 
ungrateful, knowing the benefits You bestow? Who would reject You and accept something for the sake of 
material enjoyment, which simply leads to forgetfulness of You? And what lack is there for us who are 
engaged in the service of the dust of Your lotus feet?  
6. O my Lord! Transcendental poets and experts in spiritual science could not fully express their 
indebtedness to You, even if they were endowed with the p rolonged lifetime of Brahma, for You appear in 
two features —externally as the acarya and internally as the Supersoul —to deliver the embodied living being 
by directing him how to come to You.  
7. Sukadeva Gosvami said: Thus questioned by the most affectionate Uddhava, Lord Krsna, the supreme 
controller of all controllers, who takes the entire universe as His plaything and assumes the three forms of 
Brahma, Visnu and Siva, began to reply, lovingly d isplaying His all -attractive smile.  
8. The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Yes, I shall describe to you the principles 
of devotion to Me, by executing which a mortal human being will conquer 
unconquerable death.  
9. Always remembering Me, one should pe rform all his duties for Me without becoming impetuous. With 
mind and intelligence offered to Me, one should fix his mind in attraction to My devotional service.  
10. One should take shelter of holy places where My saintly devotees reside, and one should be  guided by 
the exemplary activities of My devotees, who appear among the demigods, demons and human beings.  
11. Either alone or in public gatherings, with singing, dancing and other exhibitions of royal opulence, one 
should arrange to celebrate those holy days, ceremonies and festivals set aside specially for My worship.  
12. With a pure heart one should see Me, the Supreme Soul within all beings and also within oneself, to be 
both unblemished by anything material and also present everywhere, both externally  and internally, just like 
the omnipresent sky.  
13-14. O brilliant Uddhava, one who thus views all living entities with the idea that I am present within each 
of them, and who by taking shelter of this divine knowledge offers due respect to everyone, is co nsidered 
actually wise. Such a man sees equally the brahmana and the outcaste, the thief and the charitable promoter 
of brahminical culture, the sun and the tiny sparks of fire, the gentle and the cruel.  15. For him who constantly meditates upon My presenc e within all persons, the bad tendencies of rivalry, 
envy and abusiveness, along with false ego, are very quickly destroyed.  
16. Disregarding the ridicule of one’s companions, one should give up the bodily 
conception and its accompanying embarrassment. One  should offer obeisances before 
all—even the dogs, outcastes, cows and asses —falling flat upon the ground like a rod.  
17. Until one has fully developed the ability to see Me within all living beings, one must continue to 
worship Me by this process with the  activities of his speech, mind and body.  
18. By such transcendental knowledge of the all -pervading Personality of Godhead, one is able to see the 
Absolute Truth everywhere. Freed thus from all doubts, one gives up fruitive activities.  
19. Indeed, I consider this process —using one’s mind, words and bodily functions for realizing Me within 
all living beings —to be the best possible method of spiritual enlightenment.  
20. My dear Uddhava, because I have personally established it, this process of  devotional service unto Me is 
transcendental and free from any material motivation. Certainly a devotee never suffers even the slightest 
loss by adopting this process.  
21. O Uddhava, greatest of saints, in a dangerous situation an ordinary person cries, b ecomes fearful and 
laments, although such useless emotions do not change the situation. But activities offered to Me without 
personal motivation, even if they are externally useless, amount to the actual process of religion.  
22. This process is the supreme  intelligence of the intelligent and the cleverness of the most clever, for by 
following it one can in this very life make use of the temporary and unreal to achieve Me, the eternal reality.  
23. Thus have I related to you —both in brief and in detail —a comp lete survey of the science of the 
Absolute Truth. Even for the demigods, this science is very difficult to comprehend.  
24. I have repeatedly spoken this knowledge to you with clear reasoning. Anyone who properly understands 
it will become free from all dou bts and attain liberation.  
25. Anyone who fixes his attention on these clear answers to your questions will attain to the eternal, 
confidential goal of the Vedas —the Supreme Absolute Truth.  
26. One who liberally disseminates this knowledge among My devotee s is the bestower of the Absolute 
Truth, and to him I give My very own self.  
27. He who loudly recites this supreme knowledge, which is the most lucid and purifying, becomes purified 
day by day, for he reveals Me to others with the lamp of transcendental k nowledge.  
28. Anyone who regularly listens to this knowledge with faith and attention, all the while engaging in My 
pure devotional service, will never become bound by the reactions of material work.  
29. My dear friend Uddhava, have you now completely unde rstood this transcendental knowledge? Are the 
confusion and lamentation that arose in your mind now dispelled?  
30. You should not share this instruction with anyone who is hypocritical, atheistic or dishonest, or with 
anyone who will not listen faithfully,  who is not a devotee, or who is simply not humble.  31. This knowledge should be taught to one who is free from these bad qualities, who is dedicated to the 
welfare of the brahmanas, and who is kindly disposed, saintly and pure. And if common workers and 
women are found to have devotion for the Supreme Lord, they are also to be accepted as qualified hearers.  
32. When an inquisitive person comes to understand this knowledge, he has nothing further to know. After 
all, one who has drunk the most palatable nect ar cannot remain thirsty.  
33. Through analytic knowledge, ritualistic work, mystic yoga, mundane business and political rule, people 
seek to advance in religiosity, economic development, sense gratification and liberation. But because you 
are My devotee, w hatever men can accomplish in these multifarious ways you will very easily find within 
Me. 
34. A person who gives up all fruitive activities and offers himself entirely unto Me, eagerly desiring to 
render service unto Me, achieves liberation from birth and death and is promoted to the status of sharing My 
own opulences.  
35. Sukadeva Gosvami said: Hearing these words spoken by Lord Krsna, and having thus been shown the 
entire path of yoga, Uddhava folded his hands to offer obeisances. But his throat choke d up with love and 
his eyes overflowed with tears; so he could say nothing.  
36. Steadying his mind, which had become overwhelmed with love, Uddhava felt extremely grateful to Lord 
Krsna, the greatest hero of the Yadu dynasty. My dear King Pariksit, Uddhava  bowed down to touch the 
Lord’s lotus feet with his head and then spoke with folded hands.  
37. Sri Uddhava said: O unborn, primeval Lord, although I had fallen into the great darkness of illusion, my 
ignorance has now been dispelled by Your merciful associ ation. Indeed, how can cold, darkness and fear 
exert their power over one who has approached the brilliant sun?  
38. In return for my insignificant surrender, You have mercifully bestowed upon me, Your servant, the 
torchlight of transcendental knowledge. Th erefore, what devotee of Yours who has any gratitude could ever 
give up Your lotus feet and take shelter of another master?  
39. The firmly binding rope of my affection for the families of the Dasarhas, Vrsnis, Andhakas and 
Satvatas —a rope You originally ca st over me by Your illusory energy for the purpose of developing Your 
creation —is now cut off by the weapon of transcendental knowledge of the self.  
40. Obeisances unto You, O greatest of yogis. Please instruct me, who am surrendered unto You, how I may 
have undeviating attachment to Your lotus feet.  
41-44. The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Uddhava, take My order and go to My asrama 
called Badarika. Purify yourself by both touching and also bathing in the holy waters there, which have 
emanate d from My lotus feet. Rid yourself of all sinful reactions with the sight of the sacred Alakananda 
River. Dress yourself in bark and eat whatever is naturally available in the forest. Thus you should remain 
content and free from desire, tolerant of all dua lities, good -natured, self -controlled, peaceful and endowed 
with transcendental knowledge and realization. With fixed attention, meditate constantly upon these 
instructions I have imparted to you and assimilate their essence. Fix your words and thoughts up on Me, and 
always endeavor to increase your realization of My transcendental qualities. In this way you will cross 
beyond the destinations of the three modes of nature and finally come back to Me.  
45. Sukadeva Gosvami said: Thus addressed by Lord Krsna, wh ose intelligence destroys all the suffering of 
material life, Sri Uddhava circumambulated the Lord and then fell down, placing his head upon the Lord’s 
feet. Although Uddhava was free from the influence of all material dualities, his heart was breaking, an d at 
this time of departure he drenched the Lord’s lotus feet with his tears.  46. Greatly fearing separation from Him for whom he felt such indestructible affection, Uddhava was 
distraught, and he could not give up the Lord’s company. Finally, feeling grea t pain, he bowed down to the 
Lord again and again, placed the slippers of his master upon his head, and departed.  
47. Thereupon, placing the Lord deeply within his heart, the great devotee Uddhava went to Badarikasrama. 
By engaging there in austerities, he  attained to the Lord’s personal abode, which had been described to him 
by the only friend of the universe, Lord Krsna Himself.  
48. Thus Lord Krsna, whose lotus feet are served by all great yoga masters, spoke to His devotee this 
nectarean knowledge, which  comprises the entire ocean of spiritual bliss. Anyone within this universe who 
receives this narration with great faith is assured of liberation.  
49. I offer my obeisances to that Supreme Personality of Godhead, the original and greatest of all beings, 
Lord Sri Krsna. He is the author of the Vedas, and just to destroy His devotees’ fear of material existence, 
like a bee He has collected this nectarean essence of all knowledge and self -realization. Thus He has 
awarded to His many devotees this nectar from t he ocean of bliss, and by His mercy they have drunk it.  
OM TAT SAT  
THE END OF UDDHAVA GITA  
 