http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com 
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                   1 of 30 
  
 
Vastu for House 
The eBook details the world of Vastu Shastra. It co vers the topics Principles of Vastu 
Shastra, Vastu Residential Land, Vastu Shastra Hous e, and Interior Decoration. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com 
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                   2 of 30 
  
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Overview ……………………………………………………………………………… …. 3 
Chapter 1 - The Principles of Vastu Shastra ………………… ……………………. 4 
Chapter 2 - The Vastu Residential Lot or Land …………… ………………………  7 
Chapter 3 - The Vastu Shastra House ……………………………………… ……… 17 
Chapter 4 - Vastu and Interior Decoration ……………………… …………………. 26 
Conclusion ………………………………………………………………………………. 29 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com 
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                   3 of 30 
  
OVERVIEW 
Vastu Shastra  a refined combination of ancient Hindu traditions developed as an art, 
analyzed as a science, and interpreted astrological ly can lead the way into healthy 
living. There is a universal call for world peace h ence the smallest unit of the society like 
the family should raise their offspring in an envir onment that knows the meaning of 
peace.    
The ebook details the world of Vastu Shastra; it te aches us how to recognize a land 
suitable as a vastu for a house that will receive m agnetic energy from elemental forces: 
the Sun, the Earth, the Sky, the Air, and the Water .   
Discover how ancient principles and practices inter pret the value of land in terms of 
shapes and other geographical characteristics. How even the debris and rubbish 
unearthed can play an important part on the quality  of the land we build our house on. 
Understand how and where we should position ourselv es in order to receive the sun’s 
unseen benefits. We all wish to live a life as peac efully and comfortably as we can and 
a simple knowledge of the positive elemental influe nces can help us achieve what we all 
hope for.  
Learn the importance of laying out your house in a manner that will ensure a 
harmonious balance between you and nature. The obje ctive is to become open to 
positive elemental influences and at the same time become protected from unseen 
malevolence. Positive vibrations can bring happines s through excellence in health and 
business dealings while the negative vibrations can  bring grief and losses. There is a 
purpose in each location and positioning. What we d o as dwellers in a house designed 
as per vastu shastra can be aptly guided by the way  our rooms are positioned.   
Vastu Shastra is a vast field and it may take more than this ebook to acquire 
specialization. Some basic knowledge on what are fa vorable and unfavorable will help 
us develop our own instincts to recognize a suitabl e land, a correct alignment, and an 
ideal location. Understanding the scientific reason s will help us appreciate the logic of 
ancient traditions which may very well help us to a chieve what has been elusive for so 
long: happiness, contentment, and inner peace.   
 http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com 
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                   4 of 30 
     
CHAPTER 1 - THE PRINCIPLES OF VASTU SHASTRA 
India in the richness of its culture and tradition has some helpful tips to share with us on 
how we can design our homes or any kind of building  for that matter. It lies in the basic 
principle that for man to get the maximum benefits of life’s energy giving sources, he 
must keep his bodily placement in balance with natu re. The guiding principles are 
embodied in the ancient tradition known as Vastu Shastra.  
Roughly translated Vastu means land to live on and Shastra  has reference to harmony 
and balance of man with nature. Vastu Shastra teach es us on how we can lay out our 
house design so that we as human beings can get the  maximum benefits of the natural 
forces given-off by nature. Basically, this system deals with the five elements in Indian 
Mythology namely, air, water, earth, fire, and sky which are believed to be sources of 
natural power. 
These five elements in ancient Hindu beliefs are sa id to be capable of giving off energy. 
How we, as human beings absorb this energy rely on where we are positioned. 
Therefore a good enough knowledge and understanding  about the art or science of 
vastu shastra helps us appreciate its traditional v alues.  
Before we get into details about vastu shastra, let  us first have a clearer concept about 
the five elements and its significance to human lif e. Ancient Hindu tradition believes that 
the Earth was formed 460 million years ago and it s tarted out from being just a big fiery 
ball. Hindu theory has it that it possessed magneti c forces that caused a surface to be 
formed out of the rocks that melted through the pas sing of time. As magnets have it, 
there is the existence of two poles: the North Pole  and the South Pole.  
Then there came the creation of space represented b y the sky, the air inherent in 
space, or vacuum, the earth which is the solid surf ace, the water which comprises ¾ of 
the earth’s surface and the fire which is natural t o the sun.  
Sky something that denotes space, a vacuum endless and infinite yet holds an 
unimaginable power that can reach our earthly exist ence. 
Air the gasses biologically needed by all living things  on earth whether for subsistence 
or for ecological balance. http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com 
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                   5 of 30 
  
Water believed to  be rainfall from the skies which filled up the gaps  and low lying areas 
of the Earth. 
Earth that which was formed out of the molten rocks and w hich attracts all other 
elements because of its great magnetic force. 
Sun the bearer of fire and the main source of life on e arth. It plays an important part in 
vastu shastra since it is worshipped as the personi fication of God being the potential 
source of creation. If we are to really think about  it, life without the sun is like having the 
main switch turned-off.  
The invisible powers emanating from these elements can come in all directions. It is a 
must therefore to know where we can position our pr operty, our house as well as our 
physical beings in order to receive the natural lif e forces.  
POSITION    BENEFITS 
North -    Happiness and Calm  
East -     Abundance of wealth 
South -    Shortage of female members or tragedies 
West -  Stomach and sexual troubles to occur among male 
members 
North West -     Unhealthy rivalry that can cause t rouble  
South West -    Brings conflict with the son 
South East -     Death will be dreaded 
Center of the House -   Suffer from heavy monetary losses 
Vastu Shastra  adapts its principles by revolving its concept in the huge power of the 
Sun to reach man’s existence on earth. A mere fract ion of the Sun’s heat is enough to 
sustain the life and continuous existence of living  things in a place as distant as the 
Earth thus the placing of a structured habitat to r eceive the most of the energy from all 
elemental forces is rendered important. http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com 
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                   6 of 30 
  
The methods and the techniques adhered to in order to achieve the benefits of vastu 
shastra are based on both myths and scientific expl anations. The following are the basic 
objectives of the vastu shastra ideology:   
Dharma or Religion:  The goal is to achieve spiritual happiness among t he dwellers of 
the house and this can be best achieved by letting natural energy forces do the job. As 
we deal with family, friends, businesses, and peopl e within the community, we often 
show respect and deference by observing the teachin gs of our religion. Thus we 
promote harmony by manifesting our religious maturi ty. 
Arth or Wealth : The objective is to gain wealth as this will prov ide the dweller comfort 
and luxury. 
Kama or Desire: The goal is to have the house and entire family mem bers attain their 
heart’s desires for those that cannot be bought by way of money. As long as harmony 
and contentment fill the various rooms of the vastu  house, real and intangible desires 
will be realized.       
Moksha or Salvation : Being human is being vulnerable to the worldlines s of our 
environment hence the soul craves for salvation or redemption as a way of cleansing 
the soul. The positive energy forces that surround us in our environment will steer us to 
do what is good and what is best. 
The use of vastu shastra to fill in our dwellings w ith positive energy forces can help us 
achieve the four main focus of our human existence;  hence we will go through this life 
with much satisfaction and contentment. 
*** 
 
 
 
 
 http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com 
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                   7 of 30 
  
CHAPTER 2 - THE VASTU RESIDENTIAL LOT OR LAND   
A house should be constructed on a good vastu or la nd to live on. Hence care and 
proper selection should be exercised when choosing to buy a property you intend to 
build your house on.  
As we have come to an understanding that different cosmic energy fields reach our 
place of existence here on earth, the benefits we d erive from them rely on the paths 
where these solar and magnetic energy meet at certa in points on the Earth’s surface. 
Hence importance is placed on how we should positio n our lands and homes while 
these different types of energy emit their life giv ing powers on Earth.  
The sunbeams during the morning are bearers of prof use and positive energy quite 
beneficial to the body, while afternoon sunbeams wh ich can easily tire the human body 
are best avoided because they are not useful. For t his purpose, energy coming from 
different directions is treated in different ways. Energy received from Northeast direction 
to Southwest direction is to be stored in the body since the Northeast is a positive pole 
and the Southwest is a negative pole. Hence in cons tructing our homes or buildings, the 
Northeast side should have wider openings while the  Southwest should have smaller 
openings. 
The principle behind this is to get as much positiv e energy as possible to achieve 
maximum potential for development and growth. Thus these will all start with the land 
upon which we build our energy receptacle or house.   
Here are some helpful learning guides when acquirin g lots or lands for your buildings or 
edifices:   
Geographic Qualities of the Vastu Land  
Shapes of the Lot or Land  
Vastu Shastra recommends square or rectangular shap es of lands. However, since  
perfectly shaped lands are hard to come by, vastu r ecommends what is known as the 
Sherdah or one where the land is wider in front and  coming out narrower at the rear.  
 http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com 
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                   8 of 30 
  
There is also the favorable vastu known as Gaumukhi  wherein the front part is narrower 
compared to the rear part where the lot is wider.   
The Plot or Land Facings  
1. A lot facing Northeast is a good site for homes,  factories, and offices. 
2. A lot facing Northwest is ideal for trading, bus iness, and industrial sites. 
3. A lot facing Southeast is good for chemical, pet ro-chemical, and electricity-
related industries. 
4. A lot facing Southwest can bring good business f or night time activities.  
5. Plots facing a road in more than one direction c an also be significant in vastu 
principles.  
• Land facing the West road brings fame and populari ty. 
• Land facing a South road is ideal for business ven tures. 
6. Plots facing two-side roads : 
• Lots facing North and East roads are good for over all prosperity. 
• Lots facing East and South roads foretell prosperi ty for female residents. 
• Lots facing South and West roads as well as those facing North and South 
roads will provide moderate fortune. 
• Lots facing West and North roads are considered as  prosperous lands. 
7. Lots facing roads on three sides, one side of wh ich leads to a road end or facing 
a T-junction are considered as not ideal or weak pl ots.  
8. The best plot of all is the lot facing roads on all sides.  
The Quality of Soil  
Land that has good soil quality is perfect for cult ivation where agricultural production 
can prosper. Land with too many rocks, worms, humus , and thorny trees are not 
promising sites.  Black and clay-like soil is hardl y suitable for building sites which is also 
true for soil with crumbly rock composition. Soil c onsidered as perfect for construction 
use are those that are yellowish in color.  
 http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com 
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                   9 of 30 
  
Vastu Shastra also gives importance to the differen t debris materials found in the soil 
during excavation processes of construction. Vastu guiding principles make use of them 
as indicators as to how the land fared during the p ast.  
Listed below are the equivalent interpretations for  each material dug out of the soil 
during excavation proceedings: 
Stone     Abundance of wealth 
Bricks      All types of riches and possessions in the future 
Copper or metals     Affluence in life 
Coal       Illnesses and loss of health and wealth 
Bones of animals    Hindrance to future development s 
Snake or Scorpion    Stumbling blocks to progress i n construction 
Anthill or Termites    Damage to wealth and lesseni ng the longevity of life 
Straw or Eggs    Death leading to pointless expense s 
Cotton      Grief 
Pieces of wood    Need to vacate the place 
Skull      Intense quarrels and litigation procedur es 
Horns of cow    Wealth and abundant possessions 
Gold or silver coins   All kinds of comforts and lu xuries   
Zinc or brass    Wealth and comforts 
Rugs or torn clothes   Conflict, quarrels, and stri fe 
Iron or steel pipes   Death or Extinction http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com 
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                   10 of 30 
  
Effects of Roads near the Plot  
North / Northeast - Ideal for women and for busines s activities as this will 
ensure wealth  
East / Northeast - Promotes upward trend in life es pecially among men; useful 
for newspaper offices / presses / photo studios / m edia 
industries, and residences 
South / Southeast - Best for women as it brings hap piness as well as excellence 
in finance 
East / Southeast - Tends to make the residents gree dy but brings more 
expenses 
North / Northwest - Instability and lack of discipl ine and may lead to unlawful 
deals 
West / Northwest - Good for businessmen with its qu ality to improve attitude 
and behavior 
South / Southwest - Indicates accidents and bad hab its for women and can lead 
to trouble  
West / Southwest -  Indicates frequent feuds, strif e, and financial instability 
Other Things to Consider while Buying Land  
1. Triangular, diamond, and L-shaped lots are unpro mising and therefore should not 
be purchased. 
2. Lands that are cut in the corner or takes the sh ape of a headless body should be 
avoided. 
3. Extensions on some portions of the land found on  the Northwest side are not 
good. They are believed to be causes for losing for tune or money.  On the other 
hand, extensions on the Northeast side are said to be bearers of wealth, 
happiness, and fame. 
4. Avoid plots that are humped at the center which tend to slope on all sides. If at all 
possible, choose a land where the north east half o r the solar half is lower than 
the south west half or the lunar half.  Adhering to  this geographical make up  http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com 
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                   11 of 30 
  
ensures the natural flow of light, solar energy, an d polar energy. Vastu principles 
maintain that these types of land bring happiness, good children and all kinds of 
successes to the home dwellers.  
5. Land obstructed on the North, Northeast, or East  side by hills, tall buildings, or 
towers blocks the Sun and will be prevented from be aming down on your 
property. Hence, this type of land becomes unpopula r. On the other hand, if the 
obstructions are found on the west or south side of  the property which will render 
your property protected from the harmful heat of th e sun, the property now 
becomes a favorable choice and it will bring health , wealth, and happiness.   
6. Land located near electrical power stations or l arge electric poles on the 
Northeast side of the plot does not complement the property with good vibrations. 
7. If you are buying property near a temple, hospit al, factory, or other public places, 
there should be a distance of at least 80 feet away  from the public places. This is 
to ensure that the shadow of the temple or public b uilding will not loom over your 
house. 
Magnetic Fields and Influences  
Each and every land we find ourselves possesses uns een magnetic forces that can 
attract other elemental emissions. The strength or the density depends on how we have 
positioned ourselves, possibly right in the path wh ere these unseen forces meet or 
about a meter away or even just remotely so.  
Vastu tradition advises that square plots are ideal  for house construction because there 
is concentration of energy in these types of lots. Unseen by us are several round 
rotational lines revolving within the house, vibrat ions that we do not see but we can at 
least slightly feel. It is a feeling that we instin ctively recognize when we sometimes enter 
certain rooms or buildings. 
Hence an understanding about the shapes, purposes, and where openings are located 
whether North, East, South, or West enable us to re ceive certain magnetic influences. 
Consult a vastu expert as they readily recognize th e geographical shapes as a whole in 
order to determine how and where the influences of these magnetic forces come from. 
We can hardly recognize the shape as square or rect angular once we are faced with the 
vastness of a land. Professional help can also give  us correct directional intuition as to  
 http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com 
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                   12 of 30 
  
North, East, South, or West directions. Our objecti ve is to find the best land for a 
construction as per vastu.   
Myths and Rituals about the Vastu or Land 
I. There are certain properties considered unsuitab le based on myths:  
1. Property being sold due to insolvency. 
2. Property belongs to persons suffering from lepro sy. 
3. Property owned by lunatics or demented individua ls. 
4. Property of persons who intend to leave the coun try or those who have left the 
country. 
5. Property near meat shop, workshop, laundry, and shoe shop. 
 
As a matter of propriety, land donated to a temple,  assigned to a watchman of a village, 
acquired through charitable trusts, and those witho ut any title deeds are not suitable for 
purchase. 
II. Bhoomi Pooja or Ritual in Preparing a Land for Construction  
 
Vastu Shastra provides that the land to be used for  construction should undergo certain 
rituals to make them suitable. Listed below are the  different steps in the ritual 
proceedings: 
• After acquiring the property, cultivate and grow p lants on the land. Prior to using 
the land for construction, make preparations for cl earing out the land. Dirt, debris, 
humus, and all kinds of rubbish should be removed f rom the land including the up 
root of thorny plants and bushes. 
• Commence setting up the property during a most fav orable time under a most 
favorable constellation. To ensure accuracy, a qual ified astrologer should give 
advice as to the proper time to set up the land for  construction. Commonly known 
as favorable days to observe such rituals are usual ly on Mondays and 
Thursdays.  
• Do not start on the construction if a female membe r of your household is more 
than seven months pregnant. 
• The groundbreaking ceremony should be done when th e sun is in the northern 
hemisphere and when days are longer than nights; us ually this transpires from 
June 21 to December 20. 
 http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com 
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                   13 of 30 
  
 
• Construction work once it commences should be unre lenting although work 
during the day should stop at sunset. It is unadvis able to continue working during 
the night. There should be a qualified engineer to oversee the construction 
project. 
• Storing of the building materials should be done i n the Southwest or Southeast 
corner of the property under construction. The ware house should be positioned 
at least a meter away from the property boundary. G uards securing the property 
should stay in a house at the southeast corner to e nsure danger away from 
thieves. 
• Recycling old construction materials to build a ne w house or building is definitely 
out of the question under the Vastu Shastra princip les. Old materials should be 
sold if still suitable and the money from the sale should be used to buy new 
materials.  
 
The First Construction Goal: The Well or Water Sour ce 
The first construction project to deal with in buil ding a new house is the well or water 
source. It is prescribed under vastu shastra that t he water source will be dug on the 
North or Northeast side of the property. To locate the most ideal site to dig the well, you 
should draw a line from the Southeast corner to Nor theast corner and mark your well to 
the right or left of the line and not on it.  
Below are the vastu guidelines for the Well:   
1. To ensure that the water derived from the well i s pure, a ritual should be first 
performed on the land at an astrologically favorabl e time. A downward-facing 
constellation is said to be the best astrological t ime to dig the well.   
 
2. Traditionally and ideally, the well should be ro und. 
 
3. It is located either on the Southeast corner or Northeast corner in a spot where it 
will be exposed to five hours of sunlight each day.  
 
4. Wells are not recommended to serve two propertie s. 
  
 
 http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com 
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                   14 of 30 
  
The Compound Walls and Gates  
The compound walls and gates are required to be bui lt before the actual construction of 
the house or building goes underway. Favorable cons tellations are also influential 
during the actual construction of these walls and t he agreeable days on which to 
commence the construction should fall on a Monday, Wednesday, Thursday, or Friday. 
Construction of these compound walls should begin f rom the Southwest side. 
As a matter of vastu shastra practice, the compound  wall should not be higher than the 
house to be built. The height of these walls if pos sible should not be uniform; the 
Southwest part of the wall should be higher than th e rest. Other provisions require that 
the walls on the North and East side should be shor ter by 21 inches than the wall on the 
West and South sides. 
However, if this is not possible, the North and Eas t sides should maintain at least a 
lowered difference of 3 inches than the West and So uth sides. For this matter, it is ideal 
to install two gates for the compound so that evil forces that enter one gate will make an 
exit to the other gate. Take note however that the South side should not be used for 
gates.  
Obstructions in front of the Main Gate 
Several obstructions to the main gate can be enumer ated and thus be avoided because 
these obstructions bring ill effects: 
Big Tree -  This obstruction can cause detriments t o the progress of 
children 
Gutter or Ditch - This connotes grief and sorrow  
Open Well -                        This is negative  since it equates with mental problem 
Corner of another building -  This too concerns men tal unrest instability  
Water drain -   Income will be drained by unnecessa ry expenses 
 
 http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com 
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                   15 of 30 
  
Straight street -    Can shorten the life span of r esidents  
 
Dilapidated house or walls - This has a negative ef fect on prosperity 
 
Staircase railings -    Often associated with sadne ss  
Pillars - Electric or telephone posts can affect th e well being of 
female members 
However, the existence of a public road to separate  obstruction from the property will 
lessen if not void the deficiencies. In a similar m anner, if the distance between the 
obstruction and the house results to a difference t hat is twice the house’s height, the 
effect of the deficiencies will be nullified. 
The Trees and Plants on the Property  
As much as trees and plants provide natural adornme nt to the property, there are also 
certain considerations and norms to be observed in keeping with the vastu shastra: 
1. Planting should be done during favorable constel lations. Seedlings should be 
grown initially in clay pots before being planted o n the grounds. Tulasi plants are 
recommended plants for vastu shastra. 
 
2. Trees are best planted on the North, Northeast, East, or in front of the house. 
However, they should not to be planted directly in front of the main entrance 
since a shadow will loom over the entrance. 
 
3. Grow an even number of trees and should be grown  on the South or West side of 
the house; it would be ideal if grown on both sides . It is not advisable to plant 
trees on the North, Northeast, or East side of a bu ilding.  
 
4. Large trees should not be planted too near the h ouse since their roots might 
damage the foundations of the building and the comp ound wall. For that matter, 
do not allow tree branches to touch the house. Besi des, large roots tend to 
absorb much sunlight and will compete with the dwel ler’s own need for the sun’s 
energy. 
 
 http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com 
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                   16 of 30 
  
5. If a tree is to be removed because of its negati ve effect, it should be done in the 
months of Magh or Bhadrapada. Worship the tree and express your apologies for 
cutting it before finally removing it and make sure  that it will fall East or North 
ways. Vow to plant a new tree in its place then do it within the next three months.   
 
6. Thorny plants except roses should not be planted  at all while creepers should be 
grown only in a garden with their own support to pr event them from crawling up 
the building.  
 
Parking Lot  
The Northwest corner of the property is the ideal l ocation for the parking lot but it should 
not be connected to the compound wall or the main b uilding. While parked, cars should 
face east or north and not facing south; otherwise,  the car owner will be destined to 
travel a long way. The parking garage should be pai nted with a light color.  
 
*** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com 
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                   17 of 30 
  
CHAPTER 3 - THE VASTU SHASTRA HOUSE  
Supporters of vastu shastra firmly believe that a h ouse built without integrating vastu 
principles is dangerous. Total disregard of the cos mic influences makes a household 
vulnerable to all that can be possibly negative. As  we struggle against conflict, we will 
continuously go through life with serious complicat ions. Believers maintain that all else 
happening is never too late to adhere to vastu prin ciples as there are corrective steps 
that can be taken to become sturdy and progressive.   
Under Vastu Shastra, the house should be constructe d with the following views in mind: 
The Main Doors and Windows : 
• Make sure they are located in the East. Placements  may be modified as Northeast, 
East of Northeast, or North of Northeast. This loca tion allows the positive energy to 
flow into the room. As an added feature it even sug gests the swastika symbol to be 
placed on the door aside from suggesting heavy deco rations as adornment.  
 
• Vastu house construction recommends that the house  should have two points of 
entry. They should not be set in a straight line an d the one which is used as an exit 
door should be smaller and must have only one shutt er.  
 
• The main door being larger than the other doors sh ould be equipped with two 
shutters. A recommended material for a door to brin g in good balance is teak. 
 
• For a main entrance to be ideal, vastu shastra pre scribes the following: 
 
• The main entrance should not face a wall and a doo r opening to the next room 
should be provided 
• Make sure that a shadow does not loom on the main door 
• It is not advisable to position the main entry poi nt at the center of the house or in 
the extreme corners 
• It is also important in vastu principles that the main entrance should not face road 
intersections or dead end roads 
• There shouldn’t be large trees or imposing lamp po sts that appear to be blocking 
the entrance 
• If there is a short flight of stairs leading to th e main entrance, the number of steps 
should be kept even 
• It is not advisable for two houses to share a sing le main entrance http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com 
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                   18 of 30 
  
• If a main entrance door is located in the south si de of the building, remember that 
it is best if a balcony or veranda is affixed to it  
The Living Room 
1. In keeping with the traditional spots for living  room you can have it at the forefront 
of the house, wide, and as large as you please. Thi s is because the living room 
ranks first in the vastu shastra household. However , take heed as to where the 
dwellers are supposed to face while inside the room . Facing the East can give 
good results while facing the North could also be b eneficial provided the living 
room is situated at the front side instead of front  center. 
 
2. Don’t construct your living room on the west sid e or south side of your front room 
as these spots will not give-off the correct vibrat ions of the cosmic energy. 
 
3. You can keep more than one door for living rooms  in accordance with vastu 
shastra but keep it in the right location. Keep thi s room beautiful and decorate as 
well as you can to promote a life with little strif e and with much enjoyment. 
 
4. Be careful where you position yourself if you ar e in this room. If it will be used for 
discussions or business deals observe your seating arrangements. As the owner, 
take a seat that faces towards the East and your gu ests or business associates 
should sit facing the south or west. This seating a rrangement will give you victory 
on the negotiation aspects.   
The Bedrooms 
1. For male family members, vastu places their bedr ooms in the West or Northwest 
since this section holds commanding and authoritati ve forces. 
 
2. For female family members, the South or Southeas t will ensure good health and 
happiness if their bedroom doors and windows are lo cated here. 
 
3. Main or Master’s Bedroom is suitably located at the Southwest. 
 
4. Bedrooms of adult married children are also idea lly placed here at the Southwest. 
For that matter if there is a second story level, t he master’s bedroom should be 
located on the said second level. It would be unwis e to choose this area for 
children’s bedroom as it is said to cause trouble. 
 
 http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com 
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                   19 of 30 
  
5. It is not advisable for newly wed couples to use  the east side for their bedroom as 
it is said to bring bad luck. 
 
6. The following bed habits, norms and decors shoul d be observed: 
 
/checkbld If one is sleeping as a guest, he should not sleep with his head facing north.  
Otherwise the bedroom owner should sleep heads faci ng east or south while 
sleeping 
 
/checkbld As one rises out of bed he should set his right foo t first on the floor. 
 
/checkbld If one studies in the room the east side should be used to achieve best 
results. 
 
/checkbld Northwest and Southside of the bedroom is ideal pla ce for putting the 
wardrobes, while TVs and heaters should be located in the Southeast corner.   
 
/checkbld If there should be a bathroom within the room, it i s best to put it in the west or 
north sides of the room.  
 
/checkbld It is not advisable to put safes in the bedroom but  if necessary, place the safe 
on the south wall. 
 
/checkbld Place something on the southwest corner of the room  since it is not 
advisable to keep this spot empty. 
 
/checkbld Photos, calendars, idols, or statues should not be kept in bedrooms. 
 
/checkbld Never keep the room in total darkness, instead keep  a night bulb lighted . 
 
/checkbld Recommended colors for bedroom walls are light rose , dark blue, or dark 
green but never white or light yellow.     
 
7. Vastu provides the following pointers for the ch ildren’s bedroom: 
/checkbld Children’s bedrooms are best located in the Northwe st or Eastside of the 
house. 
 
 http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com 
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                   20 of 30 
  
/checkbld There should be vacant spaces in the North side and  East side in a children’s 
bedroom. If a space could not be provided, place th e child’s bed at the South, 
West, or Southwest corner. 
 
/checkbld The directions of their head while laid in their be ds should be on the East side 
with the legs placed towards the west side. This is  said to attract energy that 
will bring intelligence and memory power. 
    
The Bathroom 
1. Vastu places the West and South for the bathroom  and provides that the flow of 
its drain should be towards Northeast. This positio n has something to do with the 
sun falling on the body after a good bath. 
 
2. Positioning of the toilet should be at the West or Northwest of the room at a level 
of 30 to 60 cm above the ground. 
 
3. If the bathroom is structured as an attachment t o the building, it should be 
positioned on the West or Northwest and never on th e Northeast side. 
 
4. Bathtubs and sinks are best located on the North east, North, or East side of the 
room. 
The Dining Room 
1. Vastu recommends the dining room to be near or a ttached to the kitchen and 
situated   either at the Southeast, Northwest, or N ortheast corner of the house. 
To encourage profitability coming in, place the din ing room at the West side of 
the building. 
 
2. It is best to keep in mind not to place your kit chen at the Southwest corner of the 
house since it is said to obstruct financial increa se and brings certain detriments 
to the health of its dwellers. 
 
3. You can place the dining table at the center of the house but make sure that it is 
not situated towards the Southwest corner. 
 
 http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com 
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                   21 of 30 
  
4. Positioning the kitchen on the ground floor and the dining room on the upper floor 
is said to be improper since carrying food while cr ossing stairs is in itself 
improper. 
 
5. During mealtime, the proper table places should have the head of the family 
facing the East while the rest should either face E ast, West, or North. It is said 
that placing a family member in a position facing t he South will result to petty 
quarrels.  
 
6. Make sure that the door of the dining room area does not face the main entrance 
of the room. 
 
7. The dining hall area must have a door to the Eas t, North, or West and should not 
be decorated with arches. 
 
8. Dining tables should either be square, rectangul ar in shape or never round, egg-
shaped, or irregular. Dining tables attached or fol ded against the wall are not 
advisable. 
 
9. There should be water and wash basin in the East  or North but never in the 
Southeast or Southwest corner of the room. 
 
10. Landscape paintings or portraits of nature will  permit a happy atmosphere in the 
dining area. In addition keep the dining room posit ive by painting the walls with 
light blue, yellow, saffron, or light green hues. 
 
11. Toilets are best kept as not annexed to the din ing room although there’s no harm 
for the laundry room to be near the dining room.  
The Kitchen 
1. Position the kitchen at the Southeast, although placing it in the Northwest can 
also be desirable. Whichever of these locations get  occupied by the kitchen 
should also consider the cook who should be placed at the East. Avoid using the 
Northeast part of the house for kitchens; it’s boun d to bring negative vibrations 
concerning family relationships and finances.  
 
 
 http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com 
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                   22 of 30 
  
2. The location of the sink where the tap water sho uld be located at the Northeast 
and must not be near the stove or fire area since s ituations like this will hold back 
peace and mutual love within the family. 
 
3. It is a must to avoid placing the kitchen at the  Northeast corner since conflict 
among family member will always take place. 
 
4. Storage shelves and attics should be in the Sout h and West particularly those 
that are heavy.  
The Pooja or the Prayer Room 
1. The pooja room is ideally placed at the Northeas t corner of the house preferably 
on the ground floor; if this isn’t possible, altern ative areas can be East, South, 
and West but never on the Northwest. 
 
2. Although we may explore areas here as to where w e can have the Gods give 
more attention to our prayers, we should not forget  the fact that our Gods can be 
prayed too almost anywhere because it is our faith and devotion that will be 
looked upon. 
 
3. Pictures and icons of the gods to be worshipped should face either the East or 
the West, while the person in worship should face e ither the East or the North. 
The altar should not be attached to the wall but in stead kept about 2.5 cm away 
from the wall.  
 
4. If possible, it is good for a Pooja room to be p yramid in shape sloping inward and 
pointing upwards to the roof. But it is more import ant for the pooja room to have a 
door with two shutters. 
 
5. Pooja room should not share a common wall with t he toilet or be placed opposite 
the bathroom or the toilet. This is in keeping with  the pooja room being kept 
fragrant aside from being kept clean and clutter fr ee since the room is a 
receptacle for blessings. It shouldn’t be situated above electrical appliances or 
gas stoves either as there are a lot of external en ergy emanating from these 
gadgets. 
  
6. White, light blue, or light yellow are the perfe ct colors for the pooja room. 
 
  http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com 
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                   23 of 30 
  
The Study Room 
1. The Northeast of the house is the perfect spot f or a study room. To make its 
location a more beneficial, place it next to the po oja or prayer room. When using 
this room be sure that you’re facing East or North.  
 
2. The library section should take the West side bu t not in the corners. Avoid 
placing your bookshelves in the Northwest or Southw est; having them on the 
East, West, or North of the room will give better b enefits. 
 
3. The Northeast corner is the best for a study roo m. If the study room and place of 
worship room are adjacent then it is considered mos t beneficial. 
 
4. Provide this room with a two-shuttered door loca ted at the North, Northeast, or 
West of the room while set your windows on the East , North, or West of the 
room. 
 
5. Similar to the prayer room, setting up a pyramid al study room will allow a good 
place for meditation.   
 
6. Have the study room painted either with white, s ky blue, cream, or light green to 
give it the right touch.  
 
The Swimming Pool (or Underground Water Tank, Wells , and Bore-Well) 
1. The swimming pool, underground water tank, wells , and bore-wells are ideally 
constructed in the East or Northeast of the propert y; another choice would simply 
be the North side as these are favorable spots outs ide of the house. 
 
2. As water denotes a positive flow of cash, bank b alances, and good credit for the 
residents, take note that the flow of the swimming pool or water item should 
begin from the Northeast side going to the East sid e or from the Northeast side 
going to the North side. 
 
3. For more positive results, the slope inside a sw imming pool should begin from 
the West to the East if the pool is located at the North side. On the other hand, if 
the pool is located on the East side of the propert y, the slope in the swimming 
pool should begin from the South to the North.   
 http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com 
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                   24 of 30 
  
4. Wells and tube wells are also ideally placed on the Northeast corner of the 
property; otherwise the home owner is bound to suff er from financial losses 
based on Vastu Shastra studies. 
The Overhead Water Tank 
1. Contrary to underground water tanks, the overhea d water tank should be placed 
Southwest as the best location or West corner as an  alternative location in the 
corner buildings . Neither should the overhead water tank be placed in  the middle 
of the building roof. 
 
2. Placing the overhead water tank in the Northwest  corner is acceptable only if the 
tank is small and located about a meter away from t he building’s corner roof. 
 
3. In the correct location, the overhead water tank s should be placed elevated on a 
platform about a meter from roof level.  
 
4. If possible choose overhead tanks that are light  colored and not made of plastic. 
If plastic tanks could not be avoided, make it blac k or dark blue plastic to avoid 
microbial growth usual in water containers. 
 
5. Ideally, there should be a separate water tank f or the kitchen where water is used 
for food handling and for the bathroom where water is used for general cleaning 
purposes.    
The Balconies and Verandahs 
1. The balcony can achieve good health and wealth i f it is incorporated at the 
Northeast of a house being constructed. If the hous e is already constructed and 
a balcony was placed in the Southwest, this should be corrected by enclosing it 
with glass or screen affixtures .  
 
2. The floor or roof of a balcony should be at a lo wer level than the floor of the main 
building. 
 
3. A slanted tin balcony roof where the corners of the structure are not rounded 
comprises a good balcony or verandah feature. 
 http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com 
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                   25 of 30 
  
4. Avoid arches and planting creepers on the verand ah while flower pots should be 
kept in minimal sizes. 
 
5. Seating arrangements on the verandah should be set on the South or West 
sides. While provisions for shoes to be removed upo n entering the house from 
point of the verandah, should be at the Northeast.  
The Staircase 
A staircase which is considered as a heavy installa tion is preferably situated in the 
South or West part of the house. Do not utilize the  North or East part of the house for a 
staircase as it denotes conflict between heavy obje cts being placed on light zones. 
Should a home dweller insist on putting the stairca se on the North or East side of the 
house, it is highly probable that the household wil l suffer loss of wealth. 
The following are some Vastu Shastra tips in instal ling a staircase for your house: 
1. In coming up with a staircase, the total number of stairs should not end with a 
zero, for example 10 or 20 steps. Neither should th ey end with even numbers 
since Vastu Shastra believes that this makes possib le the idea of starting your 
climb with the right foot. The right foot is equate d with gain while the left foot is 
associated with loss. 
 
2. Circular stairways are not recommended. 
 
3. The doorway meeting the top of the stairway shou ld be at least 20 cm lower than 
the doorway located at the bottom of the stairs. 
 
4. Broken stairs should immediately undergo repairs . 
 
5. The prayer room, safe, or toilet should not be p laced directly under a staircase. 
 
*** 
 
 http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com 
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                   26 of 30 
  
CHAPTER 4 - VASTU AND INTERIOR DECORATION 
In dealing with the interior decoration of a vastu shastra house, a good understanding of 
the zones is required. There are positive and the n egative zones which vastu shastra 
aims to balance. These zones deal with placing ligh t objects and furnishings on the 
positive zones while the heavy ones should be kept at the negative zones. Positive 
zones are located at the North, East, and Northeast  while negative zones are located at 
the South, West, and Southwest.    
Placement of Furniture  
• The ideal spots for the couches and chaise lounge s ets are in the south and west 
portion of the room. The person sitting on a couch should make sure that he or 
she is seated facing the North or East directions.   
• Beds should be positioned pointing to the southwest  direction of the room.  
• Bureaus or drawers containing valuables such as cas h or jewelry are best kept in 
southwest portion of the room. 
• The dining table is best found in Northwest of the kitchen, living room, or dining 
room.  
• Study table will bring better results if situated i n the North or East of the room.   
• Place aquariums in the North, East, or Northeast si nce they are light and water 
bearers as well. 
Decors and Fixtures  
Paintings and Statues – Vastu Shastra  encourages the use of paintings that depict 
natural scenery, for example waterfalls, sunrise, m ountains, flower fields, and the likes. 
Do away with war scenes and other forms of conflict  and violence since they obviously 
do not promote peace and harmony. Statues of God an d deities should have a proper 
niche in the prayer room but take care in choosing its location. Heavy statues should not 
be placed in the Northeast of the room or the house . 
Mirrors: These objects should find  suitable places in the North or East wall of the 
rooms.  However do not place them on walls opposite the bed  or put them in a study 
room . 
Indoor Plants:  Do not put large plants in the Northeast of the ho use nor use cactus and 
other thorny plants as your decor.   http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com 
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                   27 of 30 
  
Curtains: Bedrooms are best fitted with light colored curtain s while dark colored 
curtains are suitable only for the living room. In choosing dark colored curtains, red and 
black are not the favorable hues.  
Ceilings: Keep ceilings flat since elevated ceilings have les s appeal for Vastu Shastra 
concept.  
Lightings: The house should be kept brightly lit to bring more  positive vibrations to the 
house; avoid keeping rooms dimly lit.  
Floorings: Flooring materials recommended by Vastu Shastra are  mosaic, ceramic 
tiles, and marbles; white marble tiles for regular rooms are not appropriate. Use white 
marble tiles for pooja or prayer rooms since this w ill prove favorable.  
Paint Colors: Choose light shades of colors of blue and green asi de from the naturally 
light shades of pink and cream . Exclude red and black from your choices as they are  
not recommendable hues for house paints .  
Electrical Appliances: Heat emitting appliances like gas, ovens, and micro waves are 
best kept in the Southeast directions. TVs, audio, and video players are best located at 
the North, East, and Southeast of the room. Take no te not to install electrical appliances 
in the Northeast corner of the room.  
Colors and their Vastu Impact  
As colors can stir different feelings and emotions,  Vastu Shastra also puts emphasis on 
colors that will bring positive influences in our h ome. The following colors are 
considered complimentary to natural forces.  
Red: The Red is complimentary only for decors and orname nts since its bright hue can 
liven up an otherwise disciplined environment. It i s a color symbolic of bravery and 
power and has an energizing quality. However, refra in from using it as your wall paint 
particularly the bedrooms since it can also produce  stressful effect.  
Orange: Similar to the red hue, this color is strong and v ibrant and at best is used for 
decors and ornaments. It encourages positive feelin gs of happiness, joy, and good 
relationships. Its variation into a light color can  be found in peach-like tints and will make 
the color suitable for curtains and wall paints. http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com 
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                   28 of 30 
  
Green: A color that represents nature which brings hope, freshness, and harmony; it 
denotes energy forces for quick healing, good healt h, and calmness to the room. This is 
the reason why most hospitals use this color in the ir environs. This color is suitable for 
the study room as it relaxes and readies the mind f or absorption of ideas.     
Yellow: It promotes patience and wisdom and carries the su nlight aura. Rooms that 
receive direct sunlight are discouraged from being painted with yellow colors. However, 
the pooja or prayer room is an ideal choice for app lying the yellow color.  
Blue: A cool color that is symbolic for spring and new g rowth as well as relaxation. 
Bedrooms and the prayer room can function well if p ainted with this color. 
Purple: A color symbolic of faith encourages respect and t rust. However, avoid painting 
the entire room with this color as it tends to be o ver-powering. Its variation into a lighter 
hue is the lilac or lavender which can now render i tself as suitable for bedroom walls.  
White: This color is elegant, pure, and often used as a c ombination with other colors. 
Ceilings are ideally painted with the white color s ince it produces a widening and bright 
effect. Vastu Shastra recommends this color for the  Northwest bedroom also.  
Pink: A color that represents joy, happiness, and pure f eeling; it is suitable for all 
bedrooms in the South and Southwest.  
Black: A somber color which is brooding in nature hence i t is powerful in its energy. 
Black by its nature tends to make us feel depressed  and heavily laden. In some aspects 
it also borders on the occult hence this color is h ardly advisable for wall paints and 
draperies.  However, this color can find its use in  small amounts to give emphasis as 
borders and frames to ornate decors.  
Vastu Shastra is intended to give human a more mean ingful existence by being able to 
absorb all positive influences. Negative vibrations  may sometimes be unavoidable but 
there are certain vastu shastra elements to off-set  them. Live life to your fullest and 
learn its maximum potentials by absorbing positive influences, hopefully this ebook 
helps you achieve the meaning of happiness and peac e.   
 
*** http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com 
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                   29 of 30 
  
CONCLUSION 
Well done! You now know the basics of Vastu Shastra , how to recognize a suitable land 
as per Vastu, vastu for house, and interior decocat ion as per vastu principles. 
 
We invite you to learn more about vastu shastra at our website: 
http://www.freevastushastra.com  
 
We truly hope that this information was enlightenin g and helpful for you. If you enjoyed 
this e-book, please let us know. Likewise, if you t hink there are ways we can improve it, 
tell us. You can contact us on our website at http://www.freevastushastra.com  
 
Thank you, and good fortune to you, 
Team FreeVastuShastra.com  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 http://www.FreeVastuShastra.com 
 
Copyright © 2008 – 2010. FreeVastuShastra.com                                                                                   30 of 30 
  
 
DISCLAIMER 
 
The information contained in this ebook is for info rmation purposes only.  
 
FreeVastuShastra.com is not responsible for if any damage caused by using 
FreeVastuShastra.com's web site and ebooks includin g but not limited to personal, 
business, software, or hardware damages. 