Rig Veda – English Translation  
The singers  taste through  sacred  songs.   
15 Thornless  be thou,  O Earth,  spread  wide  before  us for a dwelling−place:   
Vouchsafe  us shelter  broad  and sure.   
16 The Gods  be gracious  unto us even  from  the place  whence  Visnu  strode   
Through  the seven  regions  of the earth!   
17 Through  all this world  strode  Visnu;  thrice  his foot he planted,  and the whole   
 
Was gathered  in his footstep's  dust.   
18 Visnu,  the Guardian,  he whom  none  deceiveth,  made  three  steps;  thenceforth   
Establishing  his high decrees.   
19 Look  ye on Visnu's  works,  whereby  the Friend  of Indra,  close−allied,   
Hath  let his holy ways  be seen.   
20 The princes  evermore  behold  that loftiest  place  where  Visnu  is,  
Laid as it were  an eye in heaven.   
21 This,  Vishnu's  station  most  sublime,  the singers,  ever vigilant,   
Lovers  of holy song,  light up.  
 
HYMN  XXIII.  Vayu  and Others.  
1 STRONG  are the Somas;  come  thou nigh;  these  juices  have  been  mixt with milk:   
Drink,  Vayu,  the presented  draughts.   
2 Both  Deities  who touch  the heaven,  Indra  and Vayu  we invoke   
To drink  of this our soma  juice.   
3 The singers'  for their aid, invoke  Indra  and Vayu,  swift  as mind,   
The thousand−eyed,  the Lords  of thought.   
4 Mitra  and Varupa,  renowned  as Gods  of consecrated  might,  
We call to drink  the Soma  juice.   
5 Those  who by Law uphold  the Law,  Lords  of the shining  light of Law,   
Mitra  I call, and Varuna.   
6 Let Varuna  be our chief  defence,  let Mitra  guard  us with all aids  
Both  make  us rich exceedingly.   
7 Indra,  by Marut s girt, we call to drink  the Soma  juice:  may he  
Sate him in union  with his troop.   
8 Gods,  Marut  hosts  whom  Indra  leads,  distributers  of Pusan's  gifts,   
Hearken  ye all unto my cry.  
9 With  conquering  Indra  for ally, strike  Vrtra  down,  ye bounteous  Gods   
Let not the wicked  master  us.  
10 We call the Universal  Gods,  and Maruts  to the Soma  draught,   
For passing  strong  are Prsni's  Sons.   
11 Fierce  comes  the Maruts'  thundering  voice,  like that of conquerors,  when  ye go  
Forward  to victory,  O Men.   
12 Born  of the laughing  lightning.  may the Maruts  guard  us everywhere   
May they be gracious  unto Us.  
13 Like some  lost animal,  drive  to us, bright  Pusan,  him who bears  up heaven,   
Resting  on many−coloured  grass.   
14 Pusan  the Bright  has found  the King,  concealed  and bidden  in a cave,   
Who  rests on grass  of many  hues.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
15 And may he. duly bring  to me the six bound  closely,  through  these  drops,   
As one who ploughs  with steers  brings  corn.   
16 Along  their paths  the Mothers  go, Sisters  of priestly  ministrants,   
Mingling  their sweetness  with the milk.   
17 May Waters  gathered  near the Sun, and those  wherewith  the Sun is joined,   
Speed  forth  this sacrifice  of ours.   
18 I call the Waters,  Goddesses,  wherein  our cattle  quench  their thirst;   
Oblations  to the Streams  be given.   
19 Amrit  is in the Waters  in the Waters  there  is healing  balm   
Be swift,  ye Gods,  to give them  praise.   
 
20 Within  the Waters−Soma  thus hath told me−dwell  all balms  that heal,   
And Agni,  he who blesseth  all. The Waters  hold all medicines.   
21 O Waters,  teem  with medicine  to keep  my body  safe from  harm,   
So that I long may see the Sun.  
22 Whatever  sin is found  in me, whatever  evil I have  wrought.   
If I have  lied or falsely  sworn,  Waters,  remove  it far from  me.  
23 The Waters  I this day have sought,  and to their moisture  have  we come:   
O Agni,  rich in milk,  come  thou,  and with thy splendour  cover  me.  
24 Fill me with splendour,  Agni;  give offspring  and length  of days;  the Gods   
Shall  know  me even  as I am, and Indra  with the Rsis,  know.   
 
HYMN  XXIV.  Varuna  and Others.  
1 WHO  now is he, what  God among  Immortals,  of whose  auspicious  name  we may bethink  us?  
Who  shall  to mighty  Aditi  restore  us, that I may see my Father  and my Mother?   
2 Agni  the God the first among  the Immortals,  − of his auspicious  name  let us bethink  us.  
He shall  to mighty  Aditi  restore  us, that I may see my Father  and my Mother.   
3 To thee,  O Savitar,  the Lord  of precious  things,  who helpest  us  
Continually,  for our share  we come−   
4 Wealth,  highly  lauded  ere reproach  hath fallen  on it, which  is laid,  
Free from  all hatred,  in thy hands   
5 Through  thy protection  may we come  to even  the height  of affluence   
Which  Bhaga  hath dealt  out to us.  
6 Ne'er  have  those  birds  that fly through  air attained  to thy high dominion  or thy might  or spirit;   
Nor these the waters  that flow on for ever,  nor hills,  abaters  of the wind's  wild fury.   
7 Varuna,  King,  of hallowed  might,  sustaineth  erect  the Tree's  stem in the baseless  region.   
Its rays,  whose  root is high above,  stream  downward.  Deep  may they sink within  us, and be hidden.   
8 King  Varuna  hath made  a spacious  pathway,  a pathway  for the Sun wherein  to travel.   
Where  no way was he made  him set his footstep,  and warned  afar whate'er  afflicts  the spirit.   
9 A hundred  balms  are thine,  O King,  a thousand;  deep and wide−reaching  also be thy favours.   
Far from  us, far away  drive  thou Destruction.  Put from  us e'en the sin we have  committed.   
10 Whither  by day depart  the constellations  that shine  at night,  set high in heaven  above  us?  
Varuna's  holy laws remain  unweak ened,  and through  the night  the Moon  moves  on in splendor   
11 I ask this of thee with my prayer  adoring;  thy worshipper  craves  this with his oblation.   
Varuna,  stay thou here and be not angry;  steal not our life from  us, O thou Wide−Ruler.   
12 Nightly  and daily  this one thing  they tell me, this too the thought  of mine  own heart  repeateth.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
May he to whom  prayed  fettered  Sunahsepa,  may he the Sovran  Varuna  release  us.  
13 Bound  to three  pillars  captured  Sunahsepa  thus to the Aditya  made  his supplication.   
Him may the Sovran  Varuna  deliver,  wise,  ne'er  deccived,  loosen  the bonds  that bind him.  
14 With  bending  down,  oblations,  sacrifices,  O Varuna,  we deprecate  thine  anger:   
Wise  Asura,  thou King  of wide  dominion,  loosen  the bonds  of sins by us committed.   
15 Loosen  the bonds,  O Varuna,  that hold me, loosen  the bonds  above,  between,  and under.   
So in thy holy law may we made  sinless  belong  to Aditi,  O thou Aditya.   
 
HYMN  XXV.  Varuna.  
I WHATEVER  law of thine,  O God,  O Varurna,  as we are men,   
Day after day we violate.   
2 give us not as a prey to death,  to be destroyed  by thee in wrath,   
To thy fierce  anger  when  displeased.   
 
3 To gain thy mercy,  Varuna,  with hymns  we bind thy heart,  as binds   
The charioteer  his tethered  horse.   
4 They  flee from  me dispirited,  bent only on obtaining  wealths   
As to their nests  the birds  of air.  
5 When  shall  we bring,  to be appeased,  the Hero,  Lord  of warrior  might,   
Him,  the far−seeing  Varuna?   
6 This,  this with joy they both accept  in common:  never  do they fail  
The ever−faithfu l worshipper.   
7 He knows  the path of birds  that fly through  heaven,  and, Sovran  of the sea,  
He knows  the ships  that are thereon.   
8 True  to his holy law, he knows  the twelve  moons  with their progeny:   
He knows  the moon  of later birth.   
9 He knows  the pathway  of the wind,  the spreading,  high,  and mighty  wind   
He knows  the Gods  who dwell  above.   
10 Varuna,  true to holy law, sits down  among  his people;  he,  
Most  wise,  sits there  to govern.  all.  
11 From  thence  percerving  he beholds  all wondrous  things,  both what  hath been,   
And what  hereafter  will be done.   
12 May that Aditya,  very −wise,  make  fair paths  for us all our days:   
May lie prolong  our lives  for us.  
13 Varuna,  wearing  golden  mail,  hath clad him in a shining  robe.   
His spies  are seated  found  about.   
14 The God whom  enemies  threaten  not, nor those  who tyrannize  o'er men,   
Nor those  whose  minds  are bent on wrong.   
15 He who gives  glory  to mankind,  not glory  that is incomplete,   
To our own bodies  giving  it.  
16 Yearning  for the wide−seeing  One,  my thoug hts move  onward  unto him,  
As kine unto their pastures  move.   
17 Once  more  together  let us speak,  because  my meath  is brought:  priest−like   
Thou  eatest  what  is dear to thee.   
18 Now  saw I him whom  all may see, I saw his car above  the earth:   
He hath accept ed these  my songs.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
19 Varuna,  hear this call of mine:  be gracious  unto us this day  
Longing  for help I cried  to thee.   
20 Thou,  O wise God,  art Lord  of all, thou art the King  of earth  and heaven   
Hear,  as thou goest  on thy way.   
21 Release  us from  the upper bond,  untie  the bond  between,  and loose   
The bonds  below,  that I may live.  
 
HYMN  XXVI.  Agni.  
1 O WORTHY  of oblation,  Lord  of prospering  powers,  assume  thy robes,   
And offer  this our sacrifice.   
2 Sit ever to be chosen,  as our Priest.,  most  youthful,  through  our hymns,   
O Agni,  through  our heavenly  word.   
3 For here a Father  for his son, Kinsman  for kinsman  worshippeth,   
And Friend,  choice−worthy,  for his friend.   
4 Fiere  let the foe−destroyers  sit, Varuna,  Mitra,  Aryaman,   
Like men,  upon  our sacred  grass.  
5 O ancient  Herald,  be thou glad in this our rite and fellowship:   
 
Hearken  thou well to these  our songs.   
6 Whate'er  in this perpetual  course  we sacrifice  to God and God,   
That gift is offered  up in thee  
7 May he be our dear household  Lord,  Priest,  pleasant  and, choice−worthy  may  
We, with bright  fires,  be dear to him.  
8 The Gods,  adored  with brilliant  fires.  have  granted  precious  wealth  to us  
So, with bright  fires,  we pray to thee.   
9 And,  O Immortal  One,  so may the eulogies  of mortal  men  
Belong  to us and thee alike.   
10 With  all thy fires,  O Agni,  find pleasure  in this our sacrifice,   
And this our speech,  O Son of Strength.   
 
HYMN  XXVII.  Agni.  
1 WITH  worship  will I glorify  thee,  Agni,  like a long−tailed  steed,   
Imperial  Lord  of sacred  rites.   
2 May the far−striding  Son of Strength,  bringer  of great  felicity,   
Who  pours  his gifts like rain, be ours.   
3 Lord  of all life, from  near;  from  far, do thou,  O Agni  evermore   
Protect  us from  the sinful  man.   
4 O Agni,  graciously  announce  this our oblation  to the Gods,   
And this our newest  song  of praise.   
5 Give  us a share  of strength  most  high,  a share  of strength  that is below,   
A share  of strength  that is between.   
6 Thou  dealest  gifts,  resplendent  One;  nigh,  as with waves  of Sindhu,  thou  
Swift  streame st to the worshipper.   
7 That man is lord of endless  strength  whom  thou protectest  in the fight,   
Agni,  or urgest  to the fray.  Rig Veda – English Translation  
8 Him,  whosoever  he may be, no man may vanquish,  mighty  One:   
Nay,  very glorious  power  is his.  
9 May he who dwells  with all mankind bear us with war−steeds  through  the fight,   
And with the singers  win the spoil.   
10 Help,  thou who knowest  lauds,  this work,  this eulogy  to Rudra,  him  
Adorable  in every  house.   
11 May this our God,  great,  limitless,  smoke−bannered  excellently  bright,   
Urge  us to strength  and holy thought.   
12 Like some  rich Lord  of men may he, Agni  the banner  of the Gods,   
Refulgent,  hear us through  our lauds.   
13 Glory  to Gods,  the mighty  and the lesser  glory  to Gods  the younger  and the elder!   
Let us, if we have  power, pay the God worship:  no better  prayer  than this, ye Gods,  acknowledge.   
 
HYMN  XXVIII  Indra,  Etc.  
1 THERE  where  the broad−based  stone  raised  on high to press  the juices  out,  
O Indra,  drink  with eager  thirst  the droppings  which  the mortar  sheds.   
2 Where,  like broad  hips,  to hold the juice  the platters  of the press  are laid,  
O Indra,  drink  with eager  thirst  the droppings  which  the mortar  sheds.   
3 There  where  the woman  marks  and leans  the pestle's  constant  rise and fall,  
O Indra,  drink  with eager  thirst  the droppings  which  the mortar  sheds.   
4 Where,  as with reins  to guide  a horse,  they bind the churn ing−staff  with cords,   
 
O Indra,  drink  with eager  thirst  the droppings  which  the mortar  sheds.   
5 If of a truth  in every  house,  O Mortar  thou art set for work,   
Here  give thou forth  thy clearest  sound,  loud as the drum  of conquerors.   
6 O Sovran  of the Forest, as the wind  blows  soft in front  of thee,   
Mortar,  for Indra  press  thou forth  the Soma  juice  that he may drink.   
7 Best strength−givers,  ye stretch  wide  jaws,  O Sacrificial  Implements,   
Like two bay horses  champing  herbs.   
8 Ye Sovrans  of the Forest,  both swift,  with swift  pressers  press  to−day   
Sweet  Soma  juice  for Indra's  drink.   
9 Take  up in beakers  what  remains:  the Soma  on the filter  pour,   
and on the ox−hide  set the dregs.   
 
HYMN  XXIX.  Indra.  
1 O SOMA  DRINKER,  ever true, utterly  hopeless  though  we be,  
Do thou,  O Indra,  give us hope  of beauteous  horses  and of kine,   
In thousands,  O most  wealthy  One.   
2 O Lord  of Strength,  whose  jaws are strong,  great  deeds  are thine,  the powerful:   
Do thou,  O Indra,  give us hope  of beauteous  horses  and of kine,   
In thousands,  O most  wealthy  One.   
3 Lull thou asleep,  to wake  no more,  the pair who on each other  look  
Do thou,  O Indra,  give us, help of beauteous  horses  and of kine,   
In thousands,  O most  wealthy  One.   
4 Hero,  let hostile  spirits  sleep,  and every  gentl er genius  wake:   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Do thou,  O Indra,.  give us hope  of beauteous  horses  and of kine,   
In thousands,  O most  wealthy  One.   
5 Destroy  this ass, O Indra,  who in tones  discordant  brays  to thee:   
Do thou,  O Indra,  give us hope  of beauteous  horses  and of kine,   
In thousands,  O most  wealthy  One.   
6 Far distant  on the forest  fall the tempest  in a circling  course!   
Do thou,  O Indra,  give us hope  of beauteous  horses  and of kine,   
In thousands,  O most  wealthy  One.   
7 Slay each reviler,  and destroy  him who in secret  injure s us:  
Do thou,  O Indra,  give us hope  of beauteous  horses  and of kine  
In thousands,  O most  wealthy  One.   
 
HYMN  XXX.  Indra.  
1 WE seeking  strength  with Soma−drops  fill full your Indra  like a well,   
Most  liberal,  Lord  of Hundred  Powers,   
2 Who  lets a hundr ed of the pure,  a thousand  of the milk−blent  draughts   
Flow,  even  as down  a depth,  to him;  
3 When  for the strong,  the rapturous  joy he in this manner  hath made  room   
Within  his belly,  like the sea.  
4 This is thine  own.  Thou  drawest  near,  as turns  a pigeo n to his mate:   
Thou  carest  too for this our prayer.   
5 O Hero,  Lord  of Bounties,  praised  in hymns,  may power  and joyfulness   
Be his who sings  the laud to thee.   
6 Lord  of a Hundred  Powers,  stand  up to lend us succour  in this fight   
In others  too let us agree.  
 
7 In every  need,  in every  fray we call as friends  to succour  us  
Indra  the mightiest  of all.  
8 If he will hear us let him come  with succour  of a thousand  kinds,   
And all that strengthens,  to our call.  
9 I call him mighty  to resist,  the Hero  of our ancient  home,   
Thee  whom  my sire invoked  of old.  
10 We pray to thee,  O much−invoked,  rich in all prccious  gifts,  O Friend,   
Kind  God to those  who sing thy praise.   
11 O Soma−drinker,  Thunder−armed,  Friend  of our lovely−featured  dames   
And of our Soma−dri nking  friends.   
12 Thus,  Soma−drinker,  may it be; thus,  Friend,  who wieldest  thunder,  act  
To aid each wish  as we desire.   
13 With  Indra  splendid  feasts  be ours,  rich in all strengthening  things  wherewith,   
Wealthy  in food,  we may rejoice.   
14 Like thee,  thyself,  the singers'  Friend,  thou movest,  as it were,  besought,   
Bold  One,  the axle of the car.  
15 That,  Satakratu,  thou to grace  and please  thy praisers,  as it were,   
Stirrest  the axle with thy strength.   
16 With  champing,  neighing  loudly−snorting  horses  Indra  hath ever won himself  great  treasures   
A car of gold hath he whose  deeds  are wondrous  received  from  us, and let us too receive  it.  Rig Veda – English Translation  
17 Come,  Asvins,  with enduring  strength  wealthy  in horses  and in kine,   
And gold,  O ye of wondrous  deeds.   
18 Your  chariot yoked  for both alike,  immortal,  ye of mighty  acts,  
Travels,  O Aivins,  in the sea.  
19 High  on the forehead  of the Bull one chariot  wheel  ye ever keep,   
The other  round  the sky revolves.   
20 What  mortal,  O immortal  Dawn,  enjoyeth  thee?  Where  lovest  thou?   
To whom,  O radiant,  dost thou go?  
21 For we have had thee in our thoughts  whether  anear  or far away,   
Red−hued  and like a dappled  mare.   
22 Hither,  O Daughter  of the Sky, come  thou with these  thy strengthenings,   
And send thou riches  down  to us.  
 
HYMN  XXXI.  Agni.  
1 Thou,  Agni,  wast the earliest  Angiras,  a Seer;  thou wast,  a God thyself,  the Gods'  auspicious  Friend.   
After  thy holy ordinance  the Maruts,  sage,  active  through  wisdom,  −with  their glittering  spears,  were  born
.  
2 O Agni,  thou,  the best and earliest  Angiras,  fulfillest  as a Sage  the holy law of Gods.   
Sprung  from  two mothers,  wise,  through  all existence  spread,  resting  in many  a place  for sake of living  m
an.  
3 To Matarisvan  first thou,  Agni,  wast disclosed,  and to Vivasvan  through  thy noble inward  power.   
Heaven  and Earth,  Vasu!  shook  at the choosing  of the Priest:  the burthen  thou didst  bear,  didst  worship  
mighty  Gods.   
4 Agni  thou madest  heaven  to thunder  for mankind;  thou,  yet more  pious,  for pious  Pururavas.   
When  thou art rapidly  freed from  thy parents,  first eastward  they bear thee round,  and, after,  to the west.   
5 Thou,  Agni,  art a Bull who makes  our store  increase,  to be invoked  by him who lifts the ladle  up.  
Well  knowing  the oblation  with the hallowing  word,  uniting  all who live, thou lightenest  first our folk  
6 Agni,  thou savest  in the synod  when  pursued  e'en him, farseeing  One!  who walks  in evil ways.   
Thou,  when  the heroes  fight  for spoil  which  men rush,  round,  slayest  in war the many  by the hands  of few
.  
7 For glory,  Agni,  day by day, thou liftest  up the mortal  man to highest  immortality,   
Even  thou who yearning  for both races  givest  them  great  bliss,  and to the prince  grantest  abundant  food.   
 
8 O Agni,  highly  lauded,  make  our singer  famous  that he may win us store  of riches:  
May we improve  the rite with new performance.  O Earth  and Heaven,  with all the Gods,  protect  us.  
9 O blameless  Agni  lying  in thy Parents'  lap, a God among  the Gods,  be watchful  for our good.   
Former  of bodies,  be the singer's  Providence:  all good  things hast thou sown  for him, auspicious  One!   
10 Agni,  thou art our Providence,  our Father  thou − we are thy brethren  and thou art our spring  of life. in 
thee,  rich in good  heroes,  guard  of high decrees,  meet  hundred,  thousand  treasures,  O infallible!   
11 Thee,  Agni,  have the Gods  made  the first living  One for living  man, Lord  of the house  of Nahusa.   
Ila they made  the teacher  of the sons of men,  what  time a Son was born to the father  of my race.   
12 Worthy  to be revered,  O Agni,  God,  preserve  our wealthy  patrons  with thy succours,  and ourselves.   
Guard  of our seed art thou, aiding  our cows  to bear,  incessantly  protecting  in thy holy way.   
13 Agni,  thou art a guard  close  to the pious  man;  kindled  art thou,  four−eyed!  for him who is unarmcd.   
With  fond heart  thou acceptest  e'en the poor man's  prayer,  when  he hath brought  his gift to gain security.   
14 Thou,  Agni  gainest  for the loudly−praising  priest  the highest  wealth,  the object  of a man's  desire.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Thou  art called  Father,  caring  even  for the weak,  and wisest,  to the simple  one thou teachest  lore.  
15 Agni,  the man who giveth guerdon  to the priests,  like well−sewn  armour  thou guardest  on every  side.  
He who with grateful  food shows  kindness  in his house,  an offerer  to the living,  is the type of heaven.   
16 Pardon,  we pray,  this sin of ours,  O Agni,  −− the path which  we have  trodden,  widely  straying,   
Dear  Friend  and Father,  caring  for the pious,  who speedest  nigh and who inspirest  mortals.   
17 As erst to Manus,  to Yayiti,  Angiras,  so Angiras!  pure Agni!  come  thou to our hall  
Bring  hither  the celestial  host and seat them  here upon  the sacred  grass,  and offer  what  they love.   
18 By this our prayer  be thou,  O Agni,  strengthened,  prayer  made  by us after our power  and knowledge.   
Lead  thou us, therefore,  to increasing  riches;  endow  us with thy strength−bestowing  favour.   
 
HYMN  XXXII. Indra.  
1 I WILL  declare  the manly  deeds  of Indra,  the first that he achieved,  the Thunder−wielder.   
He slew the Dragon,  then disclosed  the waters,  and cleft the channels  of the mountain  torrents.   
2 He slew the Dragon  lying  on the mountain:  his heave nly bolt of thunder  Tvastar  fashioned.   
Like lowing  kine in rapid  flow descending  the waters  glided  downward  to the ocean.   
3 Impetuous  as a bull, he chose  the Soma  and in three  sacred  beakers  drank  the juices.   
Maghavan  grasped  the thunder  for his weapon,  and smote  to death  this firstborn  of the dragons.   
4 When,  Indra,  thou hadst  slain  the dragon's  firstborn,  and overcome  the charms  of the enchanters,   
Then,  giving  life to Sun and Dawn  and Heaven,  thou foundest  not one foe to stand  against  thee.   
5 Indra  with his own great  and deadly  thunder  smote  into pieces  Vrtra,  worst  of Vrtras.   
As trunks  of trees,  what  time the axe hath felled  them,  low on the earth  so lies the prostrate  Dragon.   
6 He, like a mad weak  warrior,  challenged  Indra,  the great  impetuous  many−slaying  Hero.   
He. brooking  not the clashing  of the weapons,  crushed−Indra's  foe−the  shattered  forts in falling.   
7 Footless  and handless  still he challenged  Indra,  who smote  him with his bolt between  the shoulders.   
Emasculate  yet claiming  manly  vigour , thus Vrtra  lay with scattered  limbs  dissevered.   
8 There  as he lies like a bank−bursting  river,  the waters  taking  courage  flow above  him.  
The Dragon  lies beneath  the feet of torrents  which  Vrtra  with his greatness  had encompassed.   
9 Then  humbled  was the strength  of Vrtra's  mother:  Indra  hath cast his deadly  bolt against  her.  
The mother  was above,  the son was under  and like a cow beside  her calf lay Danu.   
10 Rolled  in the midst  of never−ceasing  currents  flowing  without  a rest for ever onward.   
The wate rs bear off Vrtra's  nameless  body:  the foe of Indra  sank to during  darkness.   
11 Guarded  by Ahi stood  the thralls  of Dasas,  the waters  stayed  like kine held by the robber.   
But he, when  he had smitten  Vrtra,  opened  the cave wherein  the floods  had been  imprisoned.   
12 A horse's  tail wast thou when  he, O Indra,  smote  on thy bolt; thou,  God without  a second,   
Thou  hast won back the kine,  hast won the Soma;  thou hast let loose  to flow the Seven  Rivers.   
13 Nothing  availed  him lightning,  nothing  thunder,  hailsto rm or mist which  had spread  around  him:  
 
When  Indra  and the Dragon  strove  in battle,  Maghavan  gained  the victory  for ever.   
14 Whom  sawest  thou to avenge  the Dragon,  Indra,  that fear possessed  thy heart  when  thou hadst  slain  hi
m;  
That,  like a hawk  affrig hted through  the regions,  thou crossedst  nine−and−ninety  flowing  rivers?   
15 Indra  is King  of all that moves  and moves  not, of creatures  tame  and horned,  the Thunder−wielder.   
Over  all living  men he rules  as Sovran,  containing  all as spokes  within  the felly.  
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  XXXIII.  Indra.  
1 Come,  fain for booty  let us seek to Indra:  yet more  shall  he increase  his care that guides  us.  
Will not the Indestructible  endow  us with perfect  knowledge  of this wealth,  of cattle?   
2 I fly to him invisible  Wealth−giver  as flies the falcon  to his cherished  eyrie,   
With  fairest  hymns  of praise  adoring  Indra,  whom  those  who laud him must  invoke  in battle.   
3 Mid all his host,  he bindeth  on the quiver  he driveth  cattle  from  what  foe he pleaseth:   
Gathering  up great  store  of riche s, Indra.  be thou no trafficker  with us, most  mighty.   
4 Thou  slewest  with thy bolt the wealthy  Dasyu,  alone,  yet going  with thy helpers,  Indra!   
Far from  the floor  of heaven  in all directions,  the ancient  riteless  ones fled to destruction.   
5 Fighting  with pious  worshippers,  the riteless  turned  and fled, Indra!  with averted  faces.   
When  thou,  fierce  Lord  of the Bay Steeds,  the Stayer,  blewest  from  earth  and heaven  and sky the godless.   
6 They  met in fight  the army  of the blameless.  then the Navagvas  put forth all their power.   
They,  like emasculates  with men contending,  fled, conscious,  by steep  paths  from  Indra,  scattered.   
7 Whether  they weep  or laugh,  thou hast o'erthrown  them,  O Indra,  on the sky's  extremest  limit.   
The Dasyu  thou hast burned  from  heave n, and welcomed  the prayer  of him who pours  the juice  and lauds  
thee.   
8 Adorned  with their array  of gold and jewels,  they o'er the earth  a covering  veil extended.   
Although  they hastened,  they o'ercame  not Indra:  their spies  he compassed  with the Sun of morning.   
9 As thou enjoyest  heaven  and earth,  O Indra,  on every  side surrounded  with thy greatness,   
So thou with priests  bast blown  away  the Dasyu,  and those  who worship  not with those  who worship.   
10 They  who pervaded  earth's  extremest  limit  subdued  not with their charms  the Wealth−bestower:   
Indra,  the Bull,  made  his ally the thunder,  and with its light milked  cows  from  out the darkness.   
11 The waters  flowed  according  to their nature;  he raid the navigable  streams  waxed  mighty.   
Then  Indra,  with his spirit concentrated,  smote  him for ever with his strongest  weapon.   
12 Indra  broke  through  Ilibisa's  strong  castles,  and Suspa  with his horn he cut to pieces:   
Thou,  Maghavan,  for all his might  and swiftness,  slewest  thy fighting  foeman  with thy thunder   
13 Fierce  on his enemies  fell Indra's  weapon:  with.  his sharp  bull he rent their forts in pieces.   
He with his thunderbolt  dealt  blows  on Vrtra;  and conquered,  executing  all his purpose.   
14 Indra,  thou helpest  Kutsa  whom  thou lovedst,  and guardedst  brave  Dagadyu  when  he battled,   
The dust of trampling  horses  rose to heaven,  and Svitri's  son stood  up again  for conquest.   
15 Svitra's  mild steer,  O Maghavan  thou helpest  in combat  for the land,  mid Tugra's  houses.   
Long  stood  they there  before  the task was ended:  thou wast the master  of the foemen's  treasure.   
 
HYMN  XXXIV.  Asvins.  
1 Ye who observe  this day be with us even  thrice:  far−stretching  is you bounty,  Asvins  and your course.   
To you, as to a cloak  in winter,  we cleave  close:  you are to be drawn  nigh unto us by the wise.   
2 Three  are the fellies  in your honey−bearing  car, that travels  after Soma's  loved  one, as all know.   
Three  are the pillars  set upon  it for support:  thrice  journey  ye by night,  O Asvins,  thrice  by day.  
3 Thrice  in the self−same  day, ye Gods  who banish  want,  sprinkle  ye thrice  to−day  our sacrifice  with mea
th;  
And thrice  vouchsafe  us store  of food with plenteous  strength,  at evening,  O ye Asvins,  and at break  of da
y.  
4 Thrice  come  ye to our home,  thrice  to the righteous  folk, thrice  triply  aid the man who well deserves  yo
ur 
help.   
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
Thrice,  O ye Asvins,  bring  us what  shall  make  us glad;  thrice  send us store  of food as nevermore  to fail.  
5 Thrice,  O ye Asvins,  bring  to us abundant  wealth:  thrice  in the Gods'  assembly,  thrice  assist  our thought
s.  
Thrice,  grant  ye us prosperity,  thrice  grant  us fame;  for the Sun's daughter  hath mounted  your three−whee
led 
car.  
6 Thrice,  Asvins,  grant  to us the heavenly  medicines,  thrice  those  of earth  and thrice  those  that the waters  
hold,   
Favour  and health  and strength  bestow  upon  my son; triple  protection,  Lords  of Splendour,  grant  to him.  
7 Thrice  are ye to be worshipped  day by day by us: thrice,  O ye Asvins,  ye travel  around  the earth.   
Car−borne  from  far away,  O ye Nasatyas,  come,  like vital air to bodies,  come  ye to the three.   
8 Thrice,  O ye Asvins,  with the Seven  Mother  Streams;  three  are the jars, the triple  offering  is prepared.   
Three  are the worlds,  and moving  on above  the sky ye guard  the firm−set  vault  of heaven  through  days an
d 
nights.   
9 Where  are the three  wheels  of your triple  chariot,  where  are the three  seats  thereto  firmly  fastened?   
When  will ye yoke  the mighty  ass that draws  it, to bring  you to our sacrifice.  Nasatyas?   
10 Nasatyas,  come:  the sacred  gift is offered  up; drink  the sweet  juice  with lips that know  the sweetness  w
ell.  
Savitar  sends,  before  the dawn of day, your car, fraught  with oil, various−coloured,  to our sacrifice.   
11 Come,  O Nasatyas,  with the thrice−eleven  Gods;  come,  O ye Asvins,  to the drinking  of the meath.   
Make  long our days of life, and wipe  out all our sins: ward  off our enemies;  be with us evermore.   
12 Borne  in your triple  car, O Asvins,  bring  us present  prosperity  with noble  offspring.   
I cry to you who hear me for protection  be ye our helpers  where  men win the booty.   
 
HYMN  XXXV.  Savitar.  
1 AGNI  I first invoke  for our prosperit y; I call on Mitra,  Varuna,  to aid us here.   
I call on Night  who gives  rest to all moving  life; I call on Savitar  the God to lend us help.   
2 Throughout  the dusky  firmament  advancing,  laying  to rest the immortal  and the mortal,   
Borne  in his golden  chariot  he cometh,  Savitar,  God who looks  on every  creature.   
3 The God moves  by the upward  path,  the downward;  with two bright  Bays,  adorable,  he journeys.   
Savitar  comes,  the God from  the far distance,  and chases  from  us all distress  and sorrow.   
4 His chariot  decked  with pearl,  of various  colours,  lofty,  with golden  pole,  the God hath mounted,   
The many−rayed  One,  Savitar  the holy,  bound,  bearing  power  and might,  for darksome  regions.   
5 Drawing  the gold−yoked  car his Bays,  white−footed,  have  manifested  light to all the peoples.   
Held  in the lap of Savitar,  divine  One,  all men,  all beings  have  their place  for ever.   
6 Three  heavens  there  are; two Savitar's,  adjacent:  in Yama's  world  is one, the home  of heroes,   
As on a linch−pin,  firm,  rest things  immortal:  he who hath known  it let him here declare  it.  
7 He, strong  of wing,  hath lightened  up the regions,  deep−quivering  Asura,  the gentle  Leader.   
Where  now is Surya,  where  is one to tell us to what  celestial  sphere  his ray hath wandered?   
8 The earth's  eight  point s his brightness  hath illumined,  three  desert  regions  and the Seven  Rivers.   
God Savitar  the gold−eyed  hath come  hither,  giving  choice  treasures  unto him who worships.   
9 The golden−handed  Savitar,  far−seeing,  goes on his way between  the earth  and heaven,   
Drives  away  sickness,  bids the Sun approach  us, and spreads  the bright  sky through  the darksome  region.   
10 May he, gold−handed  Asura,  kind Leader,  come  hither  to us with his help and favour.   
Driving  off Raksasas  and Yatudhanas,  the God is present,  prais ed in hymns  at evening.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
11 O Savitar,  thine  ancient  dustless  pathways  are well established  in the air's midregion:   
O God,  come  by those  paths  so fair to travel,  preserve  thou us from  harm  this day, and bless  us.  
 
HYMN  XXXVI.  Agni.  
1 WITH  words  sent forth in holy hymns,  Agni  we supplicate,  the Lord  Of 
many  families  who duly serve  the Gods,  yea, him whom  others  also praise.
  
2 Men have won Agni,  him who makes  their strength  abound:  we, with oblations,  worship  thee.   
Our gracious−minded  Helper  in our deeds  of might,  be thou,  O Excellent,  this day.  
3 Thee  for our messenger  we choose,  thee,  the Omniscient,  for our Priest.   
The flames  of thee the mighty  are spread  wide  around:  thy splendour  reaches  to the sky.  
4 The Gods  enkindle  thee their ancient  messenger,  − Varuna,  Mitra,  Aryaman.   
That mortal  man,  O Agni,  gains  through  thee all wealth,  who hath poured  offerings  unto thee.   
5 Thou,  Agni,  art a cheering  Priest,  Lord  of the House,  men's  messenger:   
All constant  high decrees  established  by the Gods,  gathered  together,  meet  in thee.   
6 In thee,  the auspicious  One,  O Agni,  youthfullest,  each sacred  gift is offered  up:  
This day, and after,  gracious,  worship  thou our Gods,  that we may have  heroic  sons.   
7 To him in his own splendour  bright  draw  near in worship  the devout.   
Men kindle  Agni  with their sacrificial  gifts,  victorious  o'er the enemies.   
8 Vrtra  they smote  and slew,  and made the earth  and heaven  and firmament  a wide  abode.   
The glorious  Bull,  invoked,  hath stood  at Kanva's  side:  loud neighed  the Steed  in frays  for kine.   
9 Seat thee,  for thou art mighty;  shine,  best entertainer  of the Gods.   
Worthy  of sacred  food,  praised  Agni! loose  the smoke,  ruddy  and beautiful  to see.  
10 Bearer  of offerings,  whom,  best sacrificing  Priest,  the Gods  for Manu's  sake ordained;   
Whom  Kanva,  whom  Medhyatithi  made  the source  of wealth,  and Vrsan  and Upastuta.   
11 Him,  Agni,  whom  Medhyatithi,  whom Kanva  kindled  for his rite,  
Him these  our songs  of praise,  him, Agni,  we extol:  his powers  shine  out preeminent.   
12 Make  our wealth  perfect  thou,  O Agni,  Lord  divine:  for thou hast kinship  with the Gods.   
Thou  rulest  as a King  o'er widely−famous  stren gth: be good  to us, for thou art great.   
13 Stand  up erect  to lend us aid, stand  up like Savitar  the God:   
Erect  as strength−bestower  we call aloud,  with unguents  and with priests,  on thee.   
14 Erect,  preserve  us from  sore trouble;  with thy flame  burn thou each ravening  demon  dead.   
Raise  thou us up that we may walk  and live. so thou shalt  find our worship  mid the Gods.   
15 Preserve  us, Agni,  from  the fiend,  preserve  us from  malicious  wrong.   
Save  us from  him who fain would  injure  us or slay, Most  Youthful,  thou with lofty  light.   
16 Smite  down  as with a club,  thou who hast fire for teeth,  smite  thou the wicked,  right  and left.  
Let not the man who plots  against  us in the night,  nor any foe prevail  o'er us.  
17 Agni  hath given  heroic  might  to Kainva,  and felicity:   
Agni  hath helped  our friends,  hath helped  Medhyitithi,  hath helped  Upastuta  to win.  
18 We call on Ugradeva,  Yadu,  Turvasa,  by means  of Agni,  from  afar;  
Agni,  bring  Navavastva  and Brhadratba,  Turviti,  to subdue  the foe.  
19 Manu  hath stablished  thee a light,  Agni,  for all the race of men:   
Sprung  from  the Law,  oil−fed,  for Kanva  hast thou blazed,  thou whom  the people  reverence.   
20 The flames  of Agni  full of splendour  and of might  are fearful,  not to be approached.   
Consume  for ever all demons  and sorcerers,  consume  thou each devouring  fiend.   
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  XXXVII.  Maruts.  
1 SING  forth,  O Kanvas,  to your band  of Maruts  unassailable,   
Sporting,  resplendent  on their car  
2 They  who,  self−luminous,  were  born together,  with the spotted  deer,   
Spears,  swords,  and glittering  ornaments.   
3 One hears,  as though  'twere  close  at hand,  the cracking  of the whips  they hold  
They  gather  glory  on their way.   
4 Now  sing ye forth  the God−given  hymn  to your exultant  Marut  host,   
The fiercely−vigorous,  the strong.   
5 Praise  ye the Bull among  the cows;  for 'tis the Maruts'  sportive  band:   
 
It strengthened  as it drank  the rain.  
6 Who  is your mightiest,  Heroes,  when,  O shakers  of the earth  and heaven,   
Ye shake  them  like a garment's  hem?   
7 At your approach  man holds  him down  before  the fury of your wrath:   
The rugged−jointed  mountain  yields.   
8 They  at whose  racings  forth  the earth,  like an age−weakened  lord of men,   
Trembles  in terror  on their ways.   
9 Strong  is their birth:  vigour  have  they to issue  from  their Mother;  strengt h,  
Yea, even  twice  enough,  is theirs.   
10 And these,  the Sons,  the Singers,  in their racings  have enlarged  the bounds,   
So that the kine must  walk  knee−deep.   
11 Before  them,  on the ways  they go, they drop this offspring  of the cloud,   
Long,  broad,  and inexhaustible.   
12 O Maruts,  as your strength  is great,  so have  ye cast men down  on earth,   
So have  ye made  the mountains  fall.  
13 The while  the Maruts  pass along,  they talk together  on the way:   
Doth  any hear them  as they speak?   
14 Come  quick  with swift  steeds,  for ye have  worshippers  among  Kanva's  sons  
May you rejoice  among  them  well.   
15 All is prepared  for your delight.  We are their servants  evermore,   
To live as long as life may last.  
 
HYMN  XXXVIII.  Maruts.  
I WHAT  now?  When  will ye take us by both hands,  as a dear sire his son,  
Gods,  for whom  sacred  grass  is clipped?   
2 Now  whither?  To what  goal of yours  go ye in heaven,  and not on earth?   
Where  do your cows  disport  themselves?   
3 Where  are your newest  favours  shown?  Where,  Maruts,  your prosperity?   
Where  all your high felicities?   
4 If, O ye Maruts,  ye the Sons  whom  Prsni  bore,  were  mortal,  and  
Immortal  he who sings  your praise.   
5 Then  never  were  your praiser  loathed  like a wild beast  in pasture−land,   
Nor should  he go on Yama's  path.   
6 Let not destructive  plague  on plague  hard to be conquered,  strike  its down:   
Let each,  with drought,  depart  from  us.  Rig Veda – English Translation  
7 Truly,  they the fierce  and mighty  Sons  of Rudra  send their windless   
Rain  e'en on the desert  places.   
8 Like a cow the lightning  lows  and follow s, motherlike,  her youngling,   
When  their rain−flood  hath been  loosened.   
9 When  they inundate  the earth  they spread  forth  darkness  e'en in day time,   
With  the water−laden  rain−cloud.   
10 O Maruts,  at your voice's  sound  this earthly  habitation  shakes,   
And each man reels  who dwells  therein.   
11 O Maruts,  with your strong−hoofed  steeds,  unhindered  in their courses,  haste   
Along  the bright  embanked  streams.   
12 Firm  be the fellies  of your wheels,  steady  your horses  and your cars,  
And may your reins  be fashio ned well.   
13 Invite  thou hither  with this song,  for praise,  Agni  the Lord  of Prayer,   
Him who is fair as Mitra  is.  
 
14 Form  in thy mouth  the hymn  of praise  expand  thee like, a rainy  cloud   
Sing forth  the measured  eulogy.   
15 Sing glory  to the Marut  host,  praiseworthy,  tuneful,  vigorous:   
Here  let the Strong  Ones  dwell  with us.  
 
HYMN  XXXIX  Maruts.  
1 WHEN  thus,  like flame,  from  far away,  Maruts,  ye cast your measure  forth,   
To whom  go Ye, to whom,  O shakers  of the earth,  moved  by whose  wisdom,  whose  design?  
2 Strong  let your weapons  be to drive  away  your foes,  firm for resistance  let them  be.  
Yea, passing  glorious  must  be your warrior  might,  not as a guileful  mortal's  strength.   
3 When  what  is strong  ye overthrow,  and whirl  about  each ponderous  thing,   
Heroes,  your course  is through  the forest  trees  of earth,  and through  the fissures  of the rocks.   
4 Consumers  of your foes,  no enemy  of yours  is found  in heaven  or on the earth:   
Ye Rudras,  may the strength,  held in this bond,  be yours,  to bid defiance  even now.   
5 They  make  the mountains  rock and reel, they rend the forest−kings  apart.   
onward,  ye Maruts,  drive,  like creatures  drunk  with wine,  ye, Gods  with all your company.   
6 Ye to your chariot  have  yoked  the spotted  deer:  a red deer,  as a leader,  draws.   
Even  the Earth  herself  listened  as ye came  near,  and men were  sorely  terrified.   
7 O Rudras,  quickly  we desire  your succour  for this work  of ours.   
Come  to us with your aid as in the days of old, so now for frightened  Kanva's  sake.   
8 Should  any monstrou s foe, O Maruts,  sent by you or sent by mortals  threaten  us,  
Tear ye him from  us with your power  and with your might,  and with the succours  that are yours.   
9 For ye, the worshipful  and wise,  have  guarded  Kanva  perfectly.   
O Maruts,  come  to us with full protecting  help,  as lightning  flashes  seek the rain.  
10 Whole  strength  have  ye, O Bounteous  Ones;  perfect,  earth−shakers,  is your might.   
Maruts,  against  the poet's  wrathful  enemy  send ye an enemy  like a dart.  
 
HYMN  XL. Brahmanaspati  
1 O BRAMANASPATI,  stand up: God−serving  men we pray to thee.   
May they who give good  gifts,  the Maruts,  come  to us. Indra,  most  swift,  be thou with them.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
2 O Son of Strength,  each mortal  calls to thee for aid when  spoil  of battle  waits  for him.  
O Maruts,  may this man who loves you well obtain  wealth  of good  steeds  and hero might.   
3 May Brahmanaspati  draw  nigh,  may Sunrta  the Goddess  come,   
And Gods  bring  to this rite which  gives  the five−fold  gift the Hero,  lover  of mankind.   
4 He who bestows  a noble  guerdon  on the priest  wins  fame  that never  shall  decay.   
For him we offer  sacred  hero−giving  food,  peerless  and conquering  easily.   
5 Now  Brahmanaspati  speaks  forth  aloud  the solemn  hymn  of praise,   
Wherein  Indra  and Varuna,  Mitra,  Aryaman,  the Gods,  have  made  their dwelling  place.  
6 May we in holy synods,  Gods!  recite  that hymn,  peerless,  that brings  felicity.   
If you, O Heroes,  graciously  accept  this word,  may it obtain  all bliss from  you.  
7 Who  shall  approach  the pious?  who the man whose  sacred  grass  is trimmed?   
The offere r with his folk advances  more  and more:  he fills his house  with precious  things.   
8 He amplifies  his lordly  might,  with kings  he slays:  e'en mid alarms  he dwells  secure   
In great  or lesser  fight  none  checks  him, none  subdues,−the  wielder  of the thunderbolt .  
 
HYMN  XLI. Varuna,  Mitra,  Aryaman.  
1 NE'ER  is he injured  whom  the Gods  Varuna,  Mitra,  Aryaman,   
The excellently  wise,  protect.   
2 He prospers  ever,  free from  scathe,  whom  they,  as with full hands,  enrich,   
Whom  they preserve  from  every  foe.  
3 The Kings drive  far away  from  him his troubles  and his enemies,   
And lead him safely  o'er distress.   
4 Thornless,  Adityas,  is the path,  easy for him who seeks  the Law:   
With  him is naught  to anger  you.  
5 What  sacrifice,  Adityas,  ye Heroes  guide  by the path direc t,−  
May that come  nigh unto your thought.   
6 That mortal,  ever unsubdued,  gains  wealth  and every  precious  thing,   
And children  also of his own.   
7 How,  my friends,  shall  we prepare  Aryaman's  and Mitra's  laud,   
Glorious  food of Varuna?   
8 I point  not out to you a man who strikes  the pious,  or reviles:   
Only  with hymns  I call you nigh.   
9 Let him not love to speak  ill words:  but fear the One who holds  all four  
Within  his hand,  until they fall.  
 
HYMN  XLII.  Pusan.  
I SHORTEN  our ways,  O Pusan,  move  aside  obstruction  in the path:   
Go close  before  us, cloud−born  God.   
2 Drive,  Pusan,  from  our road the wolf,  the wicked  inauspicious  wolf,   
Who  lies in Wait  to injure  us.  
3 Who  lurks  about  the path we take,  the robber  with a guileful  heart:   
Far from  the road chase him away.   
4 Tread  with thy foot and trample  out the firebrand  of the wicked  one,  
The double−tongued,  whoe'er  he be.  
5 Wise  Pusan,  Wonder−Worker,  we claim  of thee now the aid wherewith   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Thou  furtheredst  our sires of old.  
6 So, Lord  of all prosperity,  best wielder  of the golden  sword,   
Make  riches  easy to be won.   
7 Past all pursuers  lead us, make  pleasant  our path and fair to tread:   
O Pusan,  find thou power  for this.  
8 Lead  us to meadows  rich in grass:  send on our way no early  heat:   
O Pusan,  find thou power  for this.  
9 Be gracious  to us, fill us full, give,  feed us, and invigorate:   
O Pusan,  find thou power  for this.  
10 No blame  have  we for Pusan;  him we magnify  with songs  of praise:   
We seek the Mighty  One for wealth.   
 
HYMN  XLIII.  Rudra.  
1 WHA T shall  we sing to Rudra,  strong,  most  bounteous,  excellently  wise,   
That shall  be dearest  to his heart?   
2 That Aditi  may grant  the grace  of Rudra  to our folk, our kine,   
Our cattle  and our progeny;   
 
3 That Mitra  and that Varuna,  that Rudra  may remember  us,  
Yea, all the Gods  with one accord.   
4 To Rudra  Lord  of sacrifice,  of hymns  and balmy  medicines,   
We pray for joy and health  and strength.   
5 He shines  in splendour  like the Sun, refulgent  as bright  gold is he,  
The good,  the best among  the Gods.   
6 May he grant  health  into our steeds,  wellbeing  to our rams  and ewes,   
To men,  to women,  and to kine.   
7 O Soma,  set thou upon  us the glory  of a hundred  men,   
The great  renown  of mighty  chiefs.   
8 Let not malignities,  nor those  who trouble  Soma,  hinder  us.  
Indu, give us a share  of strength.   
9 Soma!  head,  central  point,  love these;  Soma!  know  these  as serving  thee,   
Children  of thee Immortal,  at the highest  place  of holy law.  
 
HYMN  XLIV.  Agni.  
I IMMORTAL  Jatavedas,  thou many−hued  fulgent  gift of Dawn,   
Agni,  this day to him who pays oblations  bring  the Gods  who waken  with the morn.   
2 For thou art offering−bearer  and loved  messenger,  the charioteer  of sacrifice:   
Accordant  with the Asvins  and with Dawn  grant  us heroic  strength  and lofty  fame.   
3 As messenger  we choose  to−day  Agni  the good  whom  many  love,   
Smoke−bannered  spreader  of the light,  at break  of day glory  of sacrificial  rites.   
4 Him noblest  and most  youthful,  richly  worshipped  guest,  dear to the men who offer  gifts,   
Him,  Agni  Jatavedas,  I beseech  at dawn  that he may bring  the Gods  to us.  
5 Thee,  Agni,  will I glorify,  deathless  nourisher  of the world,   
Immortal,  offering−bearer,  meet  for sacred  food,  preserver,  best at sacrifice.   
6 Tell good  things  to thy praiser,  O most  youthful  God,  as richly  worshipped,  honey−tongued,   Rig Veda – English Translation  
And,  granting  to Praskanva  lengthened  days of life, show  honour  to the Heavenly  Host.   
7 For the men,  Agni,  kindle  thee as all possessor  and as Priest;   
So Agni,  much− invoked,  bring  hither  with all speed  the Gods,  the excellently  wise,   
8 At dawn  of day, at night,  Usas  and Savitar,  the Asvins,  Bhaga,  Agni's  self:  
Skilled  in fair rites,  with Soma  poured,  the Kanvas  light thee,  the oblation−wafting  God.   
9 For, Agni,  Lord of sacrifice  and messenger  of men art thou:   
Bring  thou the Gods  who wake  at dawn  who see the light,  this day to drink  the Soma  juice.   
10 Thou  shonest  forth,  O Agni,  after former  dawns,  all visible,  O rich in light.   
Thou  art our help in battle−strife,  the Friend  of inan,  the great  high priest  in sacrifice.   
11 Like Manu,  we will stablish  thee,  Agni,  performer  of the rite,  
Invoker,  ministering  Priest,  exceeding  wise,  the swift  immortal  messenger.   
12 When  as the Gods'  High  Priest,  by many  loved,  thou dost their mission  as their nearest  Friend,   
Then,  like the far−resounding  billows  of the flood,  thy flames,  O Agni,  roar aloud.   
13 Heat−,  Agni,  who hast ears to hear,  with all thy train of escort  Gods;   
Let Mitra,  Aryaman,−  seeking  betimes  our rite, seat them upon  the sacred  grass.   
14 Let those  who strengthen  Law,  who bountiUly  give,  the life−tongued  Maruts,  hear our praise.   
May Law−supporting  Varuna  with the Asvins  twain  and Usas,  drink  the Soma  juice.   
 
HYMN  XLV Agni.  
I WORSHIP  the Vasus,  Agni!  here,  the Rudras,  the Adityas,  all Who  spring  from  Manu,  those  who know  
fair rites,  who pour their blessings  down.   
2 Agni,  the Gods  who understand  give ear unto the worshipper:   
Lord  of Red Steeds,  who lovest  song,  bring  thou those  Three−and−Thirty  Gods.   
3 O Jatavedas,  great  in act, hearken  thou to Praskanva's  call,  
As Priyamedha  erst was heard,  Atri, Virupa,  Angiras.   
4 The sons of Priyamedha  skilled  in lofty  praise  have called  for help  
On Agni  who with fulgent  flame  is Ruler  of all holy rites.   
5 Hear  thou,  invoked  withholy  oil, bountiful  giver  of rewards,   
These  eulogies,  whereby  the sons of Kanva  call thee to their aid.  
6 O Agni,  loved  by many,  thou of fame  most  wondrous,  in their homes   
Men call on thee whose  hair is flame,  to be the bearer  of their gifts.  
7 Thee,  Agni,  best to find out wealth,  most  widely  famous,  quick  to hear,   
Singers  have stablished  in their rites Herald  and ministering  Priest.   
8 Singers  with Soma  pressed  have  made  thee,  Agni,  hasten  to the feast,   
Great  light to mortal  worshipper,  what  time they bring  the sacred  gift.  
9 Good,  bounteous,  Son of Strength,  this day seat here on sacred  grass  the Gods   
Who  come  at early  morn,  the host of heaven,  to drink  the Soma  juice   
10 Bring  with joint invocations  thou,  O Agni,  the celestial  host:   
Here  stands  the Soma,  bounteous  Gods  drink  this expressed  ere yesterday.   
 
HYMN  XLVI.  Asvins.  
1 Now  Morning  with her earliest  light shines  forth,  dear Daughter  of the Sky:  
High,  Asvins,  I extol  your praise,   
2 Sons  of the Sea, mighty  to save discoverers  of riches,  ye  
Gods  with deep  thought  who find out wealth.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
3 Your  giant  coursers  hasten  on over the region  all in flames,  −  
When  your car flies with winged  steeds.   
4 He, liberal,  lover  of the flood,  Lord  of the House,  the vigilant,   
Chiefs!  with oblati ons feeds  you full.  
5 Ye have  regard  unto our hymns,  Nasatyas,  thinking  of our words:   
Drink  boldly  of the Soma  juice.   
6 Vouchsafe  to us, O Asvin  Pair, such strength  as, with attendant  light,   
May through  the darkness  carry  us.  
7 Come  in the ship of these our hymns  to bear you to the hither  shore   
O Asvins,  harness  ye the car.  
8 The heaven's  wide  vessel  is your own on the flood's  shore  your chariot  waits   
Drops,  with the hymn,  have  been  prepared.   
9 Kanvas,  the drops  are in the heaven;  the wealth  is at the waters'  place:   
Where  will ye manifest  your form?   
10 Light  came  to lighten  up the branch,  the Sun appeared  as it were  gold:   
And with its−tongue  shone  forth  the dark.   
11 The path of sacrifice  was made  to travel  to the farther  goal:   
The road of heave n was manifest.   
12 The singer  of their praise  awaits  whatever  grace  the Asvins  give,   
who save when  Soma  gladdens  them.   
13 Ye dwellers  with Vivasvan  come,  auspicious,  as to Manu  erst;  
come  to the Soma  and our praise.   
14 O circumambient  Asvins,  Dawn  follows  the brightness  of your way:   
Approve  with beams  our solemn  rites.   
15 Drink  ye of our libations,  grant  protection,  O ye Asvins  Twain,   
 
With  aids which  none  may interrupt.  
 
HYMN  XLVlI.  Asvins.  
1 ASVINS,  for you who strengthen  Law this sweetest  Soma  hath been  shed.   
Drink  this expressed  ere yesterday  and give riches  to him who offers  it.  
2 Come,  O ye Asvins,  mounted  on your triple  car three−seated,  beautiful  of form   
To you at sacrifice  the Kanvas  send the prayer:  graciously  listen  to their call.  
3 O Asvins,  ye who strengthen  Law,  drink  ye this sweetest  Soma  juice.   
Borne  on your wealth−fraught  car come  ye this day to him who offers,  ye of wondrous  deeds.   
4 Omniscient  Asvins,  on the thrice−heaped  grass  bedew  with the sweet  juice  the sacrifice.   
The sons of Kanva,  striving  heavenward,  call on you with draughts  of Soma  juice  out−poured.   
5 O Asvins,  with those  aids wherewith  ye guarded  Kanva  carefully,   
Keep  us, O hords  of Splendour:  drink  the Soma  juice,  ye strengtheners  of holy law.  
6 O Mighty  Ones,  ye gave Sudas  abundant  food,  brought  on your treasure−laden  car;  
So now vouchsafe  to us the wealth  which  many  crave,  either  from  heaven  or from  the sea.  
7 Nasatyas,  whether  ye be far away  or close  to Turvasa,   
Borne  on your lightly−rolling  chariot  come  to us, together  with the sunbeams  come.   
8 So let your coursers,  ornaments  of sacrifice,  bring  you to our libations  here.   
Bestowing  food on him who acts and gives  aright,  sit, Chiefs,  upon  the sacred  grass.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
9 Come,  O Nasatyas,  on your car decked  with a sunbright  canopy,   
Whereon  ye ever bring  wealth  to the worshipper,  to drink  the Soma's  pleasant  juice.   
10 With  lauds  and songs  of praise  we call them  down  to us, that they,  most  rich, may succour  us;  
For ye have  ever in the Kanvas'  well−loved  house,  O Asvins, drunk  the Soma  juice.   
 
HYMN  XLVIII.  Dawn.  
1 DAWN  on us with prosperity,  O Usas,  Daughter  of the Sky,  
Dawn  with great  glory,  Goddess,  Lady  of the Light,  dawn  thou with riches,  Bounteous  One.   
2 They,  bringing  steeds  and kine,  boon−givers  of all wealth, have  oft sped forth  to lighten  us.  
O Usas,  waken  up for me the sounds  of joy: send us the riches  of the great.   
3 Usas  hath dawned,  and now shall  dawn,  the Goddess,  driver  forth  of cars  
Which,  as she cometh  nigh,  have  fixed  their thought  on her, like glory−seekers  on the flood.   
4 Here  Kanva,  chief  of Kanva's  race,  sings  forth  aloud  the glories  of the heroes'  names,−   
The. princes  who,  O Usas,  as thou comest  near,  direct  their thoughts  to liberal  gifts.   
5 Like a good  matron  Usas  comes  carefully  tending everything:   
Rousing  all life she stirs all creatures  that have  feet, and makes  the birds  of air fly up.  
6 She sends  the busy forth,  each man to his pursuit:  delay  she knows  not as she springs.   
O rich in opulence,  after thy dawning  birds  that have  flown forth  no longer  rest.  
7 This Dawn  hath yoked  her steeds  afar, beyond  the rising  of the Sun:  
Borne  on a hundred  chariots  she, auspicious  Dawn,  advances  on her way to Men.   
8 To meet  her glance  all living  creatures  bend  them  down:  Excellent  One,  she makes the light.   
Usas,  the Daughter  of the Sky, the opulent,  shines  foes and enmities  away.   
9 Shine  on us with thy radiant  light,  O Usas,  Daughter  of the Sky,  
Bringing  to us great  store  of high felicity,  and bearning  on our solemn  rites.   
10 For in thee is each living  creature's  breath  and life, when,  Excellent!  thou dawnest  forth.   
Borne  on thy lofty  car, O Lady  of the Light,  hear,  thou of wondrous  wealth,  our call.  
11 O Usas,  win thyself  the strength  which  among  men is wonderful.   
Bring  thou thereby  the pious  unto holy rites,  those  who as priests  sing praise  to thee.   
12 Bring  from  the firmament,  O Usas,  all the Gods,  that they may drink  our Soma  juice,   
 
And,  being  what  thou art, vouchsafe  us kine and steeds,  strength  meet  for praist  and hero might.   
13 May Usas  whose  auspicious  rays are seen resplendent  round  about,   
Grant  us great  riches,  fair in form,  of all good  things,  wealth  which  light labour  may attain.   
14 Mighty  One,  whom  the Rsis of old time invoked  for their protection  and their help,   
O Usas , graciously  answer  our songs  of praise  with bounty  and with brilliant   
light.   
15 Usas,  as thou with light to day hast opened  the twin doors  of heaven,   
So grant  thou us a dwelling  wide  and free from  foes.  O Goddess,  give us food with kine.   
16 Bring  us to wealth  abundant,  sent in every  shape,  to plentiful  refreshing  food,   
To all−subduing  splendour,  Usas,  Mighty  One,  to strength,  thou rich in spoil  and wealth.   
 
HYMN  XLIX.  Dawn.  
1 E'EN  from  above  the sky's  bright  realm  come,  Usas,  by auspicious  ways:   
Let red steeds  bear thee to the house  of him who pours  the Soma,  juice.   
2 The chariot  which  thou mountest,  fair of shape,  O Usas  light to move,−   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Therewith,  O Daughter  of the Sky, aid men of noble  fame  today.   
3 Bright  Usas,  when  thy times  return,  all quad rupeds  and bipeds  stir,  
And round  about  flock  winged  birds  from  all theboundaries  of heaven.   
4 Thou  dawning  with thy beams  of light illumest  all the radiant  realm.   
Thee,  as thou art, the Kanvas,  fain for wealth,  have  called  with sacred  songs.   
 
HYMN  L. Surya.  
1 HIS bright  rays bear him up aloft,  the God who knoweth  all that lives,   
Surya,  that all may look on him.  
2 The constellations  pass away,  like thieves,  together  with their beams,   
Before  the all−beholding  Sun'  
3 His herald  rays are seen afar refulgent  o'er the world  of men,   
Like flames  of fire that burn and blaze.   
4 Swift  and all beautiful  art thou,  O Surya,  maker  of the light,   
Illuming  all the radiant  realm.   
5 Thou  goest  to the hosts  of Gods,  thou comest  hither  to mankind,   
Hither  all light to be belield.   
6 With  that same  eye of thine  wherewith  thou lookest  brilliant  Varuna,   
Upon  the busy  race of men,   
7 Traversing  sky and wide  mid−air,  thou metest  with thy beams  our days,   
Sun, seeing all things  that have birth.   
8 Seven  Bay Steeds  harnessed  to thy car bear thee,  O thou farseeing  One,   
God,  Surya,  with the radiant  hair.  
9 Surya  hath yoked  the pure bright  Seven,  the daughters  of the car; with these,   
His own dear team,  he goeth  forth .  
10 Looking  upon  the loftier  light above  the darkness  we have  come   
To Surya,  God among  the Gods,  the light that is most  excellent.   
11 Rising  this day, O rich in friends,  ascending  to the loftier  heaven,   
Surya  remove  my heart's  disease,  take from  me this my yellow  hue.  
12 To parrots  and to starlings  let us give away  my yellowness,   
Or this my yellowness  let us transfer  to Haritala  trees.   
13 With  all his conquering  vigour  this Aditya  hath gone  up on high,   
Giving  my foe into mine  hand:  let me not be my foeman's  prey.   
 
HYMN  LI. Indra.  
1 MAKE  glad with songs  that Ram whom  many  men invoke,  worthy  of songs  of praise,  Indra,  the sea of 
wealth;   
Whose  gracious  deeds  for men spread  like the heavens  abroad:  sing praise  to him the Sage,  most  liberal  fo
r 
our good.  
2 As aids the skilful  Rbhus  yearned  to Indra  strong  to save,  who fills mid−air,  encompassed  round  with 
might,   
Rushing  in rapture;  and −o'er  Satakratu  came  the gladdening  shout  that urged  him on to victory.   
3 Thou  hast disclosed  the kine's  stall for the Angirases,  and made  a way for Atri by a hundred  doors.   
On Vimada  thou hast bestowed  both food and wealth,  making  thy bolt dance  in the sacrificer's  fight.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
4 Thou  hast unclosed  the prisons  of the waters;  thou hast in the mountain  seized  the treasure  rich in gifts.   
When  thou hadst  slain  with might  the dragon  Vrtra,  thou,  Indra,  didst  raise  the Sun in heaven  for all to see
.  
5 With  wondrous  might  thou blewest  enchanter  fiends  away,  with powers  celestial  those  who called  on th
ee 
in jest.  
Thou,  hero−hearted,  hast broken  down  Pipru's  forts,  and helped  Rjisvan  when  the Dasyus  were  struck  dea
d.  
6 Thou  savedst  Kutsa  when  Susna  was smitten  down;  to Atithigva  gavest  Sambara  for a prey.   
E'en mighty  Arbuda  thou troddest  under  foot:  thou from  of old wast born to strike  the Dasyus  dead.   
7 All power  and might  is closely  gathered  up in thee;  thy bounteous  spirit  joys in drinking  Soma  juice.   
Known  is the thunderbolt  that lies within  thine  arms:  rend off therewith  all manly  prowess  of our foe.  
8 Discern  thou well Aryas  and Dasyus;  punishing  the lawless  give them  up to him whose  grass  is strewn.   
Be thou the sacrificer's  strong  encourager  all these  thy deeds  are my delight  at festivals.   
9 Indra  gives  up the lawless  to the pious  man,  destroying  by the Strong  Ones those  who have  no strength.   
Vamra  when  glorified  destroyed  the gathered  piles  of the still waxing  great  one who would  reach  the heav
en.  
10 The might  which  Usana  hath formed  for thee with might  rends  in its greatness  and with strength  both 
worlds  apart.   
O Hero−souled,  the steeds  of Vata,  yoked  by thought,  have  carried  thee to fame  while  thou art filled  with 
power.   
11 When  Indra  hath rejoiced  with Kavya  Usana,  he mounts  his steeds  who swerve  wider  and wider  yet.  
The Strong  hath loosed  his bolt with the swift  rush of rain, and he hath rent in pieces  Susna's  firm−built  fo
rts.  
12 Thou  mountest  on thy car amid  strong  Soma  draughts:  Saryata  brought  thee those  in which  thou hast 
delight.   
Indra,  when  thou art pleased  with men whose  Soma  flows  thou risest  to unchallenged  glory  in the sky.  
13 To old Kaksivin,  Soma−presser,  skilled  in song,  O Indra,  thou didst  give the youthful  Vrcaya.   
Thou,  very wise,  wast Mena,  Vrsanaiva's  child:  those  deeds  of thine  must  all be told at Soma  feasts.   
14 The good  man's  refuge  in his need  is Indra,  firm as a doorpost,  praised  among  the Pajras.   
Indra  alone  is Lord  of wealth,  the Giver,  lover  of riches,  chariots,  kine,  and horses.   
15 To him the Mighty  One,  the self−resplendent,  verily  strong  and great,  this praise  is uttered.   
May we and all the heroes,  with the princes,  be, in this fray, O Indra,  in thy keeping.   
 
HYMN  LII. Indra.  
1 I GLORIFY  that Ram who finds  the light of heaven,  whose  hundred  nobly−natured  ones go forth  with h
im. With  hymns  may I turn hither  Indra  to mine  aid,−the  Car which  like a strong  steed  hasteth  to the call. 
2 Like as a mountain  on firm basis,  unremoved,  he, thousandfold  protector,  waxed  in mighty  strength,  Wh
en Indra,  joying  in the draughts  of Soma  juice,  forced  the clouds,  slaying  Vrtra  stayer  of their flow.  3 For 
he stays  e'en the stayers,  spread  o'er laden  cloud,  rooted  in light,  strengthened  in rapture  by the wise.  Indra
 with thought,  with skilled  activity,  I call, most  liberal  giver,  for he sates  him with the juice.  4 Whom  thos
e that flow in heaven on sacred  grass,  his own assistants,  nobly−natured,  fill full like the sea,−  Beside  that
 Indra  when  he smote  down  Vrtra  stood  his helpers,  straight  in form,  mighty,  invincible.   
5 To him, as in wild joy he fought  with him who stayed  the rain, his helper s sped like swift  streams  down  
a 
slope,   Rig Veda – English Translation  
When  Indra,  thunder−armed,  made  bold by Soma  draughts,  as Trta cleaveth  Vala's  fences,  cleft him throu
gh.  
6 Splendour  encompassed  thee,  forth  shone  thy warrior  might:  the rain−obstructer  lay in mid−air's  lowest  
deep,  
What  time,  O Indra,  thou didst  cast thy thunder  down  upon  the jaws of Vritra  hard to be restrained.   
7 The hymns  which  magnify  thee,  Indra,  reach  to thee even  as water−brooks  flow down  and fill the lake.   
Tvastar  gave yet more  force  to thine  appropriat e strength,  and forged  thy thunderbolt  of overpowering  mi
ght.  
8 When,  Indra,  thou whose  power  is linked  with thy Bay Steeds  hadst  smitten  Vrtra,  causing  floods  to flo
w 
for man,   
Thou  heldst  in thine  arms  the metal  thunderbolt,  and settest  in the heaven  the Sun for all to see.  
9 In fear they raised  the lofty self−resplendent  hymn,  praise  giving  and effectual,  leading  up to heaven,   
When  Indra's  helpers  fighting  for the good  of men,  the Maruts,  faithful  to mankind,  joyed  in the light.   
10 Then  Heaven  himsel f, the mighty,  at that Dragon's  roar reeled  back in terror  when,  Indra,  thy thunderb
olt  
In the wild joy of Soma  had struck  off with might  the head  of Vrtra,  tyrant  of the earth  and heaven.   
11 O Indra,  were  this earth  extended  forth  tenfold,  and men who dwell therein  multiplied  day by day,  
Still here thy conquering  might,  Maghavan,  would  be famed:  it hath waxed  vast as heaven  in majesty  and 
power.   
12 Thou,  bold of heart,  in thine  own native  might,  for help,  upon  the limit  of this mid−air  and of heaven,   
Hast made  the earth  to be the pattern  of thy strength:  embracing  flood  and light thou reachest  to the sky.  
13 Thou  art the counterpart  of earth,  the Master  of lofty heaven  with all its mighty  Heroes:   
Thou  hast filled  all the region  with thy greatness:  yea, of a truth  there  is none  other  like thee.   
14 Whose  amplitude  the heaven  and earth  have  not attained,  whose  bounds  the waters  of mid−air  have  ne
ver 
reached,−   
Not, when  in joy he fights  the stayer  of the rain: thou,  and none  else, hast made  all things  in order  due.  
15 The Maruts  sang thy praise  in this encounter,  and in thee all the Deities  delighted,   
What time thou,  Indra,  with thy spiky  weapon,  thy deadly  bolt, smotest  the face of Vrtra.   
 
HYMN  LIII. Indra.  
I WE will present  fair praise  unto the Mighty  One,  our hymns  to Indra  in Vivasvdn's  dwelling−place;   
For he hath ne'er  found  wealth  in those  who seem to sleep:  those  who give wealth  to men accept  no paltry  
praise.   
2 Giver  of horses,  Indra,  giver,  thou,  of kine,  giver  of barley,  thou art Lord  and guard  of wealth:   
Man's  helper  from  of old, not disappointing  hope,  Friend  of our friends,  to thee ,as such we sing this prais
e.  
3 Indra,  most  splendid,  powerful,  rich in mighty  deeds,  this treasure  spread  around  is known  to be thine  o
wn.  
Gather  therefrom,  O Conqueror,  and bring  to us: fail not the hope  of him who loves  and sings  to thee.   
4 Well  pleased  with these  bright  flames  and with these  Soma  drops,  take thou away  our poverty  with seed
s 
and kine.   
With  Indra  scattering  the Dasyu  through  these  drops,  freed  from  their hate may we obtain  abundant  food.   
5 Let us obtain,  O Indra,  plenteous  wealth  and food, with strength  exceeding  glorious,  shining  to the sky:  Rig Veda – English Translation  
May we obtain  the Goddess  Providence,  the strength  of heroes,  special  source  of cattle,  rich in steeds.   
6 These  our libations  strength−inspiring,  Soma  draughts,  gladdened  thee in the fight  with Vrtra, Hero  Lor
d,  
What  time thou slewest  for the singer  with trimmed  grass  ten thousand  Vrtras,  thou resistless  in thy might
.  
7 Thou  goest  on from  fight  to fight  intrepidly,  destroying  castle  after castle  here with strength.   
Thou,  Indra,  with thy friend  who makes  the foe bow down,  slewest  from  far away  the guileful  Namuci.   
8 Thou  hast struck  down  in death  Karanja,  Parnaya,  in Atithigva's  very glorious  going  forth.   
Unyielding,  when  Rjisvan  compassed  them  with siege,  thou hast destroyed  the hundred  forts of Vangrida.
  
9 With  all−outstripping  chariot−wheel,  O Indra,  thou far−famed,  hast overthrown  the twice  ten Kings  of 
men,   
With  sixty  thousand  nine−and−ninety  followers,  who came  in arms  to fight  with friendless  Susravas.   
 
10 Thou  hast protected  Susravas  with succour,  and Turvayana  with thine  aid, O Indra
. Thou  madest  Kutsa,  Atithigva,  Ayu,  subject  unto this King,  the young,  the mighty.  
11 May we protected  by the Gods  hereafter  remain  thy very prosperous  friends,  O In
dra. Thee  we extol,  enjoying  through  thy favour  life long and joyful  and with store  of
 heroes.  
 
HYMN  LIV. Indra.  
1 URGE  us not, Maghavan,  to this distressful  fight,  for none  may comprehend  the limit  of thy strength.   
Thou  with fierce  shout  hast made  the woods  and rivers  roar:  did not men run in crowds  together  in their fe
ar?  
2 Sing hymns  of praise  to Sakra,  Lord  of power  and might;  laud thou and magnify  Indra  who hearcth  thee
,  
Who  with his daring  might,  a Bull exceeding  strong  in strength,  maketh  him master  of the heaven  and eart
h.  
3 Sing forth to lofty Dyaus  a strength−bestowing  song,  the Bold,  whose  resolute  mind  hath independent  
sway.   
High  glory  hath the Asura,  compact  of strength,  drawn  on by two Bay Steeds:  a Bull,  a Car is he.  
4 The ridges  of the lofty  heaven  thou madest  shake;  thou,  daring, of thyself  smotest  through  Sambara,   
When  bold with gladdening  juice,  thou warredst  with thy bolt, sharp  and twoedged,  against  the banded  
sorcerers.   
5 When  with a roar that fills the woods,  thou forcest  down  on wind's  head  the stores  which  8usga  kept 
confined,   
Who  shall  have  power  to stay thee firm and eager−souled  from  doing  still this day what  thou of old hast 
done?   
6 Thou  helpest  Narya,  Turvasa,  and Yadu,  and Vayya's  son Turviti,  Satakratu!   
Thou  helpest  horse  and car in final battle  thou breake st down  the nine−and−ninety  castles.   
7 A hero−lord  is he, King  of a mighty  folk, who offers  free oblations  and promotes  the Law,   
Who  with a bounteous  guerdon  welcomes  hymns  of praise:  for him flows  down  the abundant  stream  belo
w 
the sky.  
8 His power  is matchless,  matchless  is his wisdom;  chief,  through  their work,  be some  who drink  the SomRig Veda – English Translation  
a,  
Those,  Indra,  who increase  the lordly  power,  the firm heroic  strength  of thee the Giver.   
9 Therefore  for thee are these  abundant  beakers  Indra's  drink,  stone−press ed juices  held in ladles.   
Quaff  them  and satisfy  therewith  thy longing;  then fix thy mind  upon  bestowing  treasure.   
10 There  darkness  stood,  the vault  that stayed  the waters'  flow:  in Vrtra's  hollow  side the rain−cloud  lay 
concealed.   
But Indra  smote  the rivers  which  the obstructer  stayed,  flood  following  after flood,  down  steep  declivitics.
  
11 So give us, Indra,  bliss−increasing  glory  give us great  sway  and strength  that conquers  people.   
Preserve  our wealthy  patrons,  save our princes;  vouchsafe  us wealt h and food with noble  offspring.   
 
HYMN  LV. Indra.  
1 THOUGH  e'en this heaven's  wide  space  and earth  have spread  them  out, nor heaven  nor earth  may be in 
greatness  Indra's  match.   
Awful  and very mighty,  causing  woe to men,  he whets  his thunderbolt  for sharpness,  as a bull.  
2 Like as the watery  ocean,  so doth he receive  the rivers  spread  on all sides  in their ample  width.   
He bears  him like a bull to drink  of Soma  juice,  and will, as Warrior  from  of old, be praised  for might.   
3 Thou  swayest,  Indra,  all kinds of great  manly  power,  so as to bend,  as't were,  even that famed  mountain  
down.   
Foremost  among  the Gods  is he through  hero might,  set in the van, the Strong  One,  for each arduous  deed
.  
4 He only in the wood  is praised  by worshippers,  when  he shows  forth to men his own fair Indra−power.   
A friendly  Bull is he, a Bull to be desired  when  Maghavan  auspiciously  sends  forth  his voice.   
5 Yet verily  the Warrior  in his vigorous  strength  stirreth  up with his might  great  battles  for mankind;   
And men have  faith in Indra,  the respIendent  One,  what  time he hurleth  down  his bolt, his dart of death.   
 
6 Though,  fain for glory,  and with strength  increased  on earth,  he with great  might  destroys  the dwellings  
made  with art,  
He makes  the lights  of heaven  shine  forth  secure, he bids,  exceeding  wise,  the floods  flow for his worship
per.  
7 Drinker  of Soma,  let thy heart  incline  to give;  bring  thy Bays  hitherward,  O thou who hearest  praise.   
Those  charioteers  of' thine,  best skilled  to draw  the rein, the rapid  sunbeams,  Indra, lead thee not astray.   
8 Thou  bearest  in both hands  treasure  that never  fails;  the famed  One in his body  holds  unvanquished  mig
ht.  
O Indra,  in thy members  many  powers  abide,  like wells  surrounded  by the ministering  priests.   
 
HYMN  LVI. Indra.  
I FOR  this man's  full libations  held in ladles,  he hath roused  him, eager,  as a horse  to meet  the mare.   
He stays  his golden  car, yoked  with Bay Horses,  swift,  and drinks  the Soma  juice  which  strengthens  for gr
eat 
deeds.   
2 To him the guidance−following  songs  of praise  flow full, as those  who seek gain go in company  to the 
flood.   
To him the Lord  of power,  the holy synod's  might,  as to a hill, with speed,  ascend  the loving  ones.   
3 Victorious,  great  is he; in manly  battle  shines,  unstained  with dust,  his might,  as shines  a mountain  peakRig Veda – English Translation  
;  
Wherewith  the iron one, fierce  e'en against  the strong,  in rapture,  fettered  wily Sushna  fast in bonds.   
4 When  Strength  the Goddess,  made  more  strong  for help by thee,  waits  upon  Indra  as the Sun attends  the 
Dawn,   
Then.  he who with his might  unflinching  kills the gloom  stirs up the dust aloft,  with joy and triumphing.   
5 When  thou with might,  upon  the framework  of the heaven,  didst  fix, across,  air's region  firmly,  unremo
ved,  
In the light−winning  war, Indra,  in rapturous  joy, thou smotest  Vrtra  dead  and broughtest  floods  of rain.  
6 Thou  with thy might  didst  grasp,the  holder−up  of heaven,  thou who art mighty  also in the seats  of earth.
  
Thou,  gladdened  by the juice,  hast set the waters  free, and broken  Vrtra's  stony  fences  throug h and throug
h.  
 
HYMN  LVII.  Indra.  
I To him most  liberal,  lofty  Lord  of lofty  wealth,  verily  powerful  and strong,  I bring  my hymn,−   
Whose  checkless  bounty,  as of waters  down  a slope,  is spread  abroad  for all that live, to give them  strengt
h.  
2 Now  all this world,  for worship,  shall  come  after thee−the  offerer's  libations  like floods  to the depth,   
When  the well−loved  one seems  to rest upon  the hill, the thunderbolt  of Indra,  shatterer  wrought  of gold.   
3 To him the terrible,  most  meet  for lofty  praise,  like bright  Dawn,  now bring  gifts with reverence  in this r
ite,  
Whose  being,  for renown,  yea, Indra−power  and light,  have  been  created,  like bay steeds,  to move  with 
speed.   
4 Thine,  Indra,  praised  by many,  excellently  rich!  are we who trusting  in thy help draw  near to thee.   
Lover  of praise,  none  else but thou receives  our laud:  as earth  loves  all her creatures,  love thou this our hy
mn.  
5 Great  is thy power,  O Indra,  we are thine.  Fulfil,  O Maghavan,  the wish  of this thy worshipper.   
After  thee lofty  heav en hath measured  out its strength:  to thee and to thy power  this earth  hath bowed  itsel
f.  
6 Thou,  who hast thunder  for thy weapon,  with thy bolt hast shattered  into pieces  this broad  massive  clou
d.  
Thou  hast sent down  the obstructed  floods  that they may flow:  thou hast, thine  own for ever,  all victorious  
might.   
 
HYMN  LVIII.,  Agni.  
I NE'ER  waxeth  faint the Immortal,  Son of Strength,  since  he, the Herald,  hath become  Vivasvan's  
messenger.   
On paths  most  excellent  he measured  out mid−air:  he with oblation  calls to service  of the Gods.   
2 Never  decaying,  seizing  his appropriate  food,  rapidly,  eagerly  through  the dry wood  he spreads.   
His back,  as he is sprinkled,  glistens  like a horse:  loud hath he roared  and shouted  like the heights  of heav
en?  
 
3 Set high in place  o'er all that Vasus,  Rudras  do, immortal,  Lord  of riches,  seated  as High  Priest;   
Hastening  like a car to men,  to those  who live, the God without  delay  gives  boons  to be desired.   
4 Urged  by the wind  be spreads  through  dry wood  as he lists, armed  with his tongues  for sickles,  with a Rig Veda – English Translation  
mighty  roar.  
Black  is thy path,  Agni,  changeless,  with glittering  waves!  when  like a bull thou rushest  eager  to the trees.
  
5 With  teeth  of flame,  wind−driven,  through  the wood  he speeds,  triumphant  like a bull among  the herd of 
cows,   
With  bright  strength  roaming  to the everlasting  air: things  fixed,  things  moving  quake  before  him as he fli
es.  
6 The Bhrgus  established  thee among  mankind  for men,  like as a treasure,  beauteous,  easy to invoke;   
Thee,  Agni,  as a herald  and choice−worthy  guest,  as an auspicious  Friend  to the Celestial  Race.   
7 Agni,  the seven  tongues'  deftest  Sacrificer,  him whom  the priests  elect  at solemn  worship,   
The Herald,  messenger  of all the Vasus,  I serve  with dainty  food,  I ask for riches.   
8 Grant, Son of Strength,  thou rich in friends,  a refuge  without  a flaw this day to us thy praisers.   
O Agni,  Son of Strength,  with forts of iron preserve  thou from  distress  the man who lauds  thee.   
9 Be thou a refuge,  Bright  One,  to the singer,  a shelter,  Bounteous  Lord,  to those  who worship.   
Preserve  the singer  from  distress,  O Agni.  May he, enriched  with prayer,  come  soon  and early.   
 
HYMN  LIX. Agni.  
1 THE  other  fires are, verily,  thy branches;  the Immortals  all rejoice  in thee,  O Agni.   
Centre  art thou,  Vaigvdnara,  of the people,  sustaining  men like a deep−founded  pillar.   
2 The forehead  of the sky, earth's  centre,  Agni  became  the messenger  of earth  and heaven.   
Vaisvanara,  the Deities  produced  thee,  a God,  to be a light unto the Arya.   
3 As in the Sun firm rays are set for ever,  treasures  are in Vaisvanara,  in Agni.   
Of all the riches  in the hills,  the waters,  the herbs,  among  mankind,  thou art the Sovran.   
4 As the great  World−halves,  so are their Son's  praises;  skilled,  as a man,  to act, is he the Heral d.  
Vaisvanara,  celestial,  truly  mighty,  most  manly  One,  hath many  a youthful  consort.   
5 Even  the lofty  heaven,  O Jatavedas  Vaisvanara,  hath not attained  thy greatness.   
Thou  art the King  of lands  where  men are settled,  thou hast brought  comfort  to the Gods in battle.   
6 Now  will I tell the greatness  of the Hero  whom  Prarti's  sons follow  as Vrtra's  slayer:   
Agni  Vaisvanara  struck  down  the Dasyu,  cleave  Sambara  through  and shattered  down  his fences.   
7 Vaisvanara,  dwelling  by his might  with all men,  far−shining,  holy mid the Bharadvajas,   
Is lauded,  excellent,  with hundred  praises  by Purunitha,  son of Satavani.   
 
HYMN  LX. Agni.  
I As 'twere  Some  goodly  treasure  Matarisvan  brought,  as a gift, the glorious  Priest  to Bhrgu,   
Banner  of sacrifice,  the good  Protector,  child  of two births,  the swiftly  moving  envoy.   
2 Both  Gods  and men obey  this Ruler's  order,  Gods  who are worshipped,  men who yearn  and worship.   
As Priest  he takes  his seat ere break  of morning,  House−Lord,  adorable  with men,  Ordainer.   
3 May our fair praise,  heart−born,  most  recent,  reach  him whose  tongue,  e'en at his birth,  is sweet  as hone
y;  
Whom  mortal  priests,  men,  with their strong  endeavour,  supplied  with dainty  viands,  have  created.   
4 Good  to mankind,  the yearnin g Purifier  hath among  men been  placed  as Priest  choice−worthy.   
May Agni  be our Friend,  Lord  of the Household,  protector  of the riches  in the dwelling.   
5 As such we Gotamas  with hymns  extol  thee,  O Agni,  as the guardian  Lord  of riches,   
Decking  thee like a horse,  the swift  prizewinner.  May he, enriched  with prayer,  come  soon  and early.   
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  LXI Indra.  
1 EVEN  to him, swift,  strong  and high.  exalted,  I bring  my song  of praise  as dainty  viands,   
My thought  to him resistless,  praise−deserving,  prayers  offered most  especially  to Indra.   
2 Praise,  like oblation,  I present,  and utter aloud  my song,  my fair hymn  to the Victor.   
For Indra,  who is Lord  of old, the singers  have decked  their lauds  with heart  and mind  and spirit.   
3 To him then with my lips mine  adoration,  winning  heaven's  light,  most  excellent,  I offer,   
To magnify  with songs  of invocation  and with fair hymns  the Lord,  most  bounteous  Giver.   
4 Even  for him I frame  a laud,  as fashions  the wright  a chariot  for the man who needs  it,−  
Praises  to him who gladly  hears  our praises,  a hymn  well−formed,  all−moving,  to wise Indra.   
5 So with my tongue  I deck,  to please  that Indra,  my hymn,  as 'twere  a horse,  through  love of glory,   
To reverence  the Hero,  bounteous  Giver,  famed  far and wide,  destroyer  of the castles.   
6 Even  for him hath Tvastar  forged  the thunder,  most  deftly  wrought,  celestial,  for the battle,   
Wherewith  he reached  the vital parts  of Vrtra,  striking−the  vast, the mighty  with the striker.   
7 As soon  as, at libations  of his mother,  great  Visnu  had drunk  up the draught,  he plundered.   
The dainty  cates,  the cooked  mess;  but One stronger  transfixed  the wild boar,  shooting  through  the mount
ain.  
8 To him, to Indra,  when  he slew the Dragon,  the Dames,  too, Consorts  of the Goda,  wove  praises.   
The mighty heaven  and earth  hath he encompassed:  thy greatness  heaven  and earth,  combined,  exceed  not
.  
9 Yea, of a truth,  his magnitude  surpasseth  the magnitude  of earth,  mid−air,  and heaven.   
Indra,  approved  by all men,  self−resplendent,  waxed  in his home,  loud−voiced  and strong  for battle.   
10 Through  his own strength  Indra  with bolt of thunder  cut piece−meal  Vrtra,  drier up of waters.   
He let the floods  go free, like cows  imprisoned,  for glory,  with a heart  inclined  to bounty.   
11 The rivers  played,  through  his impetuous  splendour,  since  with his bolt he compassed  them  on all sides
.  
Using  his might  and favouring  him who worshipped,  he made  a ford,  victorious,  for Turviti.   
12 Vast,  with thine  ample  power,  with eager  movement,  against  this Vrtra  cast thy bolt of thunder.   
Rend  thou his joints,  as of an ox, dissevered,  with bolt oblique,  that floods  of rain may follow.   
13 Sing with new lauds  his exploits  wrought  aforetime,  the deeds  of him, yea, him who moveth  swiftly,   
When,  hurling  forth  his weapons  in the battle, he with impetuous  wrath  lays low the foemen.   
14 When  he, yea, he, comes  forth  the firm.  Set mountains  and the whole  heaven  and earth,  tremble  for terr
or.  
May Nodhas,  ever praising  the protection  of that dear Friend,  gain quickly  strength  heroic.   
15 Now  unto him of these  things  hath been  given  what  he who rules  alone  o'er much,  electeth.   
Indra  hath helped  Etasa,  Soma−presser,  contending  in the race of steeds  with Sarya.   
16 Thus  to thee,  Indra,  yoker  of Bay Coursers,  the Gotamas  have  brought  their prayers  to please  thee.   
Bestow  upon  them  thought,  decked  with all beauty.  May he, enriched  with prayer,  come  soon  and early.   
 
HYMN  LXII.  Indra.  
1. LIKE  Angiras  a gladdening  laud we ponder  to him who loveth  song,  exceeding  mighty.   
Let us sing glory  to the far−famed  Hero  who must  be praised  with fair hymns  by the singer.   
2 Unto  the great  bring  ye great  adoration,  a chant  with praise  to him exceeding  mighty,   
Through  whom  our sires,  Angirases,  singing  praises  and knowing  well the places,  found  the cattle.   
3 When  Indra  and the Angirases  desired  it, Sarama  found  provision  for her offipring.   
Brhaspati  cleft the mountain,  found  the cattle:  the heroes  shouted  with the kine in triumph.   
4 Mid shout,  loud shout,  and roar, with the Navagvas,  seven  singers,  hast thou,  heavenly,  rent the mountaiRig Veda – English Translation  
n;  
Thou  hast, with speeders,  with Dasagvas,  Indra,  Sakra,  with thunder  rent obstructive  Vala.   
5 Praised  by Angirases,  thou,  foe−destroyer,  hast, with the Dawn,  Sun, rays,  dispellcd  the darkness.   
Thou  Indra,  hast spread  out the earths  high ridges,  and firmly  fixed  the region  under  heaven.   
6 This is the deed  most  worthy  of all honour,  the fairest  marvel  of the Wonder−Worker,   
That,  nigh where  heaven  bends  down,  he made  four rivers  flow full with waves  that carry  down  sweet  wat
er.  
7 Unwearied,  won with lauding  hymns,  he parted  of old the ancient  Pair, united  ever.   
 
In highest  sky like Bhaga,  he the doer of marvels  set both Dames  and earth  and heaven.   
8 Still born afresh,  young  Dames,  each in her manner,  unlike  in hue, the Pair in alternation   
Round  heaven  and earth  from  ancient  time have  travelled,  Night  with her dark limbs,  Dawn  with limbs  of 
splendour.   
9 Rich  in good  actions,  skilled  in operation,  the Son with might  maintains  his perfect  friendship.   
Thou  in the raw cows , black  of hue or ruddy,  storest  the ripe milk glossy  white  in colour.   
10 Their  paths,  of old connected,  rest uninjured;  they with great  might  preserve  the immortal  statutes.   
For many  thousand  holy works  the Sisters  wait on the haughty  Lord  like wives  and matrons.   
11 Thoughts  ancient,  seeking  wealth,  with adoration,  with newest  lauds  have sped to thee,  O Mighty.   
As yearning  wives  cleave  to their yearning  husband,  so cleave  our hymns  to thee,  O Lord  most  potent.   
12 Strong  God,  the riches  which  thy hands  have holden  from  days of old have  perished  not nor wasted.   
Splendid  art thou,  O Indra,  wise,  unbending:strengthen  us with might,  O Lord  of Power.   
13 O mighty  Indra,  Gotama's  son Nodhas  hath fashioned  this new prayer  to thee Eternal,   
Sure leader,  yoker  of the Tawny  Coursers.  May he, enriched  with prayer,  come  soon  and early.   
 
HYMN  LXIII.  Indra.  
1. THOU  art the Mighty  One;  when  born,  O Indra,  with power  thou tcrrifiedst  earth  and heaven  −  
When,  in their fear of thee,  all firm−set  mountains  and monstrous  creatures  shook  like dust before  thee.   
2 When  thy two wandering  Bays  thou drawest  hither,  thy praiser  laid within  thine  arms  the thunder,   
Wherewith,  O Much−invoked,  in will resistless,  thou smitest  foemen  down  and many  a castle.   
3 Faithful  art thou,  these  thou defiest,  Indra;  thou art the Rbhus'  Lord,  heroic,  victor.   
Thou,  by his side, for youn g and glorious  Kutsa,  with steed  and car in battle  slewest  Susna,   
4 That,  as a friend,  thou furtheredst,  O Indra,  when,  Thundcrer,  −strong  in act, thou crushedst  Vrtra;   
When,  Hero,  thou,  great−souled,  with easy conquest  didst  rend the Dasyus  in their  
distant  dwelling.   
5 This doest  thou,  and art not harmed,  O Indra,  e'en in the anger  of the strongest  mortal.   
Lay thou the race−course  open  for our horses:  as with a club,  slay, Thunderarmed  1 our foemen.   
6 Hence  men invoke  thee,  Indra,  in the tumult  of battle, in the light−bestowing  conflict.   
This aid of thine,  O Godlike  One,  was ever to be implored  in deeds  of might  in combat.   
7 Warring  for Purukutsa  thou,  O Indra,  Thunder−armed  I breakest  down  the seven  castles;   
Easily,  for Sudis,  like grass  didst  rend them,  and out of need,  King,  broughtest  gain to Puru.   
8 O Indra,  God who movest  round  about  us, feed us with varied  food plenteous  as water−   
Food  wherewithal,  O Hero,  thou bestowest  vigour  itself  to flow to us for ever.   
9 Prayers  have  been  made  by Gotamas,  O Indra,  addressed  to thee,  with laud for thy Bay Horses.   
Bring  us in noble  shape  abundant  riches.  May he, enriched  with prayer,  come  soon  and early.   
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  LXIV.  Maruts.  
1. BRING  for the manly  host,  wise and majestical,  O Nodhas,  for the Maruts  bring thou a pure gift.  
I deck  my songs  as one deft−handed,  wise in mind  prepares  the water  that hath power  in solemn  rites.   
2 They  spring  to birth,  the lofty  Ones,  the Bulls  of Heaven,  divine,  the youths  of Rudra,  free from  spot an
d 
stain;   
The purifiers , shining  brightly  even  as suns,  awful  of form  like giants,  scattering  rain−drops  down.   
3 Young  Rudras,  demon−slayers,  never  growing  old, they have  waxed,  even  as mountains,  irresistible.   
They  make  all beings  tremble  with their mighty  strength,  even  the very strongest,  both of earth  and heave
n.  
4 With  glittering  ornaments  they deck  them  forth  for show;  for beauty  on their breasts  they bind their chai
ns 
of gold.   
The lances  on their shoulders  pound  to pieces;  they were  born together,  of themselves,  the Men of Heaven
.  
5 Loud  roarers,  giving  strength,  devourers  of the foe, they make  the winds,  they make  the lightnings  with 
 
their powers.   
The restless  shakers  drain  the udders  of the sky, and ever wandering  round  fill the earth  full with milk.   
6 The bounteo us Maruts  with the fatness  dropping  milk fill full the waters  which  avail  in solenm  rites.   
They  lead,  as 'twere,  the Strong  Horse  forth,  that it may rain: they milk the thundering,  the never−failing  
spring.   
7 Mighty,  with wondrous  power  and marvellously  bright,  selfstrong  like mountains,  ye glide  swiftly  on y
our 
way.   
Like the wild elephants  ye eat the forests  up when  ye assume  your strength  among  the bright  red flames.   
8 Exceeding  wise they roar like lions  mightily,  they,  all−possessing,  are beauteous  as antelopes;   
Stirring  the darkness  with lances  and spotted  deer,  combined  as priests,  with serpents'  fury through  their 
might.   
9 Heroes  who march  in companies,  befriending  man,  with serpents'  ire through  strength,  ye greet  the earth  
and heaven.   
Upon  the seats,  O Maruts,  of your chariots,  upon  the cars stands  lightning  visible  as light.   
10 Lords  of all riches,  dwelling  in the home  of wealth,  endowed  with mighty  vigour,  singers  loud of voice
,  
Heroes,  of powers  infinite,  armed  with strong  men's  rings,  the archers,  they have  laid the arrow  on their ar
ms.  
11 They  who with golden  fellies  make  the rain increase  drive  forward  the big clouds  like wanderers  on th
e 
way.   
Self−moving,  brisk,  unwearied,  they o'erthrow  the firm;  the Maruts  with bright  lances  make  all things  to r
eel.  
12 The progeny  of Rudra  we invoke  with prayer,  the brisk,  the bright,  the worshipful,  the active  Ones   
To the strong  band  of Maruts  cleave  for happiness,  the chasers  of the sky, impetuous,  vigorous.   
13 Maruts,  the man whom  ye have  guard ed with your help,  he verily  in strength  surpasseth  all mankind.   
Spoil  with his steeds  he gaineth,  treasure  with his men;  he winneth  honourable  strength  and prospereth.   
14 O Maruts,  to the worshippers  give glorious  strength  invincible  in battle,  brillian t, bringing  wealth,   
Praiseworthy,  known  to all men.  May we foster  well,  during  a hundred  winters,  son and progeny.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
15 Will ye then,  O ye Maruts,  grant  us riches,  durable,  rich in men,  defying  onslaught.   
A hundred,  thousandfold,  ever increasing?  May he, enriched  with prayer,  come  soon  and early.   
 
HYMN  LXV.  Agni.  
1 ONE−MINDED,  wise,  they tracked  thee like a thief lurking  in dark cave with a stolen  cow:   
Thee  claiming  worship,  bearing  it to Gods  −. there  nigh to thee sate all the Holy  Ones.   
2 The Gods  approached  the ways  of holy Law;  there  was a gathering  vast as heaven  itself.   
The waters  feed with praise  the growing  Babe,  born nobly  in the womb,  the seat of Law.   
3 Like grateful  food,  like some  wide  dwelling  place,  like a fruit−bearing  hill, a wholesome  stream.   
Like a steed  urged  to run in swift  career,  rushing  like Sindhu,  who may check  his course?   
4 Kin as a brother  to his sister  floods,  he cats the woods  as a King  eats the rich.  
When  through  the forest,  urged  by wind,  he spreads,  verily  Agni  shears  the hair of earth.   
5 Like a swan  sitting  in the floods  he pants wisest  in mind  mid men he wakes  at morn.   
A Sage  like Soma,  sprung  from  Law,  he grew  like some  young  creature,  mighty,  shining  far.  
 
HYMN  LXVI.  Agni.  
1. LIKE  the Sun's  glance,  like wealth  of varied  sort, like breath  which  is the life, like one's  own son,  
Like a swift  bird, a cow who yields  her milk,  pure and refulgent  to the wood  he speeds.   
2 He offers  safety  like a pleasant  home,  like ripened  corn,  the Conqueror  of men.   
Like a Seer lauding,  famed  among  the folk;  like a steed  friendly  he vouchsafe s us power.   
3 With  flame  insatiate,  like eternal  might;  caring  for each one like a dame  at home;   
Bright  when  he shines  forth,  whitish  mid the folk, like a car, gold−decked,  thundering  to the fight.   
4 He strikes  with terror  like a dart shot forth,  e'en like an archer's  arrow  tipped  with flame;   
 
Master  of present  and of future  life, the maidens'  lover  and the matrons'  Lord.   
5 To him lead all your ways:  may we attain  the kindled  God as cows  their home  at eve.  
He drives  the flames  below  as floods  their swell: the rays rise up to the fair place  of heaven.   
 
HYMN  LXVII.  Agni.  
1. VICTORIOUS  in the wood,  Friend  among  men,  ever he claims  obedience  as a King.   
Gracious  like peace,  blessing  like mental power,  Priest  was he, offering−bearer,  full of thought.   
2 He, bearing  in his hand  all manly  might,  crouched  in the cavern,  struck  the Gods  with fear.  
Men filled  with understanding  find him there,  when  they have  sting  prayers  formed  within  their heart .  
3 He, like the Unborn,  holds  the broad  earth  up; and with effective  utterance  fixed  the sky.  
O Agni,  guard  the spots  which  cattle  love:  thou,  life of all, hast gone  from  lair to lair.  
4 Whoso  hath known  him dwelling  in his lair, and hath approached  the stream  of holy Law,−   
They  who release  him, paying  sacred  rites,  −truly  to such doth he announce  great  wealth.   
5 He who grows  mightily  in herbs,  within  each fruitful  mother  and each babe  she bears,   
Wise,  life of all men,  in the waters'  home,−for  him have sages  built as 'twere  a seat.  
 
HYMN  LXVIII.  Agni.  
1. COMMINGLING,  restless,  he ascends  the sky, unveiling  nights  and all that stands  or moves,   Rig Veda – English Translation  
As he the sole God is preeminent  in great.  ness among  all these  other  Gods.   
2 All men are joyful  in thy power,  O God,  that living  from  the dry wood  thou art born.   
All truly share  thy Godhead  while  they keep,  in their accustomed  ways,  eternal  Law.   
3 Strong  is the thought  of Law,  the Law's  behest;  all works  have  they performed;  he quickens  all.  
Whoso  will bring oblation,  gifts to thee,  to him, bethinking  thee,  vouchsafe  thou wealth.   
4 Seated  as Priest  with Manu's  progeny,  of all these  treasures  he alone  is Lord.   
Men yearn  for children  to prolong  their line, and are not disappointed  in their hope.   
5 Eagerly  they who hear his word  fulfil  his wish  as sons obey  their sire's  behest.   
He, rich in food,  unbars  his wealth  like doors:  he, the House−Friend,  bath decked  heaven's  vault  with stars
.  
 
HYMN  LXIX.  Agni.  
1. BRIGHT,  splendid,  like Dawn's  lover,  he bath filled the two joined  worlds  as with the light of heaven.   
When  born,  with might  thou hast encompassed  them:  Father  of Gods,  and yet their Son wast thou.   
2 Agni,  the Sage,  the humble,  who discerns  like the cow's  udder,  the sweet  taste of food,   
Like a bliss− giver  to be drawn  to men,  sits gracious  in the middle  of the house.   
3 Born  in the dwelling  like a lovely  son, pleased,  like a strong  steed,  he bears  on the folk.  
What  time the men and I, with heroes,  call, may Agni  then gain all through  Godlike  power.   
4 None  breaks  these  holy laws of thine  when  thou hast granted  audience  to these  chieftains  here.   
This is thy boast,  thou smotest  with thy peers,  and joined  with heroes  dravest  off disgrace.   
5 Like the Dawn's  lover,  spreading  light,  well−known  as hued  like morn,  may he remember  me.  
They,  bearing  of themselves,  unbar  the doors:  they all ascend  to the fair place  of heaven.   
 
HYMN  LXX.  Agni.  
1. MAY  we, the pious,  win much  food by prayer,  may Agni  with fair light pervade  each act,−   
He the observer  of the heavenly  laws of Gods,  and of the race of mortal  man.   
2 He who is germ  of waters,  germ  of woods,  germ  of all things  that move  not and that move,−   
To him even  in the rock and in the house:  Immortal  One,  he cares  for all mankind.   
3 Agni  is Lord  of riches  for the man who serves  him readily  with sacred  songs.   
 
Protect  these  beings  thou with careful  thought,  knowing  the races  both of Gods  and men.   
4 Whom  many  dawns  and nights,  unlike,  make  strong,  whom,  born in Law,  all things  that move  and stand
,−  
He bath been won,  Herald  who sits in light,  making  effectual  all our holy works.   
5 Thou  settest  value  on our cows  and woods:  all shall  bring  tribute  to us to the light.   
men have  served  thee in many  and sundry  spots,  parting,  as 'twere,  an aged  father's  wealth.   
6 Like a brave  archer,  like one skilled  and bold,  a fierce  avenger,  so he shines  in fight.   
 
HYMN  LXXI.  Agni.  
1. LOVING  the loving  One,  as wives  their husband,  the sisters  of one home  have  urged  him forward,   
Bright−coloured,  even,  as the cows  love morning,  dark,  breaking  forth  to view,  and redly  beaming.   
2 Our sires with lauds  burst  e'en the firmset  fortress,  yea, the Angirases,  with roar, the mountain.   
They  made  for us a way to reach  high heaven,  they found  us day, light,  day's  sign,  beams  of morning.   