Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
1020  
 mortar, with them the sacrificer milks the fire in yonder world. d The fire is the 
year, its bri cks are arranged threefold, those of Prajapati, of Visnu [2], of 
Viçvakarman; the Prajapati (bricks) are the days and nights; in that he keeps (the 
fire) in the pan, he puts down the Prajapati (bricks); in that he takes up the 
kindling -sticks, and the tree s are Visnu's, verily he puts down the Visnu (bricks); in 
that he piles the fire with bricks, and Viçvakarman is this (earth), verily he puts 
down the Viçvakarman (bricks). Therefore they say, 'Threefold is Agni.' e This 
thus should the sacrificer himself pile; if another pile his fire, if he should not 
prosper him with sacrificial gifts, he would appropriate his fire; him who piles his 
fire he should prosper with sacrificial gifts; verily thus he preserves his fire. 
 
v. 6. 10.  
Prajapati piled the fire as the year by the seasons; by the spring he piled its front 
half, by the summer its right wing, by the rains its tail, by the autumn its left wing, 
by the winter its middle. By the Brahman class he piled its front half, by the lordly 
class its right wing, by  cattle its tail, by the people its left wing, by hope its middle. 
He who knowing thus piles the fire piles it with the seasons; verily he wins all [1]; 
they hearken to him who has piled the fire, he eats food, he is resplendent. The first 
layer is this (e arth), the mortar the plants and trees; the second is the atmosphere, 
the mortar the birds; the third is yonder (sky), the mortar the Naksatras; the fourth 
the sacrifice, the mortar the sacrificial fee; the fifth the sacrificer, the mortar 
offspring; if he  were to pile it with three layers, he would obstruct the sacrifice, the 
fee, the self, offspring; therefore should it be piled with five layers; verily he 
preserves all. In that there [2] are three layers, (it is) since Agni is threefold; in that 
there ar e two (more), the sacrificer has two feet, (it is) for support; there are five 
layers, man is five fold; verily he preserves himself. There are five layers, he 
covers (them) with five (sets of) mortar, these make up ten, man has ten elements; 
he preserves man in his full extent. Again the Viraj has ten elements, the Viraj is 
food; verily he finds support in the Viraj and the eating of food. The sixth layer is 
the year, mortar is the seasons; there are six layers, six (sets of) mortar, they make 
up twelve, t he year has twelve months; verily he finds support in the year.  
The Horse Sacrifice (continued) 
 Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
1021  
 v. 6. 11.  
The red, the dark red, the jujube red, these are for Prajapati; the brown, the reddish -
brown, the parrot brown, these are for Rudra. The white, the  white -eyed, the white -
necked, these have the fathers as their deities. Three black barren cows are for 
Varuna, three white barren cows for the Sun; the dusky -spotted hornless ones are 
for Mitra and Brhaspati. 
 
v. 6. 12.  
The dappled, the one with cross -lines dappled, the one with dappled marks running 
up, these are for the Maruts; the bright, the ruddy woolled, the white, are for 
Sarasvati; the piebald, the grey piebald, the slightly piebald, these are for the All -
gods; three dark barren cows are for Pusan , three ruddy barren cows for Mitra; the 
red-spotted hornless ones are for Indra and Brhaspati. 
 
v. 6. 13.  
The white limbed, the one with white limbs on one side the one with white limbs 
on both sides, these are for Indra and Vayu; the one with white ear -holes, that with 
one white ear -hole, the one with both white ear -holes, they are for Mitra and 
Varuna; the one with a pure tail, the one with a completely pure tail, the one with a 
tail in lumps, these are for the Açvins; three barren cows of varied colour s are for 
the All -gods, three white for the supreme lord; the white -spotted hornless ones are 
for Soma and Pusan. 
 
v. 6. 14.  
The humped, the bull, the dwarf (animal), these are for Indra and Varuna; the one 
with white hump, the white -backed, the white -rumped, these are for Indra and 
Brhaspati; the white -footed, the white -lipped, the white -browed, these are for Indra 
and Visnu; the three white -flecked barren cows are for Viçvakarman; the three 
with piebald bellies are (to be offered) to Dhatr; the white -spotted hornless ones 
are for Indra and Pusan. Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
1022  
  
v. 6. 15.  
Three long -eared ones are for Yama; three white -footed for Soma; three 
ichneumons are (to be offered) to Agni, the youngest; three ruddy eighteen -month -
old (sheep), these are for the Vasus; three red gallinules, these are for the Rudras; 
the brown -spotted hornless ones are for Soma and Indra. 
 
v. 6. 16.  
Three small -eared are for Visnu; three with red -tipped ears are (to be offered) to 
Visnu, the wide strider; three with dewlaps are (to be offered) to Visnu, the wide 
goer; three of two and a half years old are for the Adityas; three of three years old 
are for the Angirases; the yellow spotted hornless ones are for Indra and Visnu.  
v. 6.17.  
To Indra, the king, are (to be offered) three white -backed; to Indra, the overlord, 
three with white humps; to Indra, the self -ruler, three with white buttocks; three 
four-year-old (cows) are for the Sadhyas; three draught cows are for the All -gods; 
the black -spotted hornless ones are for Agni and Indra. 
 
v. 6. 18.  
To Aditi are (to be offered) three ruddy -spotted; to Indrani three black -spotted; to 
Kuhu three red -spotted; three calves to Raka; three heifers to Sinivali; the red -
spotted hornless ones are for Agni and Visnu. 
 
v. 6. 19.  
Three reddish -brown ones are for Soma; to Soma, the king, are (to be offered) 
three dappled ones; the cloud -formed are for Parjanya; three goats with dewlaps 
are (to be offered) to Indrani; three ewes are for Aditi; those of auspicious mark 
and hornless are for sky and earth. Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
1023  
  
v. 6. 20.  
There are three black -spotted for Varuna; to Varuna, the king, are (to be offered) 
three red -spotted; to Varuna, destroyer of foes, three ruddy -spotted; three of varied 
colours are for the All -gods; three dappled for all the deities; the white -spotted 
hornless ones are for Indra and Surya. 
 
v. 6. 21.  
To Soma, self -ruler, there are (to be offered) two oxen which drag the cart; to Indra 
and Agni, the givers of force, two camels; to Indra and Agni, givers of might, two 
sheep that drag the plough; two heifers are for earth; to the quarters are (to be 
offered) two mares; two heifers are for earth; two females are for the Viraj two 
heifers are for earth; two oxen that drag the carriage are (to be offered) to Vayu; 
two black, barren cows are for Varuna; two bulls with high horns, destructive, are 
for the sky. 
 
v. 6. 22.  
In the morning eleven beasts of the ox kind are offered; the goat with spots, the 
blue jay, the Vidigaya, these are for Tvastr. For Surya there are nine white barren 
cows to be offered; those for A gni, Indra and Agni, and the Açvins are offered at 
the great stake. 
 
v. 6. 23.  
There are three reddish -brown ones for spring; three dappled ones for summer; 
three piebald (deer) for the rains; three dappled for autumn; three with dappled 
thighs for winter ; three smeared over for the cool season; to the year are (offered) 
those with hanging bellies. Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
1024  
  
PRAPATHAKA VII  
The Piling of the Fire Altar (continued)  
v. 7. 1.  
a 'He who piles the fire without regard to the deity falls a victim to the deities; he 
becomes poorer; he who (piles it) according to the deity does not fall a victim to 
the deities; he becomes richer. With a Gayatri (verse) addressed to Agni should he 
stroke the first layer; with a Tristubh the second; with a Jagati the third; with an 
Anustubh  the fourth; with a Pankti the fifth; verily he piles the fire according to the 
deity. He falls not a victim to the deities; he becomes richer. This is the dividing of 
the sacrificial food; the food is cattle, and he piles it with cattle [1]. b He who pile s 
the fire after announcing to Prajapati does not go to ruin. The horses should stand 
on either side, on the left the black, on the right the white; having offered them he 
should put down the bricks; that is the form of Prajapati, the horse is connected 
with Prajapati; verily having announced to Prajapati in real presence he piles the 
fire, he does not go to ruin; the white horse is the form of day, the black of night; 
the bricks are the form of day [2], the mortar of night; when about to put down the 
brick s he should stroke the white horse, when about to put down the mortar he 
should stroke the black; verily with the days and nights he piles it. c A golden 
vessel full of honey he gives, (saying), 'May I be possessed of honey'; with (a 
verse) addressed to Su rya, containing the word 'brilliant', he should gaze (on it); 
verily it becomes brilliant in the midday; he causes the horse to sniff it; Indra is 
yonder sun, Prajapati is he; the horse is connected with Prajapati; verily he wins 
him straightway. 
 
v. 7. 2 . 
a To thee, O Agni, the bull, the wise,  
I have come, generating thee ever new;  
Be our household rites not halting;  
With thy keen holy power sharpen us.  
 Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
1025  
 The bricks are cattle, in each layer he puts down a bull (brick); verily in his 
sacrifice he makes a p airing for propagation; therefore in every herd there is a bull.  
b The image of the year  
Which men revere in thee, O night,  
Making his offspring rich in heroes,  
May he obtain all life.  
 
He puts down this Prajapati (brick) [1]; the sole eighth day is this (earth); in that 
food is made on the sole eighth day, he wins it thereby; this is the wish cow of 
Prajapati; verily by it the sacrificer in yonder world milks the fire.  
c With the light wherewith the gods went upward, Wherewith the Adityas, the 
Vasus, the  Rudras, Wherewith the Angirases attained greatness, With that let the 
sacrificer go in prosperity.  
The fire is piled for the world of heaven [2]; (with the words) With the light 
wherewith the gods went upwards', he lights the fire in the pan; verily he p uts 
down the bricks connected with the trees, to win the world of heaven.  
d (Homage) to the hundred -weaponed, him of a hundred powers,  
Him of a hundred aids, the overcomer of hostility,  
To Indra who shall lead us over all obstacles  
Through autumns without  fail. 
e The four paths going to the gods  
Which stretch between sky and earth,  
To him, O gods, do ye all accord us  
Who brought to them unfailing power and untirelessness [3].  
f Summer, winter, and spring for us,  
Autumn, the rains be favourable for us;  
May we enjoy the favour and protection  
Of these seasons through a hundred autumns.  
g To the Idu year, the complete year, the year  
Pay ye honour great;  
In their lovingkindness that are worthy of sacrifice  Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
1026  
 May we long be unfailing, unsmitten.  
h Better than good have the gods brought together;  
With thee as aid may we win thee;  
Do thou, wonder -working, O drop [4], enter us,  
Be propitious and kindly to our children, our descendants.  
 
i He puts down these unfailing (bricks), they are the gods unconquered; verily he 
enters them; he is not conquered. k The theologians say, 'Since the months, the 
half-months, the seasons, the years cook the plants, then why is the offering of 
first-fruits made to other deities?' The gods conquered these (plants); if he were to 
offer to t he seasons, he would cause strife with the gods; having offered the 
offering of first -fruits, he offers these libations; verily he delights the half -months, 
the months, the seasons, the year; he does not cause strife with the gods. 'Better 
than good have t he gods brought together', he says, for the eating of the offering, to 
prevent the defeat of the sacrificer. 
 
v. 7. 3.  
a Thou art the thunderbolt of Indra, slaying foes;  
Guarding our bodies, lying in wait;  
He who in east, south, west,  
In the north, as a f oe plots against us,  
May he strike on this rock.  
 
The gods and the Asuras were in conflict; the Asuras sought to force them from the 
quarters; the gods repelled them with arrow and thunder bolt; in that he puts down 
the thunderbolt (bricks), he repels his foes with arrow and thunderbolt; in the 
quarters [1] he puts down; verily he puts round him those citadels of the gods, 
which guard the body.  
b O Agni and Visnu,  
May these songs gladden you in unison;  
Come ye with radiance and strength.  
 Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
1027  
 The theologians s ay, 'Since they do not offer to any deity, then what deity has the 
stream of wealth?' Wealth is Agni, this stream is his; wealth is Visnu, this stream is 
his; with a verse addressed to Agni and Visnu he offers the stream of wealth; verily 
he unites them wi th their proper portions; verily also [2] he makes this libation to 
have an abode; he wins that for desire of which he makes this offering. The fire is 
Rudra; now two are his bodies, the dread the one, the auspicious the other; in that 
he offers the Çataru driya, he soothes with it his dread form; in that he offers the 
stream of wealth, he delights with it his auspicious form. He, who knows the 
support of the stream of wealth [3], finds support. If there is any butter left over, in 
it he should cook a mess f or the Brahmans, four Brahmans should eat it; the 
Brahman is Agni Vaiçvanara, Vaiçvanara, is the form dear to Agni; verily he 
establishes it in his dear form. He should give four cows; verily with them the 
sacrificer in yonder world milks the fire. 
 
v. 7. 4. 
a 'To thought I offer with mind, with ghee', he says; the oblation to Viçvakarman is 
called the undeceivable; the foe cannot deceive him who has piled; verily also he 
wins the gods. b 'O Agni, to -day', (with these words) he offers with a Pankti verse, 
and by the Pankti and the libation he grasps the beginning of the sacrifice. C 'Seven 
are thy kindling -sticks, O Agni; seven thy tongues', he says; verily he wins the 
Hotr's offices. Agni went away from the gods, desiring a portion [1]; to him they  
assign ed this as a portion; that is the Agnihotra, of Agni; then is he born indeed 
when  
he is completely piled. Verily to him on birth he gives food; he delighted delights 
him,  
he becomes richer.  
d The theologians say, 'Since it is as the Garhapatya that (the fire) is piled, then 
where  
is its Ahavaniya?' 'Yonder sun', he should reply, for in it they offer to all the gods 
[2].  
He who knowing thus piles the fire straightway makes pleased the gods.  
 
e O Agni, the glorious, lead him to glory;  Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
1028  
 Bring hither the fam e that is Indra's;  
May he be head, overlord, resplendent,  
Most famed of his equals.  
With look auspicious first they underwent  
Fervour and consecration, the seers who found the heavenly light;  
Thence was born the kingly power, might and force;  
May the gods in unison accord that to us.  
Disposer, ordainer, and highest [3] onlooker,  
Prajapati, supreme lord, the ruler;  
The Stomas, the metres, the Nivids, mine they call;  
To him may we secure the kingdom.  
Turn towards me, come to me;  
May he be your ruler, your ove rlord;  
On his discernment do ye depend;  
Upon him henceforth do ye all serve.  
 
He puts down these supporters of the realm; this is the realm supporting piling of 
the fire; verily with it he bestows on him the kingly power, he becomes the kingly 
power, the k ingly power does not fall away from him. 
 
v. 7. 5.  
a Just as a son born dies, so dies he whose fire in the pan is extinguished. If he 
were to make it by friction, he would divide (the fire), he would produce a foe for 
him. It must again be kindled (with w ood) around; verily he produces it from its 
own birthplace, he does not produce a foe for him. Darkness seizes on him whose 
fire in the pan is extinguished, darkness is death; a black garment, a black heifer 
are the sacrificial fees; verily with darkness [ 1] he smites away the darkness which 
is death. Gold he gives, gold is light; verily with the light he smites away the 
darkness; moreover gold is brilliance; verily he confers brilliance upon himself.  
b Like heavenly light, the heat; hail! Like heavenly li ght, the Arka hail!  
Like heavenly light, the bright; hail! Like heavenly light, the light; hail! Like 
heavenly light, the sun; hail!'  Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
1029  
 The fire is Arka, the horse sacrifice is yonder sun [2]; in that he offers these 
libations he unites the lights of the A rka and the horse sacrifice; he indeed is an 
offerer of the Arka and the horse sacrifice, for whom this is done in the fire. c The 
waters were first this world, the moving; Prajapati saw this first layer, it he put 
down, it became this (earth). To him Viçv akarman said, 'Let me come to thee'; 
'There is no space here', he answered [3]. He saw this second layer, he put it down, 
it became the atmosphere. The sacrifice said to Prajapati, 'Let me come to thee'; 
'There is no space here', he answered. He said to Vi çvakarman, 'Let me come to 
thee.' 'In what way wilt thou come to me? ' 'By the regional (bricks)', he replied. He 
came with the regional (bricks), he put them down, they became the regions [4]. 
The supreme lord said to Prajapati, 'Let me come to thee'; 'Th ere is no space here', 
he answered. He said to Viçvakarman and the sacrifice, 'Let me come to you two'; 
'There is no space here', they answered. He saw this third layer, he put it down, it 
became yonder (world). Aditya said to Prajapati, 'Let me come to th ee' [5]; 'There 
is no space here', he answered. He said to Viçvakarman and the sacrifice, 'Let me 
come to you two'; 'There is no space here', they answered. He said to the supreme 
lord, 'Let me come to thee.' 'In what way wilt thou come to me?' 'By the spa ce-
filler', he replied. He came to him by the space filler; therefore the space -filler is 
unexhausted, for yonder Aditya is unexhausted [6]. To them the seers said, 'Let us 
come to you.' 'In what way will ye come?' 'By greatness', they replied. To them 
they came with two (more) layers; (the fire) became one of five layers. He who 
knowing thus piles the fire becomes greater, he conquers these worlds, the gods 
know him; moreover he attains community with these deities. 
 
v. 7. 6.  
a The fire is a bird; if the piler of the fire were to eat of a bird, he would be eating 
the fire, he would go to ruin. For a year should he observe the vow, for a vow goes 
not beyond a year.  
b The fire is an animal; now an animal destroys him who moves up to it face to 
face; therefor e he should go up to it from behind while it is looking towards the 
front, to prevent injury to himself.  
c 'Brilliance art thou, grant me brilliance, restrain earth [1], guard me from the 
earth. Light art thou, grant me light, restrain the atmosphere, guar d me from the 
atmosphere.  Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
1030  
 Heavenly light art thou, grant me heavenly light, restrain the heavenly light, guard 
me from the sky', he says; by these are these worlds supported; in that he puts them 
down, (it is) for the support of these worlds. Having put d own the naturally 
perforated (bricks) he puts down the gold bricks; the naturally perforated are these 
worlds, gold is light; in that having put down the naturally perforated [2] he puts 
down the gold bricks; verily he makes these worlds full of light by m eans of them; 
verily also by them these worlds shine forth for him.  
d Those flames of thine, O Agni, which rising in the sun,  
With rays envelop the sky,  
With all of them bring us to brilliance, to man.  
Those flames of yours in the sun, O gods,  
Those flame s in cattle, in horses,  
O Indra and Agni, with all of these  
Grant us brilliance, O Brhaspati.  
Grant us brilliance [3] in our Brahmans,  
Place brilliance in our princes,  
Brilliance in Viçyas and Çudras;  
With thy flame grant me brilliance.  
 
The glory and powe r of him who has piled the fire go apart twofold, or to the fire 
which he has piled or to the man who has sacrificed. In that he offers these 
libations, he places in himself power and fame. e He who having piled the fire 
steps on it is liable to go to ruin . 'To thee I come praising with holy power'; with 
this verse addressed to Varuna [4] should he offer; that is the soothing of the fire 
and the protection of himself. f He who piles the fire is made into an offering; just 
as an offering spills, so he spills  who having piled the fire approaches a woman; 
with clotted curds for Mitra and Varuna he should sacrifice; verily he approaches 
unity with Mitra and Varuna, to avoid his spilling. g He who knows the fire to rest 
on the seasons, for him the seasons go in o rder; he finds support. The fire resting 
on the seasons is the year [5]; the head is the spring, the right side summer, the tail 
the rains, the left side autumn, the middle winter, the layers the first half -months, 
the mortar the second half -months, the br icks the days and nights; this is the fire 
resting on the seasons; he who knows thus, for him the seasons go in order; he 
finds support. h Prajapati, desirous of supremacy, put down the fire; then did he 
attain supremacy; he who knowing thus piles the fire  attains thus supremacy. Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
1031  
  
v. 7. 7.  
a What has flowed from purpose, or heart,  
Or what is gathered from mind or sight,  
Follow to the world of good deed,  
Where are the seers, the first -born, the ancient ones.  
b This I place around thee, O abode, the treasure  
 
Whom the all -knower hath brought here;  
After you the lord of the sacrifice will follow;  
Know ye him in the highest firmament.  
c Know ye him in the highest firmament,  
O gods associates, ye know his form;  
When he shall come [1] by the paths, god -travelled,  
Do ye reveal to him what is sacrificed and bestowed.  
d Move ye forward; go ye along together,  
Make ye the paths, god -travelled, O Agni  
In this highest abode,  
O All -gods, sit ye with the sacrificer.  
e With the strew, the encircling - stick,  
The offering -ladle, the altar, the grass ( barhis ), 
With the Rc, bear this sacrifice for us  
To go to the heaven to the gods.  
f What is offered, what is handed over,  
What is given, the sacrificial fee,  
That [2] may Agni Vaiçvanara  
Place in the sky among the gods for us.  
g That by which thou bearest a thousand,  
Thou, O Agni, all wealth,  
By that (path) do thou bear the sacrifice of ours,  
To go to the gods in heaven.  
h By that (path) by which, O Agni, the priests, busy,  
Bear the fees, the sacrifice,  
By that do thou bear this sa crifice of ours,  
To go to the gods in heaven.  Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
1032  
 i By that (path) by which, O Agni, the doers of good deeds,  
Obtain the streams of honey,  
By that do thou bear this sacrifice of ours,  
To go to the gods in heaven.  
k Where are the streams that fail not  
Of honey and of ghee,  
May Agni Vaiçvanara place us  
In heaven among the gods.  
 
v. 7. 8.  
a Thy kindling -sticks, O Agni, thine abodes,  
Thy tongues, O all -knower, thy light,  
Thy cracklings, thy drops,  
 
With these pile thyself, well knowing.  
The fire is an extended sa crifice; what of it is performed, what not? What the 
Adhvaryu in piling the fire omits, that of himself he omits. 'Thy kindling -sticks, O 
Agni, thine [1] abodes', he says; this is the self piling of the fire; verily the fire 
piles the fire, the Adhvaryu om its nothing from himself.  
b To the four quarters let the fires advance;  
May he bear this sacrifice for us, well knowing;  
Making rich the ghee, immortal, full of heroes,  
The holy power is the kindling -stick of the libations.  
 
The tortoise is put down for t he world of heaven; 'To the four quarters let the fires 
advance', he says [2]; verily by it he recognizes the quarters; 'May he bear this 
sacrifice for us, well knowing', he says, for guidance to the world of heaven; 'The 
holy power is the kindling -stick o f the libations', he says. By means of the holy 
power the gods went to the world of heaven; in that he puts down (the tortoise) 
with (a verse) containing the word 'holy power', by the holy power the sacrificer 
goes to the world of heaven. c The fire is Pra japati here; cattle are the offspring; 
the form the metres; all colours of bricks should he make; verily by the form he Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
1033  
 wins offspring, cattle, the metres; verily also he piles it winning it for offspring, 
cattle, the metres. 
 
v. 7. 9.  
a In me I take firs t Agni,  
For increase of wealth, for good offspring with noble heroes;  
In me offspring, in me radiance I place;  
May we be unharmed in our body with good heroes.  
b The immortal Agni who hath entered  
Into us mortals within the heart, O fathers,  
May we enclose  him in ourselves;  
May he not abandon us and go afar.  
 
If the Adhvaryu without taking the fire in himself were to pile it, he would pile his 
own fire also [1] for the sacrificer. Now cattle depend upon the fire; cattle would 
be likely to depart from him. ' In me I take first Agni', he says; verily in himself he 
supports his own fire, cattle depart not from him. b The theologians say, 'Since clay 
and water are not food for Agni, then why is he piled with clay and water?' In that 
he joins with water [2] and al l the deities are the waters, verily he unites him with 
the waters. In that he piles with clay and Agni Vaiçvanara is this earth, verily he 
piles Agni with Agni. c The theologians say, 'Since the fire is piled with clay and 
water, then why is it called the  fire?' In that he piles with the metres and the metres 
are fires, therefore is it called fire. Moreover Agni Vaiçvanara is this (earth); in 
that [3] he piles with clay, therefore is it called the fire. d He puts down golden 
bricks; gold is light; verily b e confers light upon him; again gold is brilliance; 
verily he confers radiance upon himself. He, who piles (the fire) with faces on all 
sides, eats food in all his offspring, conquers all the quarters. In the east he puts 
down a Gayatri, a Tristubh on the south, a Jagati on the west, an Anustubh on the 
north, a Pankti in the middle; this is the fire with faces on all sides: he, who 
knowing thus piles it, eats food in all his offspring, conquers all the quarters; verily 
also he weaves quarter in quarter; the refore quarter is woven in quarter. 
 Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
1034  
 v. 7. 10.  
Prajapati created the fire; it created ran away east from him; he cast the horse at it, 
it turned to the south; he cast the ram at it, it turned to the west; he cast the bull at 
it, it turned to the north; he  cast the goat at it, it ran upwards. He cast the man at it. 
In that he puts down the heads of animals, he piles it [1], winning it on every side. 
The heads of animals are bricks, breath supporting, full of sight; in that he puts 
down the heads of animals,  the sacrificer breathes with them in yonder world; 
verily also these worlds shine forth for him by them. He puts them down after 
smearing with mud, for purity. The fire is an animal, animals are food, the heads of 
animals are this fire; if he desire of a man, 'May his food be less' [2], he should put 
down for him the heads of animals more closely together; his food becomes less; if 
he desire of a man, 'May his food be similar (to what he has now)', he should put 
them down for him at a mean distance; verily  his food becomes the same; if he 
desire of a man, 'May his food become more', he should put them down separating 
them at the ends of the pile; verily at the ends also he wins food for him; his food 
becomes more.  
The Horse Sacrifice (continued) 
 
v. 7. 11 . 
Flies with the teeth, frogs with the grinders; the cater with the gnawer; strength 
with the digester; the wild with the knee -cap; clay with the gums; Avaka grass with 
pieces of gravel; with the Avakas gravel; with the hump the tongue; with the 
shouter th e palate, Sarasvati with the tongue tip. 
 
v. 7. 12.  
Strength with the jaws; the waters with the mouth; the Adityas with the hair; 
support with the lower lip; the existent with the upper; the clearness with what is 
between; by the gloss the external (radia nce); by the knob the thundering; by the 
eyes Surya and Agni; by the two pupils the two lightnings; the lightning -stroke by 
the brain; might by the marrow parts. 
 Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
1035  
 v. 7. 13.  
Tortoises with the hooves; with the flesh of the hooves francolin partridges; the 
Saman with the dewclaws; speed with the legs; health with the two knees; strength 
with the two Kuhas; fear with the two movers; the secret with the two sides; the 
Açvins with the two shoulders Aditi with the head; Nirrti with the bald head. 
 
v. 7. 14.  
The yoke -thong with the pits of the legs; the yoke with the bent part; thought with 
the neck; sounds with the breaths; with the gloss skin; with the Parakaça the 
interior; with hair the flies; Indra with the hard -working bearing part; Brhaspati 
with the seat of the birds; the chariot with the cervical vertebrae. 
 
v. 7. 15.  
Indra and Varuna with the two buttocks; Indra and Agni with the flesh below the 
buttocks; Indra and Brhaspati with the two thighs; Indra and Visnu with the knees; 
Savitr with the tail; the Gandharvas with the penis; the Apsarases with the testicles; 
the purifying with the anus; the strainer with the two Potras; the going with the two 
Sthuras; the going to with the two centres of the loins. 
 
v. 7. 16.  
For Indra the breast, for Aditi the flan ks, for the quarters the cervical cartilages; the 
clouds with the heart and its covering; atmosphere with the pericardium; the mist 
with the flesh of the stomach; Indrani with the lungs; ants with the liver, the hills 
with the intestines; the ocean with th e stomach; Vaiçvanara with the fundament. 
 
v. 7. 17.  
For Pusan the rectum; for the blind serpent the large entrails; serpents with the 
entrails; seasons with the transverse processes; sky with the back; for the Vasus the 
first vertebra; for the Rudras the  second; for the Adityas the third; for the Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
1036  
 Angirases the fourth; for the Sadhyas the fifth; for the All -gods the sixth. 
 
v. 7. 18.  
Force with the neck; Nirrti with the bones; Indra with the hard -working bearing 
part; for Rudra the moving shoulder; for da y and night the second (part); for the 
half-months the third; for the months the fourth; for the seasons the fifth; for the 
year the sixth. 
 
v. 7. 19.  
Joy with the delighter; love with the two Pratyasas; fear with the two Çitimans; 
command with the two Pr açasas; sun and moon with the two kidney parts; the dark 
and the light with the two kidneys; the dawning with the form; the setting with the 
formless. 
 
v. 7. 20.  
Day with the flesh; night with the fat; the waters with the juice; ghee with the sap; 
ice wit h the fat (vása); hail with the rheum of the eyes; with tears hoar -frost; sky 
with the form; the Naksatras with the shadow; earth with the hide; the skin with the 
skin; to it brought up hail! To it slaughtered hail! To it offered hail! 
 
v. 7. 21.  
For Agni  the first rib; for Sarasvati the second; for Soma the third; for the waters 
the fourth; for the plants the fifth; for the year the sixth; for the Maruts the seventh; 
for Brhaspati the eighth; for Mitra the ninth; for Varuna the tenth; for Indra the 
eleven th for the All -gods the twelfth; for sky and earth the side; for Yama the side 
bone. 
 Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
1037  
 v. 7. 22.  
For Vayu the first rib; for Sarasvant the second; for the moon the third; for the 
Naksatras the fourth; for Savitr the fifth; for Rudra the sixth for the serpe nts the 
seventh; for Aryaman the eighth; for Tvastr the ninth for Dhatr the tenth; for 
Indrani the eleventh; for Aditi the twelfth; for sky and earth the side; for Yama the 
side bone. 
 
v. 7. 23.  
The path with the two parts near the kidneys; continuance wi th the two sinew 
parts; parrots with bile; jaundice with the liver; the Haliksnas with the evil wind; 
Kuçmas with dung; the worms with the contents of the intestines; dogs with the 
cutting up; serpents with the smell of the blood, birds with the smell of t he 
cooking; ants with the fragments. 
 
v. 7. 24.  
With strides the courser hath strode out,  
In unison with the All -gods worthy of sacrifice;.  
Do thou bear us to the world of good deeds;  
May we rejoice in thy strength.  
 
v. 7. 25.  
a Thy back is the sky; thy place earth; thy breath the atmosphere; thy birthplace the 
ocean. b Thine eye the sun; thy breath the wind; thine ear the moon; thy joints the 
months and the half -months; thy limbs the seasons; thy greatness the year. 
 
v. 7. 26.  
Agni was the animal; with it they sacrificed; it won this world where Agni is; this 
is thy world, thou wilt win it, and so snuff (it). Vayu was the animal; with it they 
sacrificed; it won this world where Vayu is; this is thy world, therefrom will I 
obstruct thee if thou dost not s nuff (it). Aditya was the animal; with it they Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
1038  
 sacrificed; it won this world where Aditya is; this is thy world, thou wilt win it if 
thou dost snuff it.  Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
1039  
 KANDA VI  
 
 
THE EXPLANATION OF THE SOMA  
SACRIFICE  
 
PRAPATHAKA I  
The Exposition of the Soma Sacrifc e  
vi. 1. 1.  
He makes a hall with beams pointing east. The gods and men divided the quarters, 
the gods (obtained) the eastern, the Pitrs the southern, men the western, the Rudras 
the northern. In that he makes a hall with beams pointing east, the sacrifice r 
approaches the world of the gods. He covers it over, for the world of the gods is 
hidden from the world of men. 'It is not easy', they say, 'to go from this world; for 
who knows if he is in yonder world or not.' He makes at the corners apertures [1], 
for the winning of both worlds. He shaves his hair and beard, he trims his nails. 
The hair and the beard are dead and impure skin, and by thus destroying the dead 
and impure skin he becomes fit for the sacrifice and approaches the sacrifice. The 
Angirases goi ng to the world of heaven placed in the waters consecration and 
penance. He bathes in the waters; verily visibly he secures consecration and 
penance. He bathes at a ford, for at a ford did they place (consecration and 
penance); he bathes at a ford [2]; ver ily he becomes a ford for his fellows. He sips 
water; verily he becomes pure within. He consecrates him with a garment; the 
linen garment has Soma for its deity. He who consecrates himself approaches 
Soma as his deity. He says, 'Thou art the body of Soma; guard my body.' He 
approaches his own deity; verily also he invokes this blessing. (Of the garment) the 
place where the border is belongs to Agni, the wind -guard to Vayu, the fringe to 
the Pitrs, the foreedge to the plants [3], the warp to the Adityas, the  woof to the 
All-gods, the meshes to the Naksatras. The garment is thus connected with all the Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
1040  
 gods; in that he consecrates him with the garment, verily with all the gods he 
consecrates him. Man has breath without; his eating is his breath, he eats; verily  he 
consecrates himself with breath. He becomes satiated. As great as is his breath, 
with it he approaches the sacrifice. Ghee pertains to the gods, sour cream to the 
Pitrs, well -seasoned butter to men [4], fresh butter is connected with all the gods; 
verily in anointing with fresh butter he satisfies all the gods. The man who is 
consecrated has fallen from this world and yet not gone to the world of the gods; 
fresh butter is as it were midway; therefore he anoints with fresh butter, along the 
hair, with a Yajus, for destruction. Indra slew Vrtra; his eyeball fell away; it 
became collyrium. When he anoints, verily he takes away the eye of his enemy. He 
anoints his right eye first [5], for men anoint the left first. He does not rub (the 
ointment) on, for men rub (the ointment) on. Five times he anoints; the Pankti has 
five syllables, the sacrifice is fivefold; verily he obtains the sacrifice. He anoints a 
limited number of times, for men anoint an unlimited number of times. He anoints 
with (a stalk) which has a tuft, for men anoint with (a stalk) which has no tuft; 
(verily he anoints them) for discrimination. If he were to anoint with (a stalk) 
having no tuft, he would be as it were a thunder bolt. He anoints with one which 
has a tuft, for friendship [6]. Indra  slew Vrtra, he died upon the waters. Of the 
waters what was fit for sacrifice, pure, and divine, that went out of the waters, and 
became Darbha grass. In that he purifies (the sacrificer) with bunches of Darbha 
grass, verily he purifies him with the water s which are fit for sacrifice, pure, and 
divine. He purifies (him) with two (stalks); verily he purifies him by days and 
nights. He purifies (him) with three (stalks); three are these worlds; verily he 
purifies him by these worlds. He purifies (him) with f ive stalks [7]; the Pankti has 
five syllables, the sacrifice is fivefold; verily he purifies him by the sacrifice. He 
purifies (him) with six (stalks); six are the seasons; verily he purifies him by the 
seasons. He purifies (him) with seven (stalks); seven  are the metres; verily he 
purifies him by the metres. He purifies (him) with nine (stalks); nine are the 
breaths in man; verily he purifies him along with his breaths. He purifies (him) 
with twenty -one (stalks); there are ten fingers and ten toes, and the  body is the 
twenty first; he thus completely purifies the man [8]. He says, 'Let the lord of 
thought purify thee'; the mind is the lord of thought; verily by the mind he purifies 
him. He says, 'Let the lord of speech purify thee'; verily by speech he puri fies him. 
He says, 'Let the god Savitr purify thee'; verily being instigated by Savitr, he 
purifies him. He says, 'O lord of the purifier, with thy purifier, for whatsoever I 
purify myself, that may I have strength to accomplish.' Verily does he invoke thi s Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
1041  
 blessing. 
 
vi. 1. 2.  
All the gods who purified themselves for the sacrifice waxed great. He who 
knowing thus purifies himself for the sacrifice waxes great. Having purified him 
without he makes him go within. Verily having purified him in the world of m en, 
he leads him forward purified to the world of the gods. 'He is not consecrated by 
one oblation ', they say; verily he offers four with the dipping -ladle for 
consecration; the fifth he offers with the offering -ladle; the Pankti has five 
syllables, the s acrifice is fivefold; verily he wins the sacrifice. 'To the purpose, to 
the impulse, to Agni, [1] hail!' he says, for with purpose does a man employ the 
sacrifice, planning to sacrifice. 'To wisdom, to thought, to Agni, hail!' he says, for 
by wisdom and th ought man approaches the sacrifice. 'To Sarasvati, to Pusan, to 
Agni, hail! 'he says. Sarasvati is speech, Pusan the earth;. verily with speech and 
the earth he performs the sacrifice. 'O ye divine, vast, all -soothing waters', he says. 
The waters of the ra in [2] are the divine, vast, all -soothing waters; if he said not 
that praise, the divine waters would descend in anger on this world. He says, 'O ye 
divine, vast, all -soothing waters.' Verily he makes them soothing for this world; 
accordingly being soothed  they approach this world. 'Heaven and earth', he says, 
for the sacrifice is in heaven and earth. 'Wide atmosphere', he says, for the sacrifice 
is in the atmosphere. 'May Brhaspati rejoice in our oblation' [3], he says. Brhaspati 
is the holy power (Brahman ) of the gods; verily by the holy power he wins this 
sacrifice for him. If he were to say vidheh  then he would stumble on the 
sacrificial post; he says vrdhatu ; verily he avoids the sacrificial post. Prajapati 
created the sacrifice. Being created it went a way. It crushed the Yajus, it crushed 
the Saman; the Rc raised it; in that the Rc raised (it), hence the elevating offering 
has the name. With a Rc [4] he sacrifices, to support the sacrifice. 'It was the 
Anustubh among the metres which supported it', they  say. Therefore he sacrifices 
with an Anustubh, to support the sacrifice. 'It was the twelve "calf -binders" which 
supported it', they say. Therefore with twelve those who know the 'calf -binders', 
consecrate. This Rc is an Anustubh; the Anustubh is speech; in that he consecrates 
him with this Rc, he consecrates him with the whole of speech. 'Let every (man) of 
the god who leads ', he says. By that (the Rc) is connected with Savitr. '(Let every) Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
1042  
 man choose the companionship' [5], he says. By that (the Rc) has  the Pitrs for its 
deity.' 'Every man prayeth for wealth', he says. By that (the Rc) is connected with 
the All -gods. 'Let him choose glory that he may prosper', he says. By that (the Rc) 
is connected with Pusan. This Rc indeed is connected with all the god s. In that he 
consecrates with this Rc, he consecrates him with all the gods. The first quarter -
verse is of seven syllables; the other three are of eight syllables. The three 
approach the eight; the four the eight. Because it has eight syllables [6] it is a 
Gayatri. Because it has eleven syllables it is a Tristubh. Because it has twelve 
syllables, it is a Jagati. This Rc indeed is all the metres. In that he consecrates him 
with this Rc, he consecrates him with all the metres. The first quarter verse is of 
seven syllables; the Çakvari is of seven syllables, the Çakvari is cattle; verily he 
wins cattle. The first quarter -verse is defective by one syllable. Therefore men live 
on what of speech is defective. He offers with a full (verse) to win Prajapati; full a s 
it were is Prajapati. He offers with a defective (verse), for the creation of offspring, 
for from what is defective Prajapati created offspring. 
 
vi. 1. 3.  
The Rc and the Saman, unwilling to remain with the gods for the sacrifice, taking 
the form of a b lack antelope departed and remained away. The (gods) reflected, 'He 
whom they shall resort to will become all this world.' They called to them, and they 
depositing their might in day and night came up to them. This is the colour of the 
Rc, the white of the  skin of the black antelope; the black is the colour of the 
Saman. 'Ye are images of the Rc and Saman', he says; verily he wins the Rc and 
the Saman [1]. The white of the black antelope skin is the colour of the day, the 
black of the night. Whatever is imb ued in those two, he wins. He consecrates (him) 
with a black antelope skin. The black antelope skin is the form of the holy power; 
verily he consecrates him with the holy power. 'O god, this prayer of him who 
imploreth', he says. That is according to the t ext. The man who is consecrated is a 
foetus; the clothing is the caul; be covers. Therefore  
[2] foetuses are born covered (with the caul). He should not uncover before the 
purchasing of the Soma. If he were to uncover before the purchasing of the Soma, 
the foetuses of offspring would be liable to miscarriage. He uncovers when the 
Soma has been purchased; verily he is born. It is also as when one uncovers to a 
superior. The Angirases going to the world of heaven divided their strength. What Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
1043  
 was left over be came Çara grass; Çara grass is strength. In that the girdle is of Çara 
grass [3], he wins strength. He girds it in the middle; verily he gives him strength 
in the middle. Therefore in the middle men enjoy strength. The part of man above 
the navel is pure, that below is impure. In that he girds him in the middle he 
discriminates between the pure and impure parts. Indra hurled his thunderbolt 
against Vrtra; it divided into three parts; one -third the wooden sword, one -third the 
chariot, and one -third the sacri ficial post [4]. The internal arrows which were split 
(açiryanta ) became Çara grass, and that is why Çara grass is so called. The 
thunderbolt is Çara grass; hunger indeed is the foe of man. In that the girdle is of 
Çara grass, he clearly drives away the en emy hunger from the middle (of man's 
body). It is threefold. The breath is threefold; verily he places the threefold breath 
in the middle of the sacrificer. It is broad, for the discrimination of the strands. He 
consecrates the sacrificer with a girdle, wi th a yoke his wife, for the sake of 
offspring [5]. The sacrifice reflected on the gift (to the priests). He had intercourse 
with her. Indra perceived this and reflected, 'He who will be born from this union 
will be this world.' He entered her; from her ver ily was Indra born; he reflected, 
'He who hence other than I will be born will be this world'. Stroking her womb he 
split it, she became barren after birth, and that is the origin of the (cow) which is 
barren after birth [6]. He wrapped it (the yoni ) in hi s hand, he deposited it among 
the wild beasts, it became the horn of the black antelope. 'Thou art the birthplace of 
Indra; harm me not', (with these words) he hands the horn of the black antelope. 
Verily he makes the sacrifice united with the womb, the gi ft with the womb, Indra 
with the womb, for union with the womb. 'For ploughing thee, for good crops', he 
says. Therefore plants grow up without ploughing. 'For those of good fruits thee, 
for the plants', he says. Therefore plants bear fruit. If he were to scratch himself 
with his hand [7] his offspring would be liable to the itch; if he were to smile, they 
would become naked. He scratches himself with the horn of the black antelope and 
smiles, holding it for the protection of his offspring. He should not le t go the horn 
of the black antelope before the bringing of the gifts (to the priests). If he were to 
let go the horn of the black antelope before the bringing of the gifts, the womb of 
his offspring will be liable to miscarriage. When the gifts have been b rought, he 
casts away the horn of the black antelope in the pit. The pit is the womb of the 
sacrificer; the horn of the black antelope is the womb; verily he places womb in 
womb, that the sacrificer may have a womb. Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
1044  
  
vi. 1. 4.  
Speech went away from the go ds, not being willing to serve for the sacrifice. She 
entered the trees. It is the voice of the trees, the voice that is heard in the drum, the 
lute, and the flute. In that he offers the staff of the initiated, he wins speech. The 
(staff) is of Udumbara wo od; the, Udumbara is strength; verily he wins strength. It 
is level with his mouth; verily from the mouth (downwards) he wins strength for 
him. Therefore from the mouth they enjoy strength [1]. After the buying of the 
Soma he hands the staff to the Maitrav aruna (priest). For the Maitravaruna first 
assigns to the priests their utterance, and the priests plant it in the sacrificer. 'Hail! 
with my mind the sacrifice', he says; for man approaches the sacrifice with his 
mind. 'Hail! from heaven and earth', he sa ys; for the sacrifice is in heaven and 
earth. 'Hail! from the broad atmosphere', he says; for the sacrifice is in the 
atmosphere. 'Hail! from the wind the sacrifice I grasp', he says [2]. The sacrifice is 
he who blows here; verily he clearly wins him. He c lenches his fist; he restrains his 
speech, for the support of the sacrifice. 'This Brahman has consecrated himself', he 
says thrice in a whisper; verily he proclaims him to the gods. Thrice aloud (he says 
it); verily he proclaims him to both gods and men. He should not utter speech until 
the Naksatras appear. If he were to utter speech before the Naksatras appear, he 
would divide the sacrifice [3]. When the Naksatras have arisen, be utters speech, 
'Prepare the fast food.' The consecrated is bound by a vow o f sacrifice; verily with 
regard to the sacrifice does he utter speech. Should he utter speech, he should then 
repeat a Rc addressed to Visnu. Visnu is the sacrifice; verily he unites the sacrifice 
with the sacrifice. 'The thought divine we meditate', he sa ys. Thus he makes 
smooth the sacrifice. 'May it guide us safely according as we will', he says. Verily 
he wins the dawn [4]. The theologians say, 'Should an offering be made in the 
house of one who is consecrated, or should an offering not be made?' The ma n who 
is consecrated is the oblation, and if he were to sacrifice he would offer a part of 
the sacrificer; if he were not to sacrifice, then he would omit a joint of the sacrifice. 
'The gods, mind born, mind using', he says. The gods, mind born, mind using , are 
the breaths; verily in them he sacrifices secretly, and the sacrifice is both offered as 
it were and yet not offered. Now the Raksases are fain to hurt him who is 
consecrated while he sleeps. Agni [5] indeed is the slayer of the Raksases. 'O Agni, 
be thou wakeful. Let us be glad', he says; verily having made Agni his guardian, 
for the smiting away of the Raksases, he sleeps. Now, if a man who is consecrated Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
1045  
 sleeps, he does something that as it were is contrary to his vow. I Thou, O Agni, art 
the guard ian of vows', he says. Agni indeed is among the gods the guardian of 
vows; verily he causes him to take up his vow again. 'Among the gods and men', he 
says for he, being a god [6], is (guardian of vows) among men. 'Thou art to be 
invoked at our sacrifices' , he says; for him they invoke at the sacrifices. Now 
power and the gods depart from the man who is consecrated when he is asleep. 'All 
the gods have surrounded me', he says; verily he unites him with both power and 
the gods. If he were not to utter that f ormula (Yajus), so many cattle would be as 
he might consecrate himself for. 'O Soma, give so much [7] and bear more hither', 
he says; verily he obtains innumerable cattle. 'Thou art gold; be for my enjoyment', 
he says; verily he takes each according to its  deity. He says, 'To Vayu thee, to 
Varuna thee!' If he did not so specify them, he would put the gifts out of 
correspondence with the deities, and would be brought low to the deities. Because 
he thus specifies them, he puts the gifts in correspondence with  the deities, and is 
not brought low to the deities. 'O divine waters, son of the waters', he says. 'That 
divine part of yours, which is pure and fit for the sacrifice, may I not step upon', 
that he says in effect. 'The unbroken web of earth may I follow',  he says; verily 
making a bridge he crosses over. 
 
vi. 1. 5.  
The gods, having fixed up a place of sacrifice, could not distinguish the quarters. 
They ran up to one another, (saying) 'By thee shall we distinguish them, by thee.' 
They fixed upon Aditi, (say ing, 'By thee shall we distinguish them.' She said, 'Let 
me choose a guerdon. Let the opening oblation in the sacrifice be mine, and the 
concluding oblation be mine.' Therefore the opening oblation of the sacrifice 
belongs to Aditi, and the concluding obla tion belongs to Aditi. He offers to five 
gods; there are five quarters, (and so it serves) for the distinction of the quarters 
[1]. Now the Pankti is of five elements, the sacrifice is fivefold; verily he wins the 
sacrifice. They made sacrifice to Pathya S vasti. The eastern quarter they 
distinguished by her, by Agni the southern, by Soma the western, by Savitr the 
northern, by Aditi the zenith. He offers to Pathya Svasti; verily he distinguishes the 
eastern quarter. Having offered to Pathya Svasti, he offer s to Agni and Soma. Agni 
and Soma indeed are the eyes of the sacrificer; verily he sees with them [2]. 
Having offered to Agni and Soma, he offers to Savitr; verily on the instigation of Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
1046  
 Savitr he sees. Having offered to Savitr, he offers to Aditi; Aditi in deed is this 
(earth); verily taking his stand on it he sees. Having offered to Aditi, he repeats the 
verse to the Maruts. The Maruts are the subjects of the gods. As the subjects of the 
gods are in harmony, so he brings the human subjects into harmony.' In  that he 
repeats the verse to the Maruts, it is to bring subjects into harmony. The 
theologians say, 'The opening oblation should be performed with a fore -offering, 
but without an after -offering; the concluding oblation should be performed with all 
after-offering [3], but without a fore -offering.' These are the fore -offerings, and 
these the after -offerings, and this is the course of the sacrifice. This is not to be 
followed. The fore -offerings are the self; the after -offerings the offspring. If he 
were to o mit the fore -offerings, he would omit the self; if he were to omits the 
after-offerings, he would omit offspring. In so far as the whole of the sacrifice is 
not performed, in so far does the sacrifice come to ruin, and the sacrificer comes to 
ruin along wi th the sacrifice [4]. Verily the opening oblation should be performed 
with both fore - and after -offerings, and the concluding oblation should be 
performed both with fore - and after offerings. He does not omit the self, nor 
offspring; the sacrifice does not  come to ruin, nor the sacrificer. He offers the 
concluding oblation in the scrapings of the opening oblation; this is the course of 
the sacrifice. Now if he were to make the Yajya verses of the opening libation the 
Yajya verses of the concluding libation,  he would mount to the other world away 
from this, and would be liable to die. The Puronuvakya verses of the opening 
libation should be made the Yajya verses of the concluding libation; verily he finds 
support in this world. 
 
vi. 1. 6.  
Kadru and Suparni h ad a dispute (for the stake of) each other's form. Kadru 
defeated Suparni. She said, 'In the third heaven from here is the Soma; fetch it, and 
by it buy your release.' Kadru is this (earth), Suparni yonder (heaven), the 
descendants of Suparni the metres. S he said, 'For this do parents rear children; "in 
the third heaven from here is the Soma; fetch it, and by it buy your release" [1], so 
has Kadru said to me.' The Jagati flew up, of fourteen syllables, but returned 
without obtaining it; it lost two syllable s, but returned with the (sacrificial) animals 
and consecration. Therefore the Jagati is the richest in cattle of the metres, and 
consecration waits upon a man who is rich in cattle. The Tristubh flew up, of Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
1047  
 thirteen syllables, but returned without obtaini ng it; it lost two syllables, but 
returned with the (sacrificial) gifts [2] and penance. Therefore in the world of the 
Tristubh, the midday oblation, the gifts are brought. 'That in truth is penance', they 
say, 'if a man gives his wealth.' The Gayatri flew  up, of four syllables, together 
with a female goat with light. Then the goat won (Soma) for her, and so the goat 
has the name. The Gayatri brought back the Soma and the four syllables, and so 
became of eight syllables. The theologians say [3], 'For what r eason is it that the 
Gayatri, the smallest of the metres, holds the forefront of the sacrifice?' Because it 
brought down the Soma, it held the forefront of the sacrifice; therefore it is the 
most glorious (of the metres). By the feet it grasped two of the oblations, and by 
the mouth one. The one it grasped by the mouth it sucked; therefore two oblations 
are made of the pure Soma, the morning and midday oblations; therefore at the 
third oblation they pour out the dregs of the Soma; for they regard it as suck ed as it 
were [4]. He removes any admixture so that it may be pure; verily also he makes 
ready it (the rjisa ). When the Soma was being borne away, the Gandharva 
Viçvavasu stole it. It was for three nights stolen; therefore after purchase the Soma 
is kept f or three nights. The gods said, 'The Gandharvas love women; let us redeem 
it with a woman.' They made speech unto a woman of one year old, and with her 
redeemed it. She adopted the form of a deer and ran away from the Gandharvas [5] 
that was the origin of the deer. The gods said, 'She has run from you; she comes 
not to us; let us both summon her.' The Gandharvas uttered a spell, the gods sang, 
she went to the gods as they sang. Therefore women love one who sings; 
enamoured are women of him who thus knows. S o if there is in a family one 
person who knows thus, men give their daughters in wedlock to that family, even if 
there be other (wooers) in plenty [6]. He buys Soma with a (cow) one year old; 
verily he buys it with the whole of speech. Therefore men utter speech when one 
year old. He buys with a cow which has no horns, small ears, is not one -eyed or 
lame, and has not seven hooves; verily he buys it with all. If he were to buy it with 
a white cow, the sacrificer would become leprous. If he were to buy with a  black 
one, it would be a funeral cow, and the sacrificer would be likely to die. If with one 
of both colours, it would be one sacred to Vrtrahan, and he would either overcome 
his foe or his foe him. He buys with a ruddy, yellow -eyed one. This is the form of 
Soma; verily he buys it with its own deity. 
 Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
1048  
 vi. 1. 7.  
That became gold. Therefore they purify gold forth from the waters. The 
theologians say, 'How is it that offspring are produced through that which is 
boneless, and yet are born with bones?' Because  he offers the gold, placing it in the 
ghee, therefore are offspring produced, through that which is boneless, and yet are 
born with bones. The ghee is Agni's loved abode, the gold, is radiance. 'This is thy 
body, O pure one. This is thy splendour', he say s; verily he unites Agni with his 
radiance and his body [1]; verily also he makes him ready. If he were to deposit 
(the gold) without fastening it on, then the foetuses of offspring would be liable to 
miscarriage. He deposits it fastening it on, to secure the foetuses. He fastens it so 
that it cannot be untied, for the production of offspring. The cow with which the 
Soma is bought is speech. 'Thou art the strong', he says; for what he strengthens in 
his mind, that he expresses in speech. 'Grasped by mind', he says; for by mind is 
speech grasped. 'Acceptable to Visnu he says [2]. Visnu is the sacrifice; verily be 
makes her accept able to the sacrifice. 'Through the impulse of thee, of true 
impulse', he says; verily he wins speech which is impelled by Savitr. As each part 
is performed, the Raksases are fain to injure the sacrifice; the path of Agni and 
Surya is one which the Raksases cannot injure. 'I have mounted the eye of the sun, 
the pupil of the eye of Agni', he says. He mounts the path which is not injure d by 
the Raksases [3]. The cow with which the Soma is bought is speech. 'Thou art 
thought, thou art mind', he says; verily he instructs her. Therefore children are born 
instructed. 'Thou art thought', he says, for what one thinks in the mind one 
expresses in speech. 'Thou art mind', he says; for what one grasps by the mind one 
performs. 'Thou art meditation', he says; for what one meditates with the mind one 
expresses in speech [4]. 'Thou art the gift (to the priests)', he says; for (the cow) is 
the gift. ' Thou art of the sacrifice', he says; verily he makes her fit for the sacrifice. 
'Thou art of kingly power', he says, for she is of kingly power. 'Thou art Aditi, 
double -headed', he says. In that to Aditi belong the opening and the concluding 
oblations of t he sacrifices, therefore does he say that. If (the cow) were not bound, 
she would be unrestrained; if she were bound by the foot, she would be the funeral 
cow, and the sacrificer would be likely to perish [5]. If she were held by the ears, 
she would belong  to Vrtrahan, and the sacrificer would oppress another, or another 
would oppress him. 'May Mitra bind thee by the foot', he says. Mitra is the 
auspicious one of the gods; verily with his help he binds her by the foot. 'May 
Pusan guard the ways', he says. P usan is this (earth); verily he makes her lady of 
this (earth), for the gaining thereof. 'For Indra the guardian!' he says; verily he Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
1049  
 makes Indra her guardian [6]. 'May thy mother approve, thy father', he says; verily 
he buys with her approved. 'Go, O godd ess, to the god', he says; for she is a 
goddess, and Soma is a god. 'To Indra Soma', he says; for the Soma is borne to 
Indra. If he were not to say that text, the cow with which the Soma is bought would 
go away. 'May Rudra guide thee hither', he says. Rudr a is the harsh [7] one of the 
gods; verily he places him below her, for guiding hither. He does as it were a harsh 
thing when he recites that (text) of Rudra's. 'In the path of Mitra', he says, for 
soothing. He buys indeed by speech when he buys by the cow  with which the 
Soma is bought. Hail! Return with Soma as thy comrade, with wealth', he says, 
verily having purchased by means of speech, he restores speech to himself. The 
speech of him who knows thus is not likely to fail. 
 
vi. 1. 8.  
He follows six step s. Speech does not speak beyond the sixth day. He wins speech 
in the size in which she is found in the path of the year. He offers in the seventh 
footprint. The Çakvari has seven feet, the Çakvari is cattle; verily he wins cattle. 
There are seven domestica ted animals, and seven wild; there are seven metres to 
win both sets of animals. 'Thou art a Vasvi, thou art a Rudra', he says; verily thus 
by her form he expounds her greatness [1]. 'May Brhaspati make thee rejoice in 
happiness', he says. Brhaspati is the  holy power of the gods; verily by means of the 
holy power be wins cattle for him. 'May Rudra with the Vasus be favourable to 
thee', he says, for the sake of protection. 'I pour thee on the head of the earth, on 
the place of sacrifice', he says; for the pl ace of sacrifice is the head of the earth. 'On 
the abode of the offering', he says; for the foot of the cow by which the Soma is 
bought is the abode of the offering. 'Rich in ghee; hail!' [2], he says. Because it was 
from her foot that ghee was pressed out , he says thus. If the Adhvaryu were to 
offer a libation where there were no fire, the Adhvaryu would become blind, and 
the Raksases would destroy the sacrifice. He offers after putting down the gold; 
verily he offers in that which has fire, the Adhvaryu d oes not become blind, and 
the Raksases. do not destroy the sacrifice. As each part is performed, the Raksases 
are fain to injure the sacrifice. 'The Raksas is enclosed, the evil spirits are 
enclosed', he says, for the smiting away of the Raksases [3]. 'Thu s I cut the necks 
of the Raksas'; 'Who hateth us and whom we hate', he says. There are two persons, 
one whom he hates and one who hates him; verily successively he cuts their necks. 