Rig Veda – English Translation  
Eager  and prompt  at will, wherewith  thou crushedst  the boasting  Dragon,  O impetuous  Hero.   
11 He dressed  a hundred  buffaloes,  O Indra,  for thee whom  all accordant  Maruts  strengthen.   
He, Pusan  Visnu,  poured  forth  three  great  vessels  to him, the juice  that cheers,  that slaughters  Vrtra.   
12 Thou  settest  free the rushing  wave  of waters,  the floods'  great  swell  encompassed  and obstructed.   
Along  steep  slopes  their course  thou tumedst,  Indra,  directed  downward,  speeding  to the ocean.   
13 So may our new prayer  bring  thee to protect  us, thee well−armed  Hero  with thy bolt of thunder,   
Indra,  who made  these  worlds,  the Strong,  the ty, who never  groweth  old, the victory−giver.   
14 So, Indra,  form  us brilliant  holy singers  for strength,  for glory, and for food and riches.   
Give  Bharadvaja  hero patrons,  Indra  Indra,  be ours upon  the day of trial.  
15 With  this may we obtain  strength  God−appointed,  and brave  sons gladden  us through  a hundred  winter
s.  
 
HYMN  XVIII.  Indra.  
1. GLORIFY  him whose  migh t is all−surpassing,  Indra  the much−invoked  who fights  uninjured.  Magnify
 with these  songs  the never−vanquished,  the Strong,  the Bull of men,  the Mighty  Victor.  2 He, Champion,
 Hero,  Warrior,  Lord  of battles,  impetuous,  loudly  roaring,  great  destroyer,   
Who whirls  the dust on high,  alone,  oerthrower,  hath made  all races  of mankind  his subjects.   
3 Thou,  thou alone,  hast tamed  the Dasyus;  singly  thou hast subdued  the people  for the Arya.   
In this, or is it not, thine  hero exploit,  Indra?  Declare  it at the proper season.   
4 For true, I deem,  thy strength  is, thine  the Mighty,  thine,  O Most  Potent,  thine  the Conquering  Victor;   
Strong,  of the strong,  Most  Mighty,  of the mighty,  thine,  driver  of the churl  to acts of bounty.   
5 Be this our ancient  bond  of friends hip with you and with Angirases  here who speak  of Vala.   
Thou,  Wondrous,  Shaker  of things  firm,  didst  smite  him in his fresh  strength,  and force  his doors  and cast
les.  
6 With  holy thoughts  must  he be called,  the Mighty,  showing  his power  in the great  fight with Vrtra.   
He must  be called  to give us seed and offspring,  the Thunderer  must  he moved  and sped to battle.   
7 He in his might,  with name  that lives  for ever,  hath far surpassed  all human  generations.   
He, most  heroic,  hath his home  with splendour,  with glory  and with riches  and with valour.   
8 Stranger  to guile,  who ne'er  was false  or faithless,  bearing  a name  that may be well remembered,   
Indra  crushed  Cumuri,  Dhuni,  Sambara,  Pipru,  and Susna,  that their castles  fell in ruin.  
9 With  saving  might  that must  be praised  and lauded,  Indra,  ascend  thy car to smite  down  Vrtra.   
In thy right  hand  hold fast thy bolt of thunder,  and weaken,  Bounteous  Lord,  his art and magic.   
10 As Agni,  as the dart burns  the dry forest,  like the dread  shaft  burn down  the fiend s, O Indra;   
Thou  who with high deep−reaching  spear  hast broken,  hast covered  over mischief  and destroyed  it.  
11 With  wealth,  by thousand  paths  come  hither,  Agni,  paths  that bring  ample  strength,  O thou Most  Splen
did.  
Come,  Son of Strength,  o'er whom,  Invoked  of many!  the godless  hath no power  to keep  thee distant.   
12 From  heaven,  from  earth  is bruited  forth  the greatness  of him the firm,  the fiery,  the resplendent.   
No foe hath he, no counterpart,  no refuge  is there  from  him the Conqueror  full of wisdom   
13 This day the deed  that thou hast done  is famous,  when  thou,  for him, with many  thousand  others   
Laidest  low Kutsa,  Ayu,  Atithigva,  and boldly  didst  deliver  Turvayana.   
14 In thee,  O God,  the wisest  of the Sages,  all Gods  were  joyful  when  thou slewest  Ahi.  
When  lauded  for thyself,  thou gavest  freedom  to sore−afflicted  Heaven  and to the people.   
15 This power  of thine  both heaven  and earth  acknowledge,  the deathless  Gods  acknowledge  it, O Indra.   
Do what  thou ne'er  hast done,  O Mighty  Worker:  beget  a new hymn  at thy sacrifices.   
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  XIX. Indra.  
1. GREAT,  hero−like  controlling  men is Indra,  unwasting  in his powers,  doubled  in vastness.   
He, turned  to us, hath grown  to hero vigour:  broad,  wide,  he hath been  decked  by those  who serve  him.  
2 The bowl  made Indra  swift  to gather  booty,  the High,  the Lofty,  Youthful,  Undecaying,   
Him who hath waxed  by strength  which  none  may conquer,  and even  at once  grown  to complete  perfectio
n.  
3 Stretch  out those  hands  of thine,  extend  to us−ward  thy wide  capacious  arms , and grant  us glory.   
Like as the household  herdsman  guards  the cattle,  so move  thou round  about  us in the combat.   
4 Now,  fain for strength,  let us invite  your Indra  hither,  who lieth hidden  with his Heroes,−   
Free from  all blame,  without  reproach,  uninj ured,  e'en as were  those  who sang,  of old, his praises.   
5 With  steadfast  laws,  wealth−giver,  strong  through  Soma,  he hath much  fair and precious  food to feed us
.  
In him unite  all paths  that lead to riches,  like rivers  that commingle  with the ocean.   
6 Bring unto us the mightiest  might,  O Hero,  strong  and most  potent  force,  thou great  Subduer!   
All splendid  vigorous  powers  of men vouchsafe  us, Lord  of Bay Steeds,  that they may make  us joyful.   
7 Bring  us, grown  mighty  in its strength,  O Indra,  thy friendly  rapturous  joy that wins  the battle,   
Wherewith  by thee assisted  and triumphant,  we may laud thee in gaining  seed and offspring.   
8 Indra,  bestow  on us the power  heroic  skilled  and exceeding  strong,  that wins  the booty,   
Wherewith,  by thine  assistance,  we may conquer  our foes in battle,  be they kin or stranger.   
9 Let thine  heroic  strength  come  from  behind  us, before  us, from  above  us or below  us.  
From  every  side may it approach  us, Indra.  Give  us the glory  of the realm  of splendour.   
10 With  most  heroic  aid from  thee,  like heroes  Indra,  may we win wealth  by deeds  glory.   
 
Thou,  King,  art Lord  of earthly,  heavenly  treasure:  vouchsafe  us riches  vast, sublime,  and lasting.   
11 The Bull,  whose  strength hath waxed,  whom  Maruts  follow,  free−giving  Indra,  the Celestial  Ruler,   
Mighty,  all−conquering,  the victory−giver,  him let us call to grant  us new protection.   
12 Give  up the people  who are high and haughty  to these  men and to me, O Thunder−wielder!   
Therefore  upon  the earth  do we invoke  thee,  where  heroes  win, for sons and kine and waters.   
13 Through  these  thy friendships,  God invoked  of many!  may we be victors  over every  foeman.   
Slaying  both kinds  of foe, may we, O Hero,  be happy,  helped  by thee,  with ample  riches.   
 
HYMN  XX. Indra.  
1. GIVE  us wealth,  Indra,  that with might,  as heaven  o'ertops  the earth,  o'ercomes  our foes in battle   
Wealth  that brings  thousands  and that wins  the corn−lands,  wealth,  Son of Strength!  that vanquishes  the 
foeman.   
2 Even  as the power  of Dyaus,  to thee,  O Indra,  all Asura  sway  was by the Gods  entrusted,   
When  thou,  Impetuous!  leagued  with Visnu,  slewest  Vrtra  the Dragon  who enclosed  the waters.   
3 Indra,  Strong,  Victor,  Mightier  than the mighty,  addressed  with prayer  and perfect  in his splendour,   
Lord  of the bolt that breaketh  forts in pieces,  became  the King  of the sweet  juice  of Soma..   
4 There,  Indra,  while  the light was won,  the Panis  f1ed,  'neath  a hundred  blows,  for wise Dasoni,   
And greedy  Susna's  magical  devices  nor left he any of their food remain ing.  
5 What  time the thunder  fell and Susna  perished,  all life's  support  from  the great  Druh  was taken.   
Indra  made  room  for his car−drivcr  Kutsa  who sate beside  him, when  he gained  the sunlight.   
6 As the Hawk  rent for him the stalk that gladdens,  he wrenched  the head  from  Namuci  the Dasa.   
He guarded  Nam,  Sayya's  son, in slumber,  and sated  him with food,  success,  and riches.   
7 Thou,  thunder−armed,  with thy great  might  hast shattered  Pipru's  strong  forts who knew  the wiles  of Rig Veda – English Translation  
serpents.   
Thou  gavest  to thy worshipper  Rjisvan  imperishable  Wealth,  O Bounteous  Giver.   
8 The crafty  Vetasu,  the swift  Dasni,  and Tugra  speedily  with all his servants,   
Hath  Indra,  gladdening  with strong  assistance,  forced  near as 'twere  to glorify  the Mother.   
9 Resistless,  with the hosts  he battles,  bearing  in both his arms  the Vrtra−slaying  thunder.   
He mounts  his Bays,  as the car−seat  an archer:  yoked  at a word  they bear the lofty  Indra.   
10 May we, O Indra,  gain by thy new favour:  so Parus  laud thee,  with their sacrifices,   
That thou hast wrecked  seven  autumn  forts,  their shelter,  slain  Dasa  tribes  and aided  Purukutsa.   
11 Favouring  Usana  the son of Kavi,  thou wast his ancient  strengthener,  O Indra.   
Thou  gavest  Navavastva.  as a present,  to the great  father  gavest  back  his grand son.  
12 Thou,  roaring  Indra,  drovest  on the waters  that made  a roaring  sound  like rushing  rivers,   
What  time,  O Hero,  o'er the sea thou broughtest,  in safety  broughtest  Turvasa  and Yadu.   
13 This Indra,  was thy work  in war: thou sentest  Dhuni  and Cumuri  to sleep  and slumber.   
Dabhiti  lit the flame  for thee,  and worshipped  with fuel, hymns,  poured  Soma,  dressed  oblations.   
 
HYMN  XXI. Indra.  Visvedevas.  
1. THESE  the most  constant  singer's  invocations  call thee who art to be invoked,  O Hero;   
Hymns  call anew the chariot−borne,  Eternal:  by eloquence  men gain abundant  riches.   
2 I praise  that Indra,  known  to all men,  honoured  with songs,  extolled  with hymns  at sacrifices,   
Whose  majesty,  rich in wondrous  arts, surpasseth  the magnitude  of earth,  and heaven  in greatness.   
3 He hath made  pathways,  with the Sun to aid him, throughout  the darkness  that extended  pathless.   
Mortals  who yearn  to worship  ne'er  dishonour,  O Mighty  God,  thy Law who art Immortal.   
4 And he who did these  things,  where  is that Indra?  among  what tribes?  what  people  doth he visit?   
 
What  sacrifice  contents  thy mind  , and wishes?  What  priest  among  them  all? what  hymn,  O Indra?   
5 Yea, here were  they who,  born of old, have  served  thee,  thy friends  of ancient  time,  thou active  Worker.
  
Bethink  thee now of these,  Invoked  of many!  the midmost  and the recent,  and the youngest.   
6 Inquiring  after him, thy later servants,  Indra,  have  gained  thy former  old traditions.   
Hero,  to whom  the prayer  is brought,  we praise  thee as great  for that wherein  we know  thee mighty.   
7 The demon's  strength  is gathered  fast against  thee:  great  as that strength  hath grown,  go forth  to meet  it.  
With  thine  own ancient  friend  and companion,  the thunderbolt,  brave  Champion!  drive  it backward.   
8 Hear,  too, the prayer  of this thy present  beadsman,  O Indra,  Hero,  cherishing  the singer.   
For thou wast aye our fathers'  Friend  aforetime,  still swift  to listen  to their supplication.   
9 Bring  to our help this day, for our protection,  Varuna,  Mitra  , Indra,  and the Maruts,   
Pusan  and Visnu,  Agni  and Purandhi,  Savitar  also, and the Plants  and Mountains.   
10 The singers  here exalt  with hymns  and praises  thee who art very Mighty  and Most  Holy.   
Hear,  when  invoked,  the invoker's  invocation.  Beside  thee there  is nonelike  thee,  Immortal!   
11 Now  to my words  come  quickly  thou who knowest,  O Son of Strength,  with all who claim  our worship
,  
Who  visit sacred  rites,  whose  tongue  is Agni,  Gods  who made  Manu  stronger  than the Dasyu.   
12 On good  and evil ways  be thou our Leader,  thou who art known  to all as Path−preparer.   
Bring  power  to us, O Indra,  with thy Horses,  Steeds  that are best to draw,  broad−backed,  unwearied.   
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  XXII.  Indra.  
1. WITH  these  my hymns  I glorify  that Indra  who is alone  to be invoked  by mortals,   
The Lord,  the Mighty  One,  of manly  vigour,  victorious,  Hero,  true, and full of wisdom.   
2 Our sires of old,. Navagvas,  sages  seven,  while  urging  him to show  his might,  extolled  him,  
Dwelling  on heights,  swift,  smiting  down  opponents,  guileless  in word,  and in his thoughts  most  mighty.  
3 We seek that Indra  to obtain  his riches  that bring  much  food,  and men,  and store  of heroes.   
Bring  us, Lord  of Bay Steeds,  to make  us joyful,  celestial  wealth,  abundant,  undecaying.   
4 Tell thou us this, if at thy hand  aforetime  the earlier  singers  have obtained  good  fortune,   
What  is thy share  and portion,  Strong  Subduer,  Asura−slayer,  rich, invoked  of many?   
5 He who for car−borne  Indra,  armed  with thunder,  hath a hymn,  craving,  deeply−piercing,  fluent,   
Who  sends  a song  effectual,  firmly−grasping , and strength−bestowing,  he comes  near the mighty.   
6 Strong  of thyself,  thou by this art hast shattered,  with thought−swift  Parvata,  him who waxed  against  th
ee,  
And,  Mightiest!  roaring!  boldly  rent in pieces  things  that were  firmly  fixed  and never  shake n.  
7 Him will we fit for you with new devotion,  the strongest  Ancient  One,  in ancient  manner.   
So may that Indra,  boundless,  faithful  Leader,  conduct  us o'er all places  hard to traverse.   
8 Thou  for the people  who oppress  hast kindled  the earthly  firmamen t and that of heaven.   
With  heat,  O Bull,  on every  side consume  them:  heat earth  and flood  for him who hates  devotion.   
9 Of all the Heavenly  Folk,  of earthly  creatures  thou art the King,  O God of splendid  aspect.   
In thy right  hand,  O Indra,  grasp  die thunder:  Eternal!  thou destroyest  all enchantments.   
10 Give  us confirmed  prosperity,  O Indra,  vast and exhaustless  for the foe's subduing.   
Strengthen  therewith  the Arya's  hate and Dasa's,  and let the arms  of Nahusas  be mighty.   
11 Come  with thy team  which  brings  all blessings  hither,  Disposer,  much−invoked,  exceeding  holy.   
Thou  whom  no fiend,  no God can stay or hinder,  come  swittly  with these  Steeds  in my direction.   
 
HYMN  XXIII.  Indra.  
1. THOU  art attached  to pressed−out  Soma,  Indra,  at laud,  at prayer,  and when  the hymn  is chante
d; Or when  with yoked  Bays,  Maghavan,  thou comest,  O Indra,  bearing  in thine  arms  the thunder.  
2 Or when  on that decisive  day thou holpest  the presser  of the juice  at Vrtra's  slaughter;   
Or when  thou,  while  the strong  one feared,  undaunted,  gavest  to death,  Indra,  the daring  Dasyus.   
3 Let Indra  drink  the pressed−out  Soma,  Helper  and mighty  Guide  of him who sings  his praises.   
He gives  the hero room  who pours  oblations,  and treasure  even  to the lowly  singer.   
4 E'en humble  rites with his Bay steeds  he visits:  he wields  the bolt, drinks  Soma,  gives  us cattle.   
He makes  the valiant  rich in store  of heroes,  accepts  our praise  and hears  the singer's  calling.   
5 What  he hath longed  for we have  brought  to Indra,  who from  the days of old hath done  us service.   
While  Soma  flows  we will sing hymn,  and laud him, so that our prayer  may streng.  then Indra's  vigour.   
6 Thou  hast made  prayer  the means  of thine  exalting,  therefore  we wait on thee with hymns,  O Indra.   
May we, by the pressed  Soma,  Somadrinker!  bring  thee,  with sacrifice,  blissful  sweet  refreshment.   
7 Mark  well our sacrificial  cake,  delighted  Indra,  drink  Soma  and the milk commingled.   
Here  on the sacrificer's  grass  be seated:  give ample  room  to thy devoted  servant.   
8 O Mighty  One,  be joyful  as thou willest.  Let these  our sacrifices  reach  and find thee;   
And may this hymn  and these  our invocations  turn thee,  whom  many  men invoke,  to help us.  
9 Friends,  when  thejuices  flow,  replenish  duly your own,  your bounteous  Indra  with the Soma .  
Will it not aid him to support  us? Indra.  spares  him who sheds  the juice  to win his favour.   
10 While  Soma  flowed,  thus Indra  hath been  lauded,  Ruler  of nobles,  mid the Bharadvajas,   
That Indra  may become  the singer's  patron  and give him wealth  in every  kind of treasure.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
 
HYMN  XXIV.  Indra.  
1. STRONG  rapturous  joy, praise,  glory  are with Indra:  impetuo us God,  he quaffs  the juice  of Soma:   
That Maghavan  whom  men must  laud with singing,  Heaven−dweller,  King  of songs,  whose  help is lasting
.  
2 He, Friend  of man,  most  wise,  victorious  Hero,  hears,  with far−reaching  aid, the singer  call him.  
Excellent,  Praise of Men,  the bard's  Supporter,  Strong,  he gives  strength,  extolled  in holy synod.   
3 The lofty  axle of thy wheels,  O Hero,  is not surpassed  by heaven  and earth  in greatness.   
Like branches  of a tree, Invoked  of many  manifold  aids spring  forth  from  thee,  O Indra.   
4 Strong  Lord,  thine  energies,  endowed  with vigour,  are like the paths  of kine converging  homeward.   
Like bonds  of cord,  Indra,  that bind the younglings,  no bonds  are they,  O thou of boundless  bounty.   
5 One act to−day,  another  act tomorrow  oft Indra makes  what  is not yet existeni.   
Here  have  we Mitra,  Varuna,  and Pusan  to overcome  the foeman's  domination.   
6 By song  and sacrifice  men brought  the waters  from  thee,  as from  a mountain's  ridge,  O Indra.   
Urging  thy might,  with these  fair lauds  they seek thee,  O theme  of song,  as horses  rush tobattle.   
7 That Indra  whom  nor months  nor autumn  seasons  wither  with age, nor fleeting  days enfeeble,−   
Still may his body  Wax,  e'en now so mighty,  glorified  by the lauds  and hymns  that praise  him.  
8 Extolled,  he bends  not to the strong,  the steadfast,  nor to the bold incited  by the Dasyu.   
High  mountains  are as level  plains  to Indra:  even  in the deep  he finds  firm ground  to rest on.  
9 Impetuous  Speeder  through  all depth  and distance,  give strengthening  food,  thou drinker  of the juices.   
Stand  up erect  to help us, unreluctant,  what  time the gloom  of night  brightens  to morning.   
10 Hasting  to help,  come  hither  and protect  him, keep  him from  harm  when  he is here,  O Indra.   
At home,  abroad,  from  injury  preserve  him. May brave  sons gladden  us through  a hundred  winters.   
 
HYMN  XXV.  Indra.  
1. WITH  thine  assistance,  O thou Mighty  Indra,  be it the least,  the midmost,  or the highest,−   
Great  with those  aids and by these  powers  support  us, Strong  God!  in battle  that subdu es our foemen.   
2 With  these  discomfit  hosts  that fight  against  us, and check  the opponent's  wrath,  thyself  uninjured.   
With  these  chase  all our foes to every  quarter:  subdue  the tribes  of Dasas  to the Arya.   
3 Those  who array  themselves  as foes to smite  us, O Indra,  be they kin or be they strangers,−   
 
Strike  thou their manly  strength  that it be feeble,  and drive  in headlong  flight  our foemen  backward.   
4 With  strength  of limb the hero slays  the hero,  when  bright  in arms  they range  them  for the combat.   
When two opposing  hosts  contend  in battle  for seed and offspring,  waters,  kine,  or corn−lands.   
5 Yet no strong  man hath conquered  thee,  no hero,  no brave,  no warrior  trusting  in his valour.   
Not one of these  is match  for thee,  O Indra.  Thou  far surpassest  all these  living  creatures.   
6 He is the Lord  of both these  armies'  valour  when  the commanders  call them  to the conflict:   
When  with their ranks  expanded  they are fighting  with a great  foe or for a home  with heroes.   
7 And when  the people  stir themselves  for battle,  be thou their saviour,  Indra,  and protector,   
And theirs,  thy manliest  of our friends,  the pious,  the chiefs  who have installed  us priests,  O Indra.   
8 To thee for high dominion  hath been  for evermore,  for slaughtering  the Vrtras,   
All lordly  power and might,  O Holy  Indra,  given  by Gods  for victory  in battle.   
9 So urge our hosts  together  in the combats:  yield  up the godless  bands  that fight  against  us.  
Singing,  at morn  may we find thee with favour,  yea, Indra,  and e'en now,  we Bharadvajas.   
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN XXVI.  Indra.  
1. O INDRA,  hear us. Raining  down  the Soma,  we call on thee to win us mighty  valour.  Give  us strong  su
ccour  on the day of trial, when  the tribes  gather  on the field of battle.  2 The warrior,  son of warrior  sire, in
vokes  thee,  to gain great  strength  that may be won as booty:  To thee,  the brave  man's  Lord,  the fiends'  sub
duer,  he looks  when  fighting  hand  to hand  for cattle.  3 Thou  didst  impel  the sage to win the daylight,  didst
 ruin Susna  for the pious  Kutsa.  The invulnerable  demon's  head  thou clavest  when  thou wouldst  win the p
raise  of Atithigva.  4 The lofty battle−car  thou broughtest  forward;  thou holpest  Dasadyu  the strong  when  f
ighting.  Along  with Vetasu  thou slewest  Tugra,  and madest  Tuji strong,  who praised  thee,  Indra.  5 Thou  
madest  good the laud,  what  time thou rentest  a hundred  thousand  fighting  foes,  O Hero,  Slewest  the Dasa  
Sambara  of the mountain,  and with strange  aids didst  succour  Divodasa.  6 Made  glad with Soma−draught
s and faith,  thou sentest  Cumuri  to his sleep,  to please  Dabhi ti. Thou,  kindly  giving  Raji to Pithinas,  slewe
st with might,  at once,  the sixty  thousand.  7 May I too, with the liberal  chiefs,  O Indra,  acquire  thy blin su
preme  and domination,  When,  Mightiest!  Hero−girt!  Nahusa  heroes  boast  them  in thee,  the triply−stro ng 
Defender.  8 So may we he thy friends,  thy best beloved,  O Indra,  at this holy invocation.  Best be Pratarda
ni, illustrious  ruler,  in slaying  foemen  and in gaining  riches.  
 
HYMN  XXVII.  Indra.  
1 WHAT  deed  hath Indra  done  in the wild transport,  in quaffin g or in friendship  with,  the Soma?   
What  joys have  men of ancient  times  or recent  obtained  within  the chamber  of libation?   
2 In its wild joy Indra  hath proved  him faithful,  faithful  in quaffing,  faithful  in its friendship.   
His truth  is the delight  that in this chamber  the men of old and recent  times  have  tasted.   
3 All thy vast power,  O Maghavan,  we know  not, know  not the riches  of thy full abundance.   
No one hath seen that might  of thine,  productive  of bounty  every  day renewed,  O Indra.   
4 This one great  power  of thine  our eyes have witnessed,  wherewith  thou slewest  Varasikha's  children,   
When  by the force  of thy descending  thunder,  at the mere  solund,  their boldest  was demolished.   
5 In aid of Abhyavartin  Cayamana,  Indra  destroyed  the seed of Varasikha.   
At Hariyupiya  he smote  the vanguard  of the Vrcivans,  and the rear fled frighted.   
6 Three  thousand,  mailed,  in quest  of fame,  together,  on the Yavyavati,  O much−sought  Indra,   
Vrcivan's  sons,  falling  before  the arrow,  like bursting  vessels  went  to their destruction.   
7 He, whose  two red Steers,  seeking  goodly  pasture,  plying  their tongues  move  on 'twixt  earth  and heaven
,  
 
Gave  Turvasa  to Srnjaya,  and, to aid him, gave the Vrcivans  up to Daivavata.  8 Two wa
gon−teams,  with damsels,  twenty  oxen,  O Agni,  Abhy dvartin  Cayamdna,  The liberal  So
vran,  giveth  me. This guerdon  of Prthu's  seed is hard to win from  others.  
 
HYMN  XXVIII.  Cows.  
I. THE  Kine  have  come  and brought  good  fortune:  let them  rest in the cow−pen  and be happy  near us.  
Here  let them  stay prolific,  many−coloured,  and yield  through  many  morns  their milk for Indra.   
2 Indra  aids him who offers  sacrifice  and gifts:  he takes  not what  is his, and gives  him more  thereto.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Increasing  ever more  and ever more  his wealth,  he makes  the pious  dwell  within  unbro ken bounds.   
3 These  are ne'er  lost, no robber  ever injures  them:  no evil−minded  foe attempts  to harass  them.   
The master  of the Kine  lives  many  a year with these,  the Cows  whereby  he pours  his gifts and serves  the 
Gods.   
4 The charger  with his dusty  brow  o'ertakes  them  not, and never  to the shambles  do they take their way.   
These  Cows,  the cattle  of the pious  worshipper,  roam  over widespread  pasture  where  no danger  is.  
5 To me the Cows  seem  Bhaga,  they seem  Indra,  they seem  a portion  of the first−poured  Soma.   
These  present  Cows,  they,  O ye Indra.  I long for Indra  with my heart  and spirit.   
6 O Cows,  ye fatten  e'en the worn  and wasted,  and make  the unlovely  beautiful  tolook  on.  
Prosper  my house,  ye with auspicious  voices.  Your  power  is glorified  in our assemblies.   
7 Crop  goodly  pasturage  and be prolific  drink  pure sweet  water  at good  drinking  places.   
Never  be thief or sinful  man your matter,  and may the dart of Rudra  still avoid  you.  
8 Now  let this close  admixture  be close  intermigled  with these  Cows,   
Mixt  with the Steer's  prolific  flow,  and, Indra,  with thy hero might.   
 
HYMN  XXIX  Indra.  
1. YOUR  men have  followed  Indra  for his friendship,  and for his loving−kindness  glorified  him.  
For he bestows  great  wealth,  the Thunder−wielder:  worship  him, Great  and Kind,  to win his favour.   
2 Him to whose  hand,  men closely  cling,  and drivers  stand  on his golden  chariot  firmly  stationed.   
With  his firm arms  he holds  the reins;  his Horses,  the Stallions,  are yoked  ready  for the journey.   
3 Thy devotees  embrace  thy feet for glory.  Bold,  thunder−armed,  rich, through  thy strength,  in guerdon,   
Robed  in a garment  fair as heaven  to look on, thou hast displayed  thee like an active  dancer.   
4 That Soma  when  effused  hath best consistence,  for which  the food is dressed  and grain is mingled;   
By which  the men who pray,  extolling  Indra  chief  favourites  of Gods,  recite  their praises.   
5 No limit  of thy might  hath been  appointed,  which  by its greatness  sundered  earth  and heaven.   
These  the Prince  filleth  full with strong  endeavou r, driving,  as 'twere,  with help his flocks  to waters.   
6 So be the lofty  Indra  prompt  to listen,  Helper  unaided,  golden−visored  Hero.   
Yea, so may he, shown  forth  in might  unequalled,  smite  down  the many  Vrtras  and the Dasyus.   
 
HYMN  XXX.  Indra.  
1. INDRA  hath waxed  yet more  for hero prowess,  alone,  Eternal,  he bestoweth  treasures.   
Indra  transcendeth  both the worlds in greatness:  one half of him equalleth  earth  and heaven.   
2 Yea, mighty  I esteem  his Godlike  nature:  none  hindereth  what  he hath once  determined.   
Near  and afar he spread  and set the regions,  and every  day the Sun became  apparent.   
3 E'en now endures  thine exploit  of the Rivers,  when,  Indra,  for their floods  thou clavest  passage.   
Like men who sit at meat  the mountains  settled:  by thee,  Most  Wise!  the regions  were  made  steadfast.   
 
4 This is the truth,  none  else is like thee,  Indra,  no God superior  to thee, no mortal.  Thou  sle
west Ahi who besieged  the waters,  and lettest  loose  the streams  to hurry  seaward.  5 Indra,  t
hou breakest  up the floods  and portals  on all sides,  and the firmness  of the mountain.  Thou  
art the King  of men,  of all that liveth,  engende ring at once  Sun, Heaven,  and Morning.  
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  XXXI  Indra.  
1. SOLE  Lord  of wealth  art thou,  O Lord  of riches:  thou in thine  hands  hast held the people,  Indra!   
Men have invoked  thee with contending  voices  for seed and waters,  progeny  and sunlight.   
2 Throu gh fear of thee,  O Indra,  all the regions  of earth,  though  naught  may move  them,  shake  and trembl
e.  
All that is firm is frightened  at thy coming,  −the earth,  the heaven,  the mountain,  and the forest.   
3 With  Kutsa,  Indra!  thou didst  conquer  Susna,  voracio us, bane  of crops,  in fight  for cattle.   
In the close  fray thou rentest  him: thou stolest  the Sun's  wheel  and didst  drive  away  misfortunes.   
4 Thou  smotest  to the ground  the hundred  castles,  impregnable,  of Sambara  the Dasyu,   
When,  Strong,  with might  thou holpest  Divodasa  who poured  libations  out, O Soma−buyer,  and madest  
Bharadvaja  rich who praised  thee.   
5 As such,  true Hero,  for great  joy of battle  mount  thy terrific  car, O Brave  and Manly.   
Come  with thine  help to me, thou distant  Roamer,  and, glorious  God,  spread  among  men my glory.   
 
HYMN  XXXII  Indra.  
1. I WITH  my lips have  fashioned  for this Hero  words  never  matched,  most  plentiful  and auspicious,   
For him the Ancient,  Great,  Strong,  Energetic,  the very mighty  Wielder  of the Thunder.   
2 Amid  the sages, with the Sun he brightened  the Parents:  glorified,  he burst  the mountain;   
And,  roaring  with the holy−thoughted  singers,  he loosed  the bond  that held the beams  of Morning.   
3 Famed  for great  deeds,  with priests  who kneel  and laud him, he still hath conquered  in the frays  for cattl
e,  
And broken  down  the forts,  the Fort−destroyer,  a Friend  with friends,  a Sage  among  the sages.   
4 Come  with thy girthed  mares,  with abundant  vigour  and plenteous  strength  to him who sings  thy praises
.  
Come  hither,  borne  by mares  with many  heroes,  Lover  of song!  Steer!  for the people's  welfare.   
5 Indra  with rush and might,  sped by his Coursers,  hath swiftly  won the waters  from  the southward.   
Thus  set at liberty  the rivers  daily  flow to their goal,  incessant  and exhaustless .  
 
HYMN  XXXIII.  Indra.  
1. GIVE  us the rapture  that is mightiest,  Indra,  prompt  to bestow  and swift  to aid, O Hero,   
That wins  with brave  steeds  where  brave  steeds  encounter,  and quells  the Vrtras  and the foes in battle.   
2 For with loud voice  the tribes  invoke  thee,  Indra,  to aid them  in the battlefield  of heroes.   
Thou,  with the singers,  hast pierced  through  the Panis:  the charger  whom  thou aidest  wins  the booty.   
3 Both  races,  Indra,  of opposing  foemen,  O Hero,  both the Arya  and the Dasa,   
Hast thou struck down  like woods  with well−shot  lightnings:  thou rentest  them  in fight,  most  manly  
Chieftain!   
4 Indra,  befriend  us with no scanty  succour,  prosper  and aid us, Loved  of all that liveth,   
When,  fighting  for the sunlight,  we invoke  thee,  O Hero,  in the fray, in war's  division.   
5 Be ours,  O Indra,  now and for the future,  be graciously  inclined  and near to help us.  
Thus  may we, singing,  sheltered  by the Mighty,  win many  cattle  on the day of trial.  
 
HYMN  XXXIV.  Indra.  
1. FULL  Many  songs  have  met in thee, O Indra,  and many  a noble  thought  from  thee proceedeth.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Now  and of old the eulogies  of sages,  their holy hymns  and lauds,  have  yearned  for Indra.   
2 He, praised  of many,  bold,  invoked  of many,  alone  is glorified  at sacrifices.   
Like a car harnessed  for some  great  achievement,  Indra  must  be the cause  of our rejoicing.   
3 They  make  their way to Indra  and exalt  him, bim whom  no prayers  and no laudations  trouble;   
For when  a hundred  or a thousand  singers.  laud him who loves  the song their praise  delights  him.  
4 As brightness  mingles  with the Moon  in heaven,  the offered  Soma  yearns  to mix with Indra.   
Like water  brought  to men in desert  places,  our gifts at sacrifice  have  still refreshed  him.  
5 To him this mighty  eulogy,  to Indra  hath this our laud been  uttered by the poets,   
That in the great  encounter  with the foemen,  Loved  of all life, Indra  may guard  and help us.  
 
HYMN  XXXV.  Indra.  
1. WHEN  shall  our prayers  rest in thy car beside  thee?  When  dost thou give the singer  food for thousands
?  
When  wilt thou clothe  this poet's  laud with plenty,  and when  wilt thou enrich  our hymns  with booty?   
2 When  wilt thou gatber  men with men,  O Indra,  heroes  with heroes,  and prevail  in combat?   
Thou  shalt  win triply  kine in frays  for cattle,  so, Indra,  give thou us celesti al glory.   
3 Yea, when  wilt thou,  O Indra,  thou Most  Mighty,  make  the prayer  all−sustaining  for the singer?   
When  wilt thou yoke,  as we yoke  songs,  thy Horses,  and come  to offerings  that bring  wealth  in cattle?   
4 Grant  to the Singer  food with store  of cattle, splendid  with horses  and the fame  of riches.   
Send  food to swell  the milch−cow  good  at milking:  bright  be its shine  among  the Bharadvajas.   
5 Lead  otherwise  this present  foeman,  Sakra!  Hence  art thou praised  as Hero,  foe destroyer   
Him who gives  pure gifts may I praise  unceasing.  Sage,  quicken  the Angirases  by devotion.   
 
HYMN  XXXVI.  Indra.  
1. THY  raptures  ever were  for all men's  profit:  so evermore  have  been  thine  earthly  riches.   
Thou  still hast been  the dealer−forth  of vigour,  since  among  Gods  thou hast had power  and Godhead.   
2 Men have obtained  his strength  by sacrificing,  and ever urged  him, on to hero valour.   
For the rein−seizing,  the impetuous  Charger  they furnished  power  even  for Vrtra's  slaughter.   
3 Associate  with him, as teams  of horses,  help,  manly  might,  and vigour  follow  Indra.   
As rivers  reach  the sea, so, strong  with praises,  our holy songs  reach  him the Comprehensive.   
4 Lauded  by us, let flow the spring,  O Indra,  of excellent  and brightly−shining  riches.   
For thou art Lord  of men,  without  an equal:  of all the world  thou art the only Sovran.   
5 Hear  what  thou mayst  hear,  thou who,  fain for worship,  as heaven  girds  earth,  guardest  thy servant's  
treasure;   
Tlat thou mayst  be our own,  joying  in power,  famed  through  thy might  in every  generation.   
 
HYMN  XXXVII  Indra.  
1. LET thy Bay Horses,  yoked,  O mighty  Indra,  bring  thy car hither  fraught  with every  blessing.  
For thee,  the Heavenly,  e'en the poor invoketh:  may we this day, thy feast−companions,  prosper.  
2 Forth  to the vat the brown  drops  flow for service,  and purifie d proceed  directly  forward.  May I
ndra drink  of this, our guest  aforetime,  Celestial  King  of the strong  draught  of Soma.  3 Bringing  
us hitherward  all−potent  Indra  on well−wheeled  chariot,  may the Steeds  who bear him Convey  hi
m on the road direct  to glory,  and ne'er  may Vayu's  Amrta  cease  and fail him. 4 Supreme,  he stirsRig Veda – English Translation  
 this man to give the guerdon,−Indra,  most  efficacious  of the princes,−  Wherewith,  O Thunderer,  
thou removest  sorrow,  and, Bold  One!  partest  wealth  among  the nobles.  5 Indra  is hewho  gives  e
nduring  vigour:  may our songs  magnify  the God Most  Mighty.  Best Vrtra−slayer  be the Hero  Ind
ra these  things  he gives  as Prince,  with strong  endeavour.  
 
HYMN  XXXVIII.  Indra.  
1. HE hath drunk  hence,  Most  Marvellous,  and carried  away  our great  and splendid  call on Indra.   
The Bounteous,  when  we serve  the Gods,  accepteth  song yet more  famous  and the gifts we bring  him.  
2 The speaker  filleth  with a cry to Indra  his ears who cometh  nigh e'en from  a distance.   
May this my call bring  Indra  to my presence,  this call to Gods  composed  in sacred  verses.   
3 Him have  I sung  with my best song  and praises,  Indra  of ancient  birth  and Everlasting.   
For prayer  and songs  in him are concentrated:  let laud wax mighty  when  addressed  to Indra:   
4 Indra,  whom  sacrifice  shall  stren gthen,  Soma,  and song and hymn,  and praises  and devotion,   
Whom  Dawns  shall  strengthen  when  the night  departeth,  Indra  whom  days shall  strengthen,  months,  and 
autumns.   
5 Him,  born for conquering  might  in full perfection,  and waxen  strongfor  bounty  and for glory,   
Great,  Powerful,  will we to−day,  O singer,  invite  to aid. us and to quell  our foemen.   
 
HYMN  XXXIX  Indra.  
1. OF this our charming,  our celestial  Soma,  eloquent,  wise,  Priest,  with inspired  devotion,   
Of this thy close  attendant,  hast thou drunke n. God,  send the singer  food with milk to grace  it.  
2 Craving  the kine,  rushing  against  the mountain  led on by Law,  with holyminded  comrades,   
He broke  the never−broken  ridge  of Vala.  With  words  of might  Indra  subdued  the Panis.   
3 This Indu lighted  darks ome nights,  O Indra,  throughout  the years,  at morning  and at evening.   
Him have  they stablished  as the days'  bright  ensign.  He made  the Mornings  to be born in splendour.   
4 He shone  and caused  to shme  the worlds  that shone  not. By Law he lighted  up the host of Mornings.   
He moves  with Steeds  yoked  by eternal  Order,  contenting  men with nave  that finds  the sunlight.   
5 Now,  praised,  O Ancient  King!  fill thou the singer  with plenteous  food that he may deal forth  treasures.   
Give  waters,  herbs  that have no poison, forests,  and kine,  and steeds,  and men,  to him who lauds  thee.   
 
HYMN  XL. Indra  
1. DRINK,  Indra;  juice  is shed to make  thee joyful:  loose  thy Bay Steeds  and give thy friends  their freedo
m.  
Begin  the song,  seated  in our assembly.  Give  strength  for sacrifice  to him who singeth.   
2 Drink  thou of this whereof  at birth,  O Indra,  thou drankest,  Mighty  One for power  and rapture.   
The men,  the pressing−stones,  the cows,  the waters  have  made  this Soma  ready  for thy drinking.   
3 The fire is kindled,  Soma  press ed, O Indra:  let thy Bays,  best to draw,  convey  thee hither.   
With  mind  devoted,  Indra,  I invoke  thee.  Come,  for our great  prosperity  approach  us.  
4 Indra,  come  hither:  evermore  thou camest  through  our great  strong  desire  to drink  the Soma.   
Listen  and hear the prayers  which  now we offer,  and let this sacrifice  increase  thy vigour.   
5 Mayst  thou,  O Indra,  on the day of trial, present  or absent,  wheresoe'er  thou dwellest,   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Thence,  with thy team,  accordant  with the Maruts,  Song−lover!  guard  our sacrifice,  to help us.  
 
HYMN  XLL Indra.  
1. COME  gracious  to our sacrifice,  O Indra:  pressed  Soma−drops  are purified  to please  thee.   
As cattle  seek their home,  so Thunderwielder,  come,  Indra,  first of those  who claim  our worship.   
2 With that well−formed  most  wide−extending  palate,  wherewith  thou ever drinkest  streams  of sweetness,
  
Drink  thou;  the Adhvaryu  standeth  up before  thee:  let thy spoil−winning  thunderbolt  attend  thee.   
3 This drop,  steer−strong  and omniform,  the Soma,  hath been made  ready  for the Bull,  for India.   
Drink  this, Lord  of the Bays,  thou Strong  Supporter,  this that is thine  of old, thy food for ever.   
4 Soma  when  pressed  excels  the unpressed  Soma,  better,  for one who knows,  to give him pleasure.   
Come  to this sacrif ice of ours,  O Victor  replenish  all thy powers  with this libation.   
5 We call on thee,  O Indra:  come  thou hither:  sufficient  be the Soma  for thy body.   
Rejoice  thee,  Satakratu!  in the juices  guard  us in wars,  guard  us among  our people.   
 
HYMN  XLII−  Indra.  
1. BRING  sacrificial  gifts to him, Omniscient,  for he longs  to drink,  The Wanderer  who comes  with speed
, the Hero  ever in the van.  
2 With  Soma  go ye nigh to him chief  drinker  of the Soma's  juice:   
With  beakers  to the Impetuous  God,  to Indra with the drops  effused.   
3 What  time,  with Soma,  with the juice  effused,  ye come  before  the God,   
Full wise he knows  the hope  of each,  and, Bold  One,  strikes  this foe and that.  
4 To him, Adhvaryu!  yea, to him give offerings  of the juice  expressed.   
Will he not keep  us safely  from  the spiteful  curse  of each presumptuous  high−born  foe?  
 
HYMN  XLIII.  Indra  
1. IN whose  wild joy thou madest  once  Sambara  Divodasa's  prey,  This Soma  is pressed  out for thee,  O In
dra: drink!   
2 Whose  gladdening  draught,  shed from  the points,  thou guardest  in the midst  and end,  
This Soma  is pressed  out for thee,  O Indra  drink!   
3 In whose  wild joy thou settest  free the kine held fast within  the rock,   
This Soma  is pressed  out for thee,  O Indra:  drink!   
4 This,  in whose  juice  delighting  thou gainest  the might  of Maghavan,   
This Soma  is pressed  out for thee,  O Indra  drink!   
 
HYMN  XLIV.  Indra.  
1. THAT  which  is wealthiest,  Wealthy  God in splendoursmost  illustrious,  Soma
 is pressed:  thy gladdening  draught,  Indra!  libation's  Lord!  is this. 2 Effect ual, 
Most  Effectual  One!  thine,  as bestowing  wealth  of hymns,  Soma  is pressed:  thy 
gladdening  draught,  Indra!  libation's  Lord!  is this. 3 Wherewith  thou art increas
ed in strength,  and conquerest  with thy proper  aids, Soma  is pressed:  thy gladde
ning draught , Indra!  libation's  Lord!  is this. 4 Him for your sake I glorify  as LorRig Veda – English Translation  
d of Strength  who wrongeth  none,  The Hero  Indra,  conquering  all, Most  Bounte
ous, God of all the tribes.  5 Those  Goddesses,  both Heaven  and Earth,  revere  th
e power  and might  of him, Him whom  our songs  increase  in strength,  the Lord  
of bounty  swift  to come.   
6 To seat your Indra,  I will spread  abroad  with power  this song of praise.   
The saving  succours  that abide  in him, like songs,  extend  and grow.   
7 A recent  Friend,  he found  the skilful  priest:  he drank,  and showed  forth  treasure  from  the Gods.   
He conquered,  borne  by strong  all−shaking  mares,  and was with far−spread  power  his friends'  Protector.   
8 In course  of Law the sapient  juice  was quaffed:  the Deities  to glory  turned  their mind.   
Winning  through  hymns  a lofty  title, he, the Lovely,  made  his beauteous  form  apparent.   
9 Bestow  on us the most  illustrious  strength  ward  off men's  manifold  malignities.   
Give  with thy might  abundant  vital force,  and aid us graciously  in gaining  riches.   
10 We turn to thee as Giver,  liberal  Indra.  Lord  of the Bay Steeds,  be not thou ungracious.   
No friend  among  mankind  have  we to lookto:  why have  men called  thee him who spurs  the niggard?   
11 Give  us not up, Strong  Hero!  to the hungry:  unharmed  be we whom  thou, so rich, befriendest.   
Full many  a boon  hast thou for men demolish  those  who present  no gifts nor pour oblations.   
12 As Indra  thundering  impels  the rain−clouds,  so doth he send us store  of kine and horses.   
Thou  art of old the Cherisher  of singers  let not the rich who bring  no gifts deceive  thee.   
13 Adbyaryu,  hero,  bring  to mighty  Indrafor  he is King  thereof−the  pressed−out  juices;   
To him exalted  by the hymns  and praises,  ancient  and modern,  of the singing  Rsis.   
14 In the wild joy of this hath Indra, knowing  full many  a form,  struck  down  resistless  Vrtras.   
Proclaim  aloud  to him the savoury  Soma  so that the Hero,  strong  of jaw, may drink  it.  
15 May Indra  drink  this Soma  poured  to please  him, and cheered  therewith  slay Vrtra  with his thunder.   
Come  to our sacrifice  even  from  a distance,  good  lover  of our songs,  the bard's  Supporter.   
16 The cup whence  Indra  drinks  the draught  is present:  the Amrta  dear to Indra  hath been  drunken,   
That it may cheer  the God to gracious  favour,  and keep far from  us hatred and affliction.   
17 Therewith  enraptured,  Hero,  slay our foemen,  the unfriendly,  Maghavan  be they kin or strangers,   
Those  who still aim their hostile  darts  to smite  us, turn them  to flight,  O Indra,  crush  and kill them.   
18 O Indra  Maghavan,  in these  our battles  win easy paths  for us and ample  freedom.   
That we may gain waters  and seed and offspring,  set thou our princes  on thy side, O Indra.   
19 Let thy Bay Stallions,  harnessed,  bring  thee hither,  Steeds  with strong  chariot  and strong  reins  to hold 
them,  
Strong  Horses,  speeding  hither,  bearing  thunder,  well−harnessed,  for the strong  exciting  potion.   
20 Beside  the vat, Strong  God!  stand  thy strong  Horses,  shining  with holy oil, like waves  exulting.   
Indra,  they bring  to thee,  the Strong  and Mighty,  Soma of juices  shed by mighty  press−stones.   
21 Thou  art the Bull of earth,  the Bull of heaven,  Bull of the rivers,  Bull of standing  waters.   
For thee,  the Strong,  O Bull,  hath Indu swollen.  juice  pleasant,  sweet  to drink,  for thine  election.   
22 This God,  with might,  when  first he had his being,  with Indra  for ally, held fast the Pani.   
This Indu stole  away  the warlike  weapons,  and foiled  the arts of his malignant  father.   
23 The Dawns  he wedded  to a glorious  Consort,  and set within  the Sun the light that lights him.  
He found  in heaven,  in the third  lucid  regions,  the threefold  Amrta  in its close  concea lment.   
24 He stayed  and held the heaven  and earth  asunder:  the chariot  with the sevenfold  reins  he harnessed.   
This Soma  Set with power  within  the milch−kine  a spring  whose  ripe contents  ten fingers  empty.   
 
HYMN  XLV.  Indra.  
1. THAT  Indra  is our youthfu l Friend,  who with his trusty  guidance  led Turvasa,  Yadu  from  afar.  Rig Veda – English Translation  
2 Even  to the dull and uninspired  Indra,  gives  vital power,  and wins   
Even  with slow  steed  the offered  prize.   
3 Great  are his ways  of guiding  us, and!nanilbld  are Ins eulogies:   
His kind protections  never  fail.  
4 Friends,  sing your psalm  and offer  praise  to him to whom  the prayer  is brought:   
 
For our great  Providence  is he.  
5 Thou,  Slaughterer  of Vrtra,  art Guardian  and Friend  of one and two,  
Yea, of a man like one of us.  
6 Beyond  men's hate thou leadest  us, and givest  cause  to sing thy praise:   
Good  hero art thou called  by men.   
7 I call with hymns,  as 'twere  a cow to milk,  the Friend  who merits  praise,   
The Brahman  who accepts  the prayer.   
8 Him in whose  hands  they say are stored  all treasures  from  the days of old,  
The Hero,  conquering  in the fight.   
9 Lord  of Strength,  Caster  of the Stone,  destroy  the firm forts built by men,   
And foil their arts, unbending  God!   
10 Thee,  thee as such,  O Lord  of Power,  O Indra,  Soma−drinker,  true,  
We, fain for glory,  have  invoked.   
11 Such  as thou wast of old, and art now to be called  on when  the prize   
lies ready,  listen  to our call.  
12 With  hymns  and coursers  we will gain,  Indra,  through  thee,  both steeds  and spoil   
Most  glorious,  and the proffe red prize.   
13 Thou,  Indra,  Lover  of the Song,  whom  men must  stir to help,  hast been   
Great  in the contest  for the prize.   
14 Slayer  of foes,  whatever  aid of thine  imparts  the swiftest  course,   
With  that impel  our car to speed.   
15 As skilfullest  of those  who drive  the chariot,  with our art and aim,  
O Conqueror,  win the proffered  prize.   
16 Praise  him who,  Matchless  and Alone,  was born the Lord  of living  men,   
Most  active,  with heroic  soul.   
17 Thou  who hast been  the singers'  Friend,  a Friend  auspicious  with thine  aid,  
As such,  O Indra,  favour  us.  
18 Grasp  in thine  arms  the thunderbolt,  O Thunder−armed,  to slay the fiends:   
Mayst  thou subdue  the foemen's  host.   
19 I call the ancient  Friend,  allied  with wealth,  who speeds  the lowly  man,   
Him to whom  chiefl y prayer  is brought.   
20 For he alone  is Lord  of all the treasures  of the earth:  he speeds   
Hither,  chief  Lover  of the Song.   
21 So with thy yoked  teams  satisfy  our wish  with power  and wealth  in steeds   
And cattle,  boldly,  Lord  of kine!   
22 Sing this, what  time the ' juice  is pressed,  to him your Hero,  Much−invoked,   
To please  him as a mighty  Steer.   
23 He, Excellent,  withholdeth  not his gift of power  and wealth  in kine,   
When  he hath listened  to our songs.   
24 May he with might  unclose  for us the cow's  stall, whosesoe'er  it be,  
To which  the Dasyu−slayer  goes.   
25 O Indra  Satakratu,  these  our songs  have  called  aloud  to thee,   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Like mother  cows  to meet  their calves.   
26 Hard  is thy love to win: thou art a Steer  to him who longs  for steers:   
Be to one craving  steeds  a Steed.   
27 Delight  thee with the juice  we pour for thine  own great  munificence:   
Yield  not thy singer  to reproach.   
28 These  songs  with every  draught  we pour come,  Lover  of the Song,  to thee,   
As milch−kine  hasten  to their young   
29 To thee most  oft invoked,  amid  the many  singers'  rivalry   
Who  beg with all their might  for wealth.   
 
30 Nearest  and most  attractive  may our laud,  O Indra  come  to thee.   
Urge  thou us on to ample  wealth.   
31 Brbu  hath set himself  above  the Panis,  o'er their highest  head,   
Like the wide  bush  on Ganga's  bank.   
32 He whose  good  bounty,  thousandfold,  swift  as the rushing  of the wind,   
Suddenly  offers  as a gift.  
33 So all our singers  ever praise  the pious  Brbu's  noble  deed,   
Chief,  best to give his thousands,  best to give a thousand  liberal  gifts.   
 
HYMN  XLVI.  Indra.  
1. THAT  we may win us wealth  and power  we poets,  verily,  call on thee:  In war men call on thee,  Indra,  t
he hero's  Lord,  in the steed's  race−course  call on thee.   
2 As such,  O Wonderful,  whose  hand  holds  thunder,  praised  as mighty,  Caster  of the Stone!   
Pour  on us boldly,  Indra,  kine and chariotsteeds,  ever to be the conqueror's  strength.   
3 We call upon  that Indra,  who,  most  active,  ever slays  the foe:  
Lord  of the brave,  Most  Manly,  with a thousand  powers,  help thou and prosper  us in fight.   
4 Rcisama,  thou forcest  men as with a bull, with anger,  in the furious  fray.  
Be thou our Helper  in the mighty  battle  fought  for sunlight,  water,  and for life.  
5 O Indra,  bring  us name  and fame,  enriching,  mightiest,  excellen t,  
Wherewith,  O Wondrous  God,  fair−visored,  thunder−armed,  thou hast filled  full this earth  and heaven.   
6 We call on thee,  O King,  Mighty  amid  the Gods,  Ruler  of men,  to succour  us.  
All that is weak  in us, Excellent  God,  make  firm:  make  our foes easy to subdue.   
7 All strength  and valour  that is found,  Indra,  in tribes  of Nahusas,  and all the splendid  fame  that the Five 
Tribes  enjoy   
Bring,  yea, all manly  powers  at once.   
8 Or, Maghavan,  what  vigorous  strength  in Trksi  lay, in Druhyus  or in Paru's  folk,  
Fully  bestow  on us, that, in the conquering  fray, we may subdue  our foes in fight.   
9 O Indra,  grant  a happy  home,  a triple  refuge  triply  strong.   
Bestow  a dwelling−place  on the rich lords  and me, and keep  thy dart afar from  these.   
10 They  who with minds  intent  on spoil  subdue  the foe, boldly  attack  and smite  him down,−   
From  these,  O Indra  Maghavan  who lovest  song,  be closest  guardian  of our lives.   
11 And now,  O Indra,  strengthen  us: come  near and aid us in the fight,   
What  time the feathered  shafts  are flying  in the air, the arrows  with their sharpened  points.   
12 Give  us, where  heroes  strain  their bodies  in the fight,  the shelter  that our fathers  loved.   
To us and to our sons give refuge:  keep  afar all unobserved  hostility.   
13 When,  Indra,  in the migh ty fray thou urgest  chargers  to their speed,   Rig Veda – English Translation  
On the uneven  road and on a toilsome  path,  like falcons,  eager  for renown,   
14 Speeding  like rivers  rushing  down  a steep  descent,  responsive  to the urging  call,  
That come  like birds  attracted  to the bait, held in by reins  in both the driver's  hands.   
 
HYMN  XLVII.  Indra,  Etc.  
1. YEA,  this is good  to taste and full of. sweetness,  verily  it is strong  and rich in flavour.   
No one may conquer  Indra  in the battle  when  he hath drunken  of the draught  we offer.   
2 This sweet  juice  here had mightiest  power  to gladden:  it boldened  Indra  when  he siaughtered  Vrtra,   
When  he defeated  Sambara's  many  onslaughts,  and battered  down  his nineand  ninety  ramparts.   
3 This stirreth  up my voice  when  I have  drunk  it: this hath aroused  from  sleep  my yearning  spirit.   
 
This Sage  hath measured  out the six expanses  from  which  no single  creature  is excluded.   
4 This,  even  this, is he who hath created  the breadth  of earth,  the lofty  height  of heaven.   
He formed  the nectar  in three  headlong  rivers.  Soma  supports  the wide  mid−air  above  us.  
5 He found  the wavy  sea of brilliant  colours  in forefront  of the Dawns  who dwell  in brightness.   
This Mighty  One,  the Steer  begirt  by Maruts,  hath propped  the heavens  up with a mighty  pillar.   
6 Drink  Soma  boldly  from  the beaker,  Indra,  in war for treasures,  Hero,  Vrtra−slayer!   
Fill thyself  full at the mid−day  libation,  and give us wealth,  thou Treasury  of riches.   
7 Look  out for us, O Indra,  as our Leader,  and guide  us on to gain yet goodlier  treasure.   
Excellent  Guardian,  bear us well through  peril,  and lead us on to wealth  with careful  guidance.   
8 Lead  us to ample  room,  O thou who knowest,  to happiness,  security,  and sunlight.   
High,  Indra,  are the arms  of thee the Mighty:  may we betake.  us to their lofty  shelter.   
9 Set us on widest  chariot−seat,  O Indra,  with two steeds  best to draw,  O Lord  of Hundreds!   
Bring  us the best among  all sorts  of viands:  let not the foe's wealth,  Maghavan,  subdue  us.  
10 Be gracious,  Indra,  let my days be lengthened:  sharpen  my thought  as 'twere  a blade  of iron  
Approve  whatever  words  I speak,  dependent  on thee,  and grant  me thy divine  protection.   
11 Indra  the Rescuer,  Indra  the Helper,  Hero  who listens  at each invocation,   
Sakra  I call, Indra  invoked  of many.  May Indra  Maghav an prosper  and bless  us.  
12 May helpful  Indra  as our good  Protector,  Lord  of all treasures,  favour  us with succour,   
Baffle  our foes,  and give us rest and safety,  and may we be the lords  of hero vigour.   
13 May we enjoy  the grace  of him the Holy,  yea, may we dwell  in his auspicious  favour.   
May helpful  Indra  as our good  Preserver  drive  from  us, even  from  afar, our foemen.   
14 Like rivers  rushing  down  a slope,  O Indra,  to thee haste  songs  and prayers  and linked  verses.   
Thou  gatherest,  Thunderer!  like wides pread  bounty,  kine,  water,  drops,  and manifold  libations.   
15 Who  lauds  him, satisfies  him, pays him worship?  E'en the rich noble  still hath found  him mighty.   
With  power,  as when  one moves  his feet alternate,  he makes  the last precede,  the foremost  follow .  
16 Famed  is the Hero  as each strong  man's  tamer,  ever advancing  one and then another.   
King  of both worlds,  hating  the high and haughty,  Indra  protects  the men who are his people.   
17 He loves  no more  the men he loved  aforetime:  he turns  and moves  away  allied  with others.   
Rejecting  those  who disregard  his worship,  Indra  victorious  lives  through  many  autumns.   
18 In every  figure  he hath been  the mode:  this is his only form  for us to look on.  
Indra  moves  multiform  by his illusions;  for his Bay Steeds  are yoked,  ten times  a hundred.   
19 Here  Tvastar,  yoking  to the car the Bay Steeds,  hath extended  sway.   
Who  will for ever stand  upon  the foeman's  side, even  when  our princes  sit at ease?   
20 Gods,  we have reached  a country  void of pasture  the land,  though  spacious,  was too small  to hold us.  
Brhaspati,  provide  in war for cattle;  find a path,  Indra,  for this faithful  singer.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
21 Day after day far from  their seat he drove  them,  alike,  from  place  to place,  those  darksome  creatures.   
The Hero  slew the meanly−huckstering  Dasas,  Varcin  and Sambara,  where  the waters  gather.   
22 Out of thy bounty,  Indra,  hath Prastoka  bestowed  ten coffers  and ten mettled  horses.   
We have  received  in turn from  Divodasa  Sambara's  wealth,  the gift of Atithigva.   
23 Ten horses  and ten treasure−chests,  ten garments  as an added  gift,  
These  and ten lumps  of gold have  I received  from  Divodasa's  hand.   
24 Ten cars with extra  steed  to each,  for the Atharvans  hundred  cows,   
Hath  Asvatha  to Payu  given.   
25 Thus  Srnjaya's  son honoured  the Bharadvajas,  recipients  of all noble  gifts and bounty.   
26 Lord  of the wood,  be firm and strong  in body:  be, bearing  us, a brave  victorious  hero  
Show  forth  thy strength,  compact  with straps  of leather,  and let thy rider  win all spoils  of battle.   
27 Its mighty  strength  was borrowed  from  the heaven  and earth:  its conquering  force  was brought  from  
sovrans  of the wood.   
Honour  with holy gifts the Car like Indra's  bolt, the Car bound  round  with straps,  the vigour  of the floods.   
28 Thou  Bolt of Indra,  Vanguard  of the Maruts,  close  knit to Varuna  and Child  of Mitra,−   
As such,  accepting  gifts which  here we offer,  receive,  O Godlike  Chariot,  these  oblations.   
 
29 Send  forth  thy voice  aloud  through  earth  and heaven,  and let the world  in all its breadth  regard  thee;  
O Drum,  accordant  with the Gods  and Indra,  drive  thou afar, yea, very far, our foemen.   
30 Thunder  out strength  and fill us full of vigour:  yea, thunder  forth  and drive  away  all dangers.   
Drive  hence,  O War−drum,  drive  away  misfortune:  thou art the Fist of Indra:  show  thy firmness.   
31 Drive  hither  those,  and these  again  bring  hither:  the War−drum  speaks  aloud  as battle's  signal.   
Our heroes,  winged  with horses,  come  together.  Let our car−warriors,  Indra,  be triumphant.   
 
HYMN  XLVIII.  Agni  and Others.  
1. SING  to your Agni  with each song,  at every  sacrifice,  for strength.  Come,  let us praise  the Wise  and Ev
erlasting  God,  even  as a well−beloved  Friend,   
2 The Son of Strength;  for is he not our gracious  Lord?  Let us serve  him who bears  our gifts.   
In battle may he be our help and strengthener,  yea, be the saviour  of our lives.   
3 Agni,  thou beamest  forth  with light,  great  Hero,  never  changed  by time.   
Shining,  pure Agni!  with a light that never  fades,  beam  with thy fair beams  brilliantly.   
4 Thou  worshippes t great  Gods:  bring  them  without  delay  by wisdom  and thy wondrous  power.   
O Agni,  make  them  turn hither  to succour  us. Give  strength,  and win it for thyself.   
5 He whom  floods,  stones,  and trees  support,  the offspring  of eternal  Law;   
He who when  rubbed  with force  is brought  to life by men upon  the lofty  height  of earth;   
6 He who hath filled  both worlds  fult with his brilliant  shine,  who hastens  with his smoke  to heaven;   
He made  himself  apparent  through  the gloom  by night,  the Red Bull in the darksome  nights, the Red Bull 
in 
the darksome  nights.   
7 O Agni,  with thy lofty  beams,  with thy pure brilliancy,  O God,   
Kindled,  Most  Youthful  One!  by Bharadvaja's  hand,  shine  on us, O pure God,  with wealth,  shine,  Purifier
! 
splendidly.   
8 Thou  art the Lord  of house  and home  of all the tribes,  O Agni,  of all tribes  of men.   
Guard  with a hundred  forts thy kindler  from  distress,  through  hundred  winters,  Youngest  God!  and those  
who Rig Veda – English Translation  
make  thy singers  rich.  
9 Wonderful,  with thy favouring  help,  send us thy bounties,  gracio us Lord.   
Thou  art the Charioteer,  Agni,  of earthly  wealth:  find rest and safety  for our seed.   
10 With  guards  unfailing  never  negligent  speed  thou our children  and our progeny.   
Keep  far from  us, O Agni,  all celestial  wrath  and wickedness  of godless  men.   
11 Hither,  O friends,  with newest  song  drive  her who freely  pours  her milk;   
Loose  her who never  turns  away;   
12 Who,  for the host of Maruts  bright  with native  sheen,  hath shed immortal  fame  like milk;   
Whom  the impetuous  Maruts  look upon  with love,  who moves in splendour  on their ways.   
13 For Bharadvaja  she poured  down  in days of old  
The milch−cow  yielding  milk for all, and food that gives  all nourishment.   
14 Your  friend  like Indra  passing  wise,  with magic  power  like Varuna.   
Like Aryaman  joy−giving,  bringing  plenteous  food like ViSnxu  for my wish,  I praise,   
15 Bright  as the host of Maruts  mighty  in their roar. May they bring  Pusan  free from  foes;   
May they bring  hither  hundreds,  thousands  for our men:  may they bring  hidden  stores  to light,  and make  
wealth easy to be found.   
16 Haste  to me, Pusan,  in thine  car, bright  Deity:  I fain would  speak:   
Most  sinful  is our foeman's  hate.   
17 Tear not up by the roots  the Kakambira  tree: destroy  thou all malignity.   
Let them  not snare  by day the neck  of that Celes tial Bird the Sun.  
18 Uninjured  let thy friendship  be, like the smooth  surface  of a skin,   
A flawless  skin,  containing  curds,  full to the mouth,  containing  curds.   
 
19 For thou art high above  mankind,  in glory  equal  to the Gods.   
Therefore,  O Pusan,  look upon  us in the fight:  now help us as in days of old.  
20 May the kind excellence  of him the Kind,  loud Roarers!  be our guide,   
Be it the God's,  O Maruts,  or a mortal  man's  who worships,  ye impetuous  Ones!   
21 They  whose  high glory  in a moment  like the God,  the Sun, goes round  the space  of heaven,   
The Maruts  have  obtained  bright  strength,  a sacred  name,  strength  that destroys  the Vrtras,  strength  
Vrtra−destroying  excellent.   
22 Once,  only once,  the heaven  was made,  once  only once,  the earth  was formed−   
Once, only Prsni's  milk was shed:  no second,  after this, is born.   
 
HYMN  XLIX.  Visvedevas.  
1. I LAUD  with newest  songs  the Righteous  People,  Mitra  and Varuna  who make  us happy.   
Let them  approach,  here let them  listen,Agni,  Varuna,  Mitra,  Lords  of fair domi nion.   
2 Him,  to be praised  at each tribe's  sacrifices,  the Two young  Matrons'  sober−minded  Herald,   
The Son of Strength,  the Child  of Heaven,  the signal  of sacrifice,  red Agni  will I worship.   
3 Unlike  in form  are the Red God's  two Daughters:  one is the Sun's, and stars bedeck  the other.   
Apart,  the Sanctifiers,  in succession,  come  to the famed  hymn,  praised  in holy verses.   
4 I with a lofty  song  call hither  Vayu,  all−bounteous,  filler  of his car, most  wealthy.   
Thou,  Sage,  with bright  path,  Lord  of harnes sed horses,  impetuous,  promptly  honourest  the prudent.   
5 That chariot  of the Asvins,  fair to look on, pleaseth  me well,  yoked  with a thought,  refulgent,   
Wherewith,  Nasatyas,  Chiefs,  ye seek our dwelling,  to give new strength  to us and to our children.   
6 Bulls  of the Earth,  O Vata  and Parjanya,  stir up for us the regions  of the water.   
Hearers  of truth,  ye, Sages,  World−Supporters,  increase  his living  wealth  whose  songs  delight  you.  Rig Veda – English Translation  
7 So may Sarasvati,  the Hero's  Consort,  brisk  with rare life, the lightn ing's Child,  inspire  us,  
And,  with the Dames  accordant,  give the singer  a refuge  unassailable  and flawless.   
8 I praise  with eloquence  him who guards  all pathways.  He, when  his love impelled  him, went  to Arka.   
May he vouchsafe  us gear with gold to grace  it: may Pusan  make  each prayer  of ours efective.   
9 May Herald  Agni,  fulgent,  bring  for worship  Tvastar  adored,  in homes  and swift  to listen,   
Glorious,  first to share,  the life−bestower,  the ever active  God,  fair−armed,  fair−handed.   
10 Rudra  by day, Rudr a at night  we honour  with these  our songs,  the Universe's  Father.   
Him great  and lofty,  blissful,  undecaying  let us call specially  as the Sage  impels  us.  
11 Ye who are youthful,  wise,  and meet  for worship,  come,  Martits,  to the longing  of the singer.   
Com ing, as erst to Angiras,  O Heroes,  ye animate  and quicken  e'en the desert.   
12 Even  as the herdsman  driveth  home  his cattle,  I urge my songs  to him the strong  swift  Hero   
May he, the glorious,  lay upon  his body  the singer's  hymns,  as stars bedeck  the heave n.  
13 He who for man's  behoof  in his afiliction  thrice  measured  out the earthly  regions,  Visnu−   
When  one so great  as thou affordeth  shelter,  may we with wealth  and with ourselves  be happy.   
14 Sweet  be this song  of mine  to Ahibudhnya,  Parvata,  Savitar,  with Floods  and Lightnings;   
Sweet,  with the Plants,  to Gods  who seek oblations.  May liberal  Bhaga  speed  us on to riches.   
15 Give  riches  borne  on cars, with many  heroes,  contenting  men,  the guard  of mighty  Order.   
Give  us a lasting  home  that we may battle  with godless  bands  of men who fight  against  us, and meet  with 
tribes  to whom  the Gods  are gracious.   
 
HYMN  L. Visvedevas.  
1. I CALL  with prayers  on Aditi  your Goddess,  on Agni,  Mitra,  Varuna  for favour,  On Ar
yaman  who gives  unasked,  the gracious,  on Gods  who save,  on Savitar  and Bhaga.   
2 Visit,  to prove  us free from  sin, O Surya  Lord  of great  might,  the bright  Gods  sprung  from  Daksa,   
Twice−born  and true, observing  sacred  duties,  Holy  and full of light,  whose  tongue  is Agni.   
3 And,  O ye Heaven  and Earth , a wide  dominion,  O ye most  blissful  Worlds,  our lofty  shelter,   
Give  ample  room  and freedom  for our dwelling,  a home,  ye Hemispheres,  which  none  may rival.   
4 This day invited  may the Sons  of Rudra,  resistless,  excellent,  stoop  down  to meet  us;  
For, when beset  with slight  or sore affliction,  we ever call upon  the Gods,  the Maruts;   
5 To whom  the Goddess  Rodasi  clings  closely,  whom  Pusan  follows  bringing  ample  bounty.   
What  time ye hear our call and come,  O Maruts,  upon  your separate  path all creatures  tremble.   
6 With  a new hymn  extol,  O thou who singest,  the Lover  of the Song,  the Hero  Indra.   
May he, exalted,  hear our invocation,  and grant  us mighty  wealth  and strength  when  lauded.   
7 Give  full protection,  Friends  of man,  ye Waters,  in peace  and trouble , to our sons and grandsons.   
For ye are our most  motherly  physicians,  parents  of all that standeth,  all that moveth.   
8 May Savitar  come  hither  and approach  us, the God who rescues,  Holy,  goldenhanded,   
The God who,  bounteous  as the face of Morning,  discl oses precious  gifts for him who worships.   
9 And thou,  O Son of Strength,  do thou turn hither  the Gods  to−day  to this our holy service.   
May I for evermore  enjoy  thy bounty  and, Agni,  by thy grace  be rich in heroes.   
10 Come  also to my call, O ye Nasatyas,  yea, verily,  through  my prayers,  ye Holy  Sages.   
As from  great  darkness  ye delivered  Atri, protect  us, Chiefs,  from  danger  in the conflict.   
11 O Gods,  bestow  upon  us riches,  splendid  with strength  and heroes,  bringing  food in plenty.   
Be gracious,  helpfu l Gods  of earth,  of heaven,  born of the Cow,  and dwellers  in the waters.   
12 May Rudra  and Sarasvati,  accordant,  Visnu  and Vayu,  pour down  gifts and bless  us;  
Rbhuksan,  Vaja,  and divine  Vidhatar,  Parjanya,  Vata  make  our food abundant.   
13 May this God Savitar, the Lord,  the Offspring  of Waters,  pouring  down  his dew be gracious,   Rig Veda – English Translation  
And,  with the Gods  and Dames  accordant,  Tvastar;  Dyaus  with the Gods  and Prthivi  with oceans.   
14 May Aja−Ekapad  and Ahibudhnya,  and Earth  and Ocean  hear our invocation;   
All Gods  who strengthen  Law,  invoked  and lauded,  and holy texts  uttered  by sages,  help us.  
15 So with my thoughts  and hymns  of praise  the children  of Bharadvaja  sing aloud  to please  you.  
The Dames  invoked,  and the resistless  Vasus,  and all ye Holy  Ones  have  been  exalted.   
 
HYMN  LI. Visvedevas.  
1. THAT  mighty  eye of Varuna  and Mitra,  infallible  and dear,  is moving  upward.   
The pure and lovely  face of holy Order  hath shone  like gold of heaven  in its arising.   
2 The Sage  who knows  these  Gods'  three  ranks  and orders , and all their generations  near and distant,   
Beholding  good  and evil acts of mortals,  Sura marks  well the doing  of the pious.   
3 I praise  you Guards  of mighty  Law eternal,  Aditi,  Mitra,  Varuna,  the noble,   
Aryaman,  Bhaga,  all whose  thoughts  are faithful:  hither  I call the Bright  who share  in common.   
4 Lords  of the brave,  infallible,  foe−destroyers,  great  Kings,  bestowers  of fair homes  to dwell  in,  
Young,  Heroes,  ruling  heaven  with strong  dominion,  Adityas,  Aditi  I seek with worship.   
5 O Heaven  our Father, Earth  our guileless  Mother,  O Brother  Agni,  and ye Vasus,  bless  us.  
Grant  us, O Aditi  and ye Adityas,  all of one mind,  your manifold  protection.   
6 Give  us not up to any evil creature,  as spoil  to wolf or she−wolf,  O ye Holy.   
For ye are they who guide aright  our bodies,  ye are the rulers  of our speech  and vigour.   
7 Let us not suffer  for the sin of others,  nor do the deed  which  ye, O Vasus,  punish.   
Ye, Universal  Gods!  are all−controllers:  may he do harm  unto himself  who hates  Me.  
8 Mighty  is homage:  I adopt  and use it. Homage  hath held in place  the earth  and heaven.   
Homage  to Gods!  Homage  commands  and rules  them.  I banish  even  committed  sin by homage   
9 You Furtherers  of Law,  pure in your spirit,  infallible,  dwellers  in the home  of Order,   
To you all Heroes  mighty  and far−seeing  I bow me down,  O Holy  Ones,  with homage.   
 
10 For these  are they who shine  with noblest  splendour;  through  all our troubles  these  conduct  us safely−   
Varuna,  Mitra,  Agni,  mighty  Rulers,  trueminded,  faithful  to the hymn's  controllers.   
11 May they,  Earth,  Aditi,  Indra,  Bhaga,  Pusan  increase  our laud,  increase  the Fivefold  people.   
Giving  good  help,  good  refuge,  goodly  guidance,  be they our good  deliverers,  good  protectors.   
12 Come  now,  O Gods,  to your celestial  station:  the Bharadvajas'  priest  entreats  your favour.   
He, sacrificing,  fain for wealth,  hath honoured  the Gods  vath those  who sit and share  oblations.   
13 Agni,  drive  thou the wicked  foe, the evil−hearted  thief away,   
Far, far, Lord  of the brave  I and give us easy paths.  
14 Soma,  these  pressing−stones  have called  aloud  to win thee for our Friend.   
Destroy  the greedy  Pani,  for a wolf is he.  
15 Ye, O most  bountiful,  are they who,  led by Indra,  seek the sky.  
Give  us good  paths  for travel:  guard  us ivell at home.   
16 Now  have  we entered  on the road that leads  to bliss,  without  a foe,  
The road whereon  a man escapes  all enemies  and gathers  wealth.   
 
HYMN  LIL Visvedevas.  
1. THIS  I allow  not in the earth  or heaven,  at sacrifice  or in these  holy duties.   
May the huge  mounta ins crush  him down:  degraded  be Atiyaja's  sacrificing  patron.   
2 Or he who holds  us in contempt,  O Maruts,  or seeks  to blame  the prayer  that we are making,   Rig Veda – English Translation  
May agonies  of burning  be his portion.  May the sky scorch  the man who hates  devotion.   
3 Why  then,  O Soma,  do they call thee keeper  of prayer?  Why  then our guardian  from  reproaches?   
Why  then beholdest  thou how men revile  us? Cast thy hot dart at him who hates  devotion.   
4 May Mornings  as they spring  to life, protect  me, and may the Rivers  as they swell  preserve  me.  
My guardians  be the firmly−seated  mountains:  the Fathers,  when  I call on Gods,  defend  me!  
5 Through  all our days may we be healthy.  minded,  and look upon  the Sun when  he arises.   
Grant  this the Treasure−Lord  of treasures,  coming,  observant,  oftenest  of Gods,  with succour!   
6 Most  near,  most  oft comes  Indra  with protection,  and she Sarasvati,  who swells  with rivers  −  
Parjanya,  bringing  health  with herbs,  and Agni,  well lauded  swift  to listen,  like a father.   
7 Hear  this mine  invocation;  come  hither,  O Universal  Gods,   
Be seated  on this holy grass.   
8 To him who comes  to meet  you, Gods,  with offerings  bathed  in holy oil−  
Approach  ye, one and all, to him.  
9 All Sons  of Immortality  shall  listen  to the songs  we sing,   
And be exceeding  good  to us.  
10 May all the Gods  who strengthen  Law,  with Rtus,  listening  to our call,  
Be pleased  with theit appropriate  draught.   
11 May 1ndra,  with the Marut  host,  with Tvastar,  Mitra,  Aryaman,   
Accept  the laud and these  our gifts.   
12 O Agni,  Priest,  as rules  ordain,  offer  this sacrifice  of ours,   
Remembering  the Heavenly  Folk.   
13 Listen,  All−Gods,  to this mine  invocation,  Ye who inhabit  heaven,  and air's midregions,   
All ye, O Holy  Ones,  whose  tongue  is Agni,  seated  upon  this sacred  grass,  be joyful.   
14 May the All−Gods  who claim  our worship  hear my thought;  may the two World−halves  hear it, and th
e 
Waters'  Child.   
Let me not utter words  that ye may disregard.  Closely  allied  with you may we rejoice  in bliss.   
15 And those  who,  Mighty,  with the wiles  of serpent s, were  born on earth,  in heaven,  where  waters  gather
−  
May they vouchsafe  us life of full duration.  May the Gods  kindly  give us nights  and mornings.   
16 At this my call, O Agni  and Parjanya,  help,  swift  to hear,  my thought  and our laudation.   
 
One generat es holy food,  the other  offspring,  so grant  us food enough  with store  of children.  17 When  hol
y grass  is strewn  and fire enkindled,  with hymn  and lowly  homage  I invite  you. All−Gods,  to day in this o
ur great  assembly  rejoice,  ye Holy,  in the gifts we offer . 
 
HYMN  LIII. Pusan.  
1. LORD  of the path,  O Pusan,  we have yoked  and bound  thee to our hymn,  Even  as a car, to win the priz
e.  
2 Bring  us the wealth  that men require,  a manly  master  of a house,   
Free−handed  with the liberal  meed.   
3 Even  him who would  not give,  do thou,   
O glowing  Pusan,  urge to give,   
And make  the niggard's  soul grow  soft.  Rig Veda – English Translation  
4 Clear  paths  that we may win the prize;  scatter  our enemies  afar.  
Strong  God,  be all our thoughts  fulfilled.   
5 Penetrate  with an awl, O Sage,  the hearts  of avarici ous churls,   
And make  them  subject  to our will.  
6 Thrust  with thine  awl, O Pusan:  seek that which  the niggard's  heart  holds  dear,   
And make  him subject  to our will.  
7 Tear up and read in pieces,  Sage,  the hearts  of avaricious  churls,   
And make  them  subje ct to our will.  
8 Thou,  glowing  Pusan,  carriest  an awl that urges  men to prayer;   
Therewith  do thou tear up and rend to shreds  the heart  of every  one.  
9 Thou  bearest,  glowing  Lord!  a goad  with horny  point  that guides  the cows   
Thence  do we seek thy gift of bliss.   
10 And make  this hymn  of ours produce  kine,  horses,  and a store  of wealth   
For our delight  and use as men.   
 
HYMN  LIV. Pusan.  
1. O PUSAN,  bring  us to the man who knows,  who shall  direct  us straight,   
And say unto us, It is here.   
2 May we go forth with Pusan  who shall  point  the houses  out to us,  
And say to us, These  same  are they.   
3 Unharmed  is Pusan's  chariot  wheel;  the box ne'er  falleth  to the ground,   
Nor doth the loosened  felIy shake.   
4 Pusan  forgetteth  not the man who serveth  him with offered  gift:  
That man is first to gather  wealth.   
5 May Pusan  follow  near our kine;  may Pusan  keep  our horses  safe:   
May Pusan  gather  gear for us.  
6 Follow  the kine of him who pours  libations  out and worships  thee;   
And ours who sing thee songs  of praise .  
7 Let none  be lost, none  injured,  none  sink in a pit and break  a limb.   
Return  with these  all safe and sound.   
8 Pusan  who listens  to our prayers,  the Strong  whose  wealth  is never  lost,  
The Lord  of riches,  we implore.   
9 Secure  in thy protecting  care,  O Pusan,  never  may we fail.  
We here are they who sing thy praise.   
 
10 From  out the distance,  far and wide,  may Pusan  stretch  his right  hand  forth,  And drive  our lost ag
ain to us. 
 
HYMN  LV. Pusan.  
1. SON  of Deliverance,  come,  bright  God!  Let us twain  go together:  be our charioteer  of sacrifice.   
2 We pray for wealth  to thee most  skilled  of charioteers,  with braided  hair,  
Lord  of great  riches,  and our Friend.   
3 Bright  God whose  steeds  are goats,  thou art a stream  of wealth,  a treasure−heap,   Rig Veda – English Translation  
The Friend  of every  pious  man.   
4 Pusan,  who driveth  goats  for steeds,  the strong  and Mighty,  who is called   
His Sister's  lover,  will we laud.   
5 His Mother's  suitor  I address.  May he who loves  his Sister  hear,   
Brother  of Indra,  and my Friend.   
6 May the sure−footed  goats  come  nigh,  conveying  Pusan  on his car,  
The God who visiteth  mankind.   
 
HYMN  LVI, Pusan.  
1. WHOSO  remembers  Pusan  as cater  of mingled  curd and meal  Need  think  no more  upon  the God.   
2 And he is best of charioteers.  Indra,  the hero's  Lord,  allied   
With  him as Friend,  destroys  the foes.   
3 And there  the best of charioteers  hath guided  through  the speckled  cloud   
The golden  wheel  of Sura's  car.  
4 Whate'er  we speak  this day to thee,  Wise,  Wondrous  God whom  many  praise,   
Give  thou fulfilment  of our thought.   
5 Lead  on this company  of ours,  that longs  for kine,  to win the spoil:   
Thou,  Pusan,  art renowned  afar.  
6 Prosperity  we crave  from  thee,  afar from  sin and near to wealth,   
Tending  to perfect  happiness  both for to. morrow  and to−day.   
 
HYMN  LVII.  Indra  and Pusan.  
1. INDRA  and Pusan  will we call for friend  ship and prosperity  And for the winning  of the spoil.   
2 One by the Soma  sits to drink  juice  which  the mortar  hath expressed:   
The other  longs  for curd and meal.   
3 Goats  are the team  that draws  the one: the other  hath Bay Steeds  at hand;   
With  both of these  he slays  the fiends.   
4 When  Indra,  wondrous  strong,  brought  down  the streams,  the mighty  waterfloods,   
Pusan  was standing  by his side.  
5 To this, to Pusan's  favouring  love,  and Indra's,  may we closely  cling,   
As to a tree's  extended  bough.   
6 As one who drives  a car draws  in his reins,  may we draw  Pusan  near,   
And Indra,  for our great  success.   
 
HYMN  LVIII.  Pusan.  
1. LIKE  heaven  art thou:  one form  is bright,  one holy,  like Day and Night  dissimilar  in colour.   
All magic  powers  thou aidest,  self−depen.  dent!  Auspicious  be thy bounty  here,  O Pusan.   
2 Goat−borne,  the guard  of cattle,  he whose  home  is strength,  inspirer  of the hymn,  set over all the world;   
Brandishing  here and there  his lightly.  moving  goad,  beholding  every  creature,  Pusan,  God,  goes forth.   
3 O Pusan,  with thy golden  ships  that travel  across  the ocean,  in the air's mid−region,   
Thou  goest  on an embassy  to Surya,  subdued  by love,  desirous  of the glory.   
4 Near  kinsman  of the heav en and earth  is Pusan,  liberal,  Lord  of food,  of wondrous  iustre,   
Whom  strong  and vigorous  and swiftlymoving,  subdued  by love,  the Deities  gave to Surya.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
 
HYMN  LIX. Indra−Agni.  
1. I WILL  declare,  while  juices  flow,  the manly  deeds  that ye have  done:   
Your Fathers,  enemies  of Gods,  were  smitten  down,  and, Indra−Agni,  ye survive.   
2 Thus,  Indra−Agnip  verily  your greatness  merits  loftiest  praise,   
Sprung  from  one common  Father,  brothers,  twins  are ye; your Mother  is in every  place.   
3 These  who delight  in flowing  juice,  like fellow  horses  at their food,   
Indra  and Agni,  Gods  armed  with the thunderbolt,  we call this day to come  with help.   
4 Indra  and Agni,  Friends  of Law,  served  with rich gifts,  your speech  is kind  
To him who praises  you while  these  libati ons flow:  that man,  O Gods,  ye ne'er  consume.   
5 What  mortal  understands,  O Gods,  Indra  and Agni,  this your way?   
One of you, yoking  Steed s that move  to every  side, advances  in your common  car.  
6 First,  Indra−Agni,  hath this Maid  come  footless  unto those  with feet.  
Stretching  her head  and speaking  loudly  with her tongue,  she hath gone  downward  thirty  steps.   
7 E'en now,  O Indra−Agni,  men hold in their arms  and stretch  their bows.   
Desert  us not in this great  fray, in battles  for the sake of kine.   
8 The foeman's  sinful  enmities,  Indra  and Agni,  vex me sore.   
Drive  those  who hate me far away,  and keep  them  distant  from  the Sun.  
9 Indra  and Agni,  yours  are all the treasures  of the heavens  and earth.   
Here  give ye us the opulence  that prospers  every  living  man.   
10 O Indra−Agni,  who accept  the laud,  and hear us for our praise,   
Come  near us, drawn  by all our songs,  to drink  of this our Soma  juice.  
 
HYMN  LX. Indra−Agni.  
1. HE slays  the foe and wins  the spoil  who worships  Indra  and Agni,  strong  and mighty  Heroes,   
Who  rule as Sovrans  over ample  riches,  victorious,  showing  forth  their power  in conquest.   
2 So battle  now,  O Indra  and thou,  Agni,  for cows  and waters,  sunlight,  stolen  Mornings.   
Team−borne,  thou makest  kine thine  own,  O Agni:  thou,  Indra,  light,  Dawns,  regions,  wondrous  waters.   
3 With  Vrtra−slaying  might,  Indra  and Agni,  come,  drawn  by homage,  O ye Vrtra−slayers.   
Indra  and Agni,  show  yourselves  among  us with your supreme  and unrestricted  bounties.   
4 I call the Twain  whose  deeds  of old have  all been  famed  in ancient  days  
O Indra−Agni,  harm  us not.  
5 The Strong,  the scatterers  of the foe, Indra  and Agni,  we invoke;   
May they be kind to one like me.  
 
6 They  slay our Arya  foes,  these  Lords  of heroes,  slay our Dasyu  foes  
And drive  our enemies  away.   
7 Indra  and Agni,  these  our songs  of praise  have sounded  forth  to you:  
Ye who bring  blessings!  drink  the juice.   
8 Come,  Indra−Agni,  with those  teams,  desired  of many,  which  ye have,   
O Heroes,  for the worshipper.   
9 With  those  to this libation  poured,  ye Heroes,  Indra−Agni,  come:   
Come  ye to drink  the Soma  juice.   
10 Glorify  him who compasses  all forests  with his glowing  flame,   
And leaves them  blackened  with his tongue.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
11 He who gains  Indra's  bliss with fire enkindled  finds  an easy way  
Over  the floods  to happiness.   
12 Give  us fleet coursers  to convey  Indra  and Agni,  and bestow   
Abundant  strengthening  food on us.  
13 Indra  and Agni,  I will call you hither  and make  you joyful  with the gifts I offer.   
Ye Twain  are givers  both of food and riches:  to win me strength  and vigour  I invoke  you.  
14 Come  unto us with riches,  come  with wealth  in horses  and in kine.   
Indra  and Agni,  we invoke  you both,  the Gods,  as Friends  for friendship,  bringing  bliss.   
15 Indra  and Agni,  hear his call who worships.  with libations  poured.   
Come  and enjoy  the offerings,  drink  the sweetly−flavoured  Soma  juice.   
 
HYMN  LXI. Sarasvati.  
1. To Vadhryasva  when.  be worshipped  her with gifts she gave fierce  Divodasa,  canceller  of debts.   
Consumer  of the churlish  niggard,  one and all, thine,  O Sarasvati,  are these  effectual  boons.   
2 She with her might,  like one who digs for lotus−stems,  hath burst  with her strong  waves  the ridges  of th
e 
hills.   
Let us invite  with songs  and holy hymns  for help Sarasvati  who slayeth  the Paravatas.   
3 Thou  castest  down,  Sarasvati,  those  who scorned  the Gods,  the brood  of every  Brsaya  skilled  in magic  a
rts.  
Thou  hast discovered  rivers  for the tribes  of men,  and, rich in wealth!  made  poison  flow away  from  them.   
4 May the divine  Sarasvati,  rich in her wealth,  protect  us well,   
Furthering  all our thoughts  with might   
5 Whoso,  divine  Sarasvati,  invokes  thee where  the prize  is set,  
Like Indra  when  he smites  the foe.  
6 Aid us, divine  Sarasvad,  thou who art strong  in wealth  and power   
Like Pusan,  give us opulence.   
7 Yea, this divine  Sarasvati,  terrible  with her golden  path,   
Foe−slayer,  claims  our eulogy.   
8 Whose  limitless  unbroken  flood,  swift−moving  with a rapid  rush,   
Comes  onward  with tempestuous  roar.  
9 She hath spread  us beyond  all foes,  beyond  her Sisters,  Holy  One,   
As Surya  spreadeth  out the days.   
10 Yea, she most  dear amid  dear stream,  Seven−sistered,  graciously  inclined,   
Sarasvati  hath earned  our praise.   
11 Guard  us from  hate Sarasvati,  she who hath filled  the realms  of earth,   
And that wide  tract,  the firmament!   
12 Seven−sistered,  sprung  from  threefold  source,  the Five Tribes'  prosperer,  she must  be  
Invoked  in every  deed  of might.  
13 Marked  out by majesty  among  the Mighty  Ones,  in glory  swifter  than the other  rapid  Streams,   
 
Created  vast for victory  like a chariot,  Sarasvati  must  be extolled  by every  sage.   
14 Guide  us, Sarasvati,  to glorious  treasure:  refuse  us not thy milk,  nor spurn  us from  thee.   
Gladly  accept  our friendship  and obedience:  let us not go from  thee to distant  countries.   
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  LXII.  Asvins.  
1. I LAUD  the Heroes  Twain,  this heaven's  Controllers:  singing  with songs  of praise  I call the Asvins,   
Fain in a mome nt, when  the morns  are breaking,  to part the earth's  ends and the spacious  regions.   
2 Moving  to sacrifice  through  realms  of lustre  they light the radiance  of the car that bears  them.   
Traversing  many  wide  unmeasured  spaces,  over the wastes  ye pass,  and fields, and waters.   
3 Ye to that bounteous  path of yours,  ye mighty,  have  ever borne  away  our thoughts  with horses,   
Mind−swift  and full of vigour,  that the trouble  of man who offers  gifts might  cease  and slumber.   
4 So ye, when  ye have  yoked  your chariotho rses, come  to the hymn  of the most  recent  singer.   
Our true and ancient  Herald  Priest  shall  bring  you, the Youthful,  bearing  splendour,  food,  and vigour.   
5 With  newest  hymn  I call those  Wonder−Workers,  ancient  and brilliant,  and exceeding  mighty,   
Bringer s of bliss to him who lauds  and praises,  bestowing  varied  bounties  on the singer.   
6 So ye, with birds,  out of the sea and waters  bore Bhujyu,  son of Tugra,  through  the regions.   
Speeding  with winged  steeds  through  dustless  spaces,  out of the bosom  of the flood  they bore him.  
7 Victors,  car−borne,  ye rent the rock asunder:  Bulls,  heard  the calling  of the eunuch's  consort.   
Bounteous,  ye filled  the cow with milk for Sayu:  thus,  swift  and zealous  Ones,  ye showed  your favour.   
8 Whate'er  from  olden  time,  Heav en, Earth!  existeth  great  object  of the wrath  of Gods  and mortals,   
Make  that, Adityas,  Vasus,  sons of Rudra,  an evil brand  to one allied  with demons.   
9 May he who knows,  as Varuna  and Mitra,  air's realm,  appointing  both the Kings  in season,   
Against  the secret  fiend  cast forth  his weapon,  against  the lying  words  that strangers  utter.   
10 Come  to our home  with friendly  wheels,  for offipring;  come  on your radiant  chariot  rich in heroes.   
Strike  off, ye Twain,  the heads  of our assailants  who with man's  treac herous  attack  approach  us.  
11 Come  hitherward  to us with teams  of horses,  the highest  and the midmost  and the lowest.   
Bountiful  Lords,  throw  open  to the singer  doors  e'en of the firm−closed  stall of cattle.   
 
HYMN  LXIII.  Asvins.  
1. WHERE  hath the hymn  with reverence,  like an envoy,  found  both fair Gods  to−day,  invoked  of many−
  
Hymn  that hath brought  the two Nasatyas  hither?  To this man's  thought  be ye, both Gods,  most  friendly.   
2 Come  readily  to this mine  invocation,  lauded  with songs,  that ye may drink the juices.   
Compass  this house  to keep  it from  the foeman,  that none  may force  it, either  near or distant.   
3 Juice  in wide  room  hath been  prepared  to feast  you: for you the grass  is strewn,  most  soft to tread  on.  
With  lifted  hands  your servant  hath adored  you. Yearningfor  you the press−stones  shed the liquid.   
4 Agni  uplifts  him at your sacrifices:  forth  goes the oblation  dropping  oil and glowing.   
Up stands  the grateful−minded  priest,  elected,  appointed  to invoke  the two Nasatyas.   
5 Lords  of great  wealth!  for glory,  Surya's  Daughter  mounted  your car that brings  a hundred  succours.   
Famed  for your magic  arts were  ye, magicians!  amid  the race of Gods,  ye dancing  Heroes!   
6 Ye Twain,  with these  your glories  fair to look on, brought,  to win victory,  rich gifts for Surya.   
After  you flew your birds,  marvels  of beauty:  dear to our hearts!  the song,  well lauded,  reached  you.  
7 May your winged  coursers,  best to draw.  Nasatyas!  convey  you to the object  of your wishes.   
Swift  as the thought,  your car hath been  sent onward  to food of many  a sort and dainty  viands.   
8 Lords  of great  wealth,  manifold  is your bounty:  ye filled  our cow with food that never  faileth.   
Lovers  of sweetness!  yours  are praise  and singers,  and poured  libations  which  have sought  your favour .  
 
9 Mine  were  two mares  of Puraya,  brown,  swift−footed;  a hundred  with Sumidha,  food with Peruk  Sanda  
gave ten gold−decked  and well−trained  horses,  tame  and obedient  and of lofty  stature.  10 Nasatyas!  Puru
panthas  offered  hundreds,  thousands  of steeds  to him who sang your praises,  Gave,  Heroes!  to the singer  Rig Veda – English Translation  
Bharadvaja.  Ye−Wonder−Workers,  let the fiends  be slaughtered.  11 May I with princes  share  your bliss i
n freedom.  
 
HYMN  LXIV.  Dawn.  
1. THE  radiant  Dawns  have risen  up for glory,  in their white  splendour  like the waves  of waters.   
She maketh  paths  all easy,  fair to travel,  and, rich, hath shown  herself  benign  and friendly.   
2 We see that thou art good:  far shines  thy lustre;  thy beams,  thy splendours  have  flown  up to heaven.   
Decking  thyself,  thou makest  bare thy bosom,  shining  in majesty,  thou Goddess  Morning.   
3 Red are the kine and luminous  that bear her the Blessed  One who spreadeth  through  the distance.   
The foes she chaseth  like a valiant  archer,  like a swift  warrior  she repelleth  darkness.   
4 Thy ways  are easy on the hills:  thou passest  Invincible!  Se1f−luminous!  through  waters.   
So lofty  Goddess  with thine  ample  pathway,  Daughter  of Heaven,  bring  wealth  to give us comfort.   
5 Dawn,  bring  me wealth:  untroubled,  with thine  oxen  thou bearest  riches  at thy will and pleasure;   
Thou  who,  a Goddess,  Child  of Heaven,  hast shown  thee lovely  through  bounty  when  we called  thee early
.  
6 As the birds  fly forth  from  their restingplaces,  so men with store  of food rise at thy dawning.   
Yea, to the liberal  mortal  who rernaineth  at home,  O Goddess  Dawn,  much  good  thou bringest.   
 
HYMN  LXV.  Dawn.  
1. SHEDDING  her light on human  habitations  this Child  of Heaven  hath called  us from  our slumber;   
She who at night−time  with her argent  lustre  hath shown  herself  e'en through  the shades  of darkness.   
2 All this with red−rayed  steeds  have they divided:  the Dawns  on bright  cars shine  in wondrous  fashion.   
They,  bringing  near the stately  rite's  commencement,  drive  far away  the night's  surrounding  shadows.   
3 Dawns,  bringing  hither,  to the man who worships,  glory  and power  and might  and food and vigour,   
Opulent,  with imperial  sway  like heroes,  favour  your servant  and this day enrich  him.  
4 Now  is there  treasure  for the man who serves  you, now for the hero,  Dawns!  who brings  oblation;   
Now  for the singer  when  he sings  the praise−song.  Even  to one like me ye brought  aforetime.   
5 O Dawn  who standest  on the mountain  ridges,  Angirases  now praise  thy stalls  of cattle.   
With  prayer  and holy hymn  they burst  them  open:  the heroes'  calling  on the Gods  was fruitful.   
6 Shine  on us as of old, thou Child  of Heaven,on  him, rich Maid!  who serves  like Bharadvaja.   
Give  to the singer  wealth  with noble  heroes,  and upon  us bestow  wide−spreading  glory.   
 
HYMN  LXVI.  Maruts.  
1. E'EN  to the wise let that be still a wonder  to which  the general  name  of Cow  is given.   
The one hath swelled  among  mankind  for milking:  Prsni  hath drained  but once  her fair bright  udder.   
2 They who like kindled  flames  of fire are glowing,.  the Maruts,  twice  and thrice  have waxen  mighty.   
Golden  and dustless  were  their cars, invested  with their great  strength  and their heroic  vigour.   
3 They  who are Sons  of the rain−pouring  Rudra,  whom  the long−lasting  One had power  to foster:   
The Mighty  Ones  whose  germ  great  Mother  Prsni  is known  to have  received  for man's  advantage.   
4 They  shrink  not from  the birth;  in this same  manner  still resting  there  they purge  away  reproaches.   
When  they have  streamed  forth,  brilliant,  at their pleasure,  with their own splendour  they bedew  their bodRig Veda – English Translation  
ies.  
5 Even  those  who bear the brave  bold name  of Maruts,  whom  not the active  quickly  wins  for milking.   
 
Even  the liberal  wards  not off those  fierce  ones,  those  who are light and agile  in their greatness.   
6 When,  strong  in strength  and armed  with potent  weapons,  they had united  wellformed  earth  and heaven,
  
Rodasl  stood  among  these  furious  Heroes  like splendour  shining  with her native  brightness.   
7 No team  of goats  shall  draw your car, O Maruts,  no horse  no charioteer  be he who drives  it.  
Halting  not, reinless,  through  the air it travels,  speeding  alone  its paths  through  earth  and heaven.   
8 None  may obstruct,  none  overtake,  O Maruts,  him whom  ye succour  in the strife  of battle  
For sons and progeny,  for kine and waters:  he bursts  the cow−stall  on the day of trial.  
9 Bring  a bright  hymn  to praise  the band  of Maruts,  the Singers,  rapid,  strong  in native  vigour,   
Who  conquer  mighty  strength  with strength  more  mighty:  earth  shakes  in terror  at their wars,  O Agni.   
10 Bright  like the flashing  flames  of sacrifices,  like tongues  of fire impetuous  in their onset,   
Chanting  their psalm,  singing  aloud,  like heroes,  splendid  from  birth,  invincible,  the Maruts.   
11 That swelling  band  I call with invocation,  the brood  of Rudra,  armed  with glittering  lances.   
Pure hymns  are meet  for that celestial  army:  like floods  and mountains  have the Strong  Ones  battled.   
 
HYMN  LXVIL  Mitra−Varuna.  
1. NOW  Mitra−Varuna  shall  be exalted  high by your songs,  noblest  of all existing;   
They  who,  as 'twere  with reins  are best Controllers,  unequalled  with their arms  to check  the people.   
2 To you Two Gods  is this my thought  extended,  turned  to the sacred  grass  with loving  homage.   
Give  us, O Mitra−Varuna,  a dwelling  safe from  attack,  which  ye shall  guard,  Boon−Givers!   
3 Come  hither,  Mitra−Varuna,  invited  with eulogies  and loving  adoration,   
Ye who with your might,  as Work−Controllers,  urge even men who quickly  hear to labour.   
4 Whom,  of pure origin,  like two strong  horses,  Aditi  bore as babes  in proper  season,   
Whom,  Mighty  at your birth,  the Mighty  Goddess  brought  forth  as terrors  to the mortal  foeman.   
5 As all the Gods  in their great  joy and gladness  gave you with one accord  your high dominion,   
As ye surround  both worlds,  though  wide  and spacious  your spies  are ever true and never  bewildered.   
6 So, through  the days maintaining  princely  power.  ye prop the height  as 'twere  from  loftiest  heaven.  
The Star of all the Gods,  established,  filleth  the heaven  and earth  with food of man who liveth.   
7 Take  the strong  drink,  to quaff  till ye are sated,  when  he and his attendants  fill the chamber.   
The young  Maids  brook  not that none  seeks  to win them , when,  Quickeners  of all! they scatter  moisture.   
8 So with your tongue  come  ever,  when  your envoy,  faithful  and very wise,  attends  our worship.   
Nourished  by holy oil! he this yGur  glory:  annihilate  the sacrificer's  trouble.   
9 When,  Mitra−Varuna,  they strive against  you and break  tlie friendly  laws ye have established,   
They,  neither  Gods  nor men in estimation,  like Api's  sons have  godless  sacrifices.   
10 When  singers  in their song uplift  their voices,  some  chant  the Nivid  texts  with steady  purpose.   
Then may we sing you lauds  that shall  be fruitful:  dp ye not rival all the Gods  in greatness?   
11 O Mitra−Varuna,  may your large  bounty  come  to us hither,  near to this our dwelling,   
When  the kine haste  to us, and when  they harness  the fleet−foot  mettled  stallion for the battle.   
 
HYMN  LXVIII.  Indra−Varuna.  
1. HIS honouring  rite whose  grass  is trimmed  is offered  swiftly  to you, in Manu's  wise,  accordant,   
The rite which  Indra−Varuna  shall  carry  this day to high success  and glorious  issue.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
2 For at Gods'  worship they are best through  vigour;  they have  become  the strongest  of the Heroes;   
With  mighty  strength,  most  liberal  of the Princes,  Chiefs  of the host,  by Law made  Vrtra's  slayers.   
3 Praise  those  Twain  Gods  for powers  that merit  worship,  Indra  and Varuna , for bliss,  the joyous.   
One with his might  and thunderbolt  slays  Vrtra;  the other  as a Sage  stands  near in troubles.   
4 Though  dames  and men have  waxen  strong  and mighty,  and all the Gods  selfpraised  among  the Heroes,   
 
Ye, Indra−Varuna,  have  in might  surpassed  them,  and thus were  ye spread  wide,  O Earth  and Heaven.   
5 Righteous  is he, and liberal  and helpful  who,  Indra−Varuna,  brings  you gifts with gladness.   
That bounteous  man through  food shall  conquer  faemen,  and win him opulence  and wealthy  people.   
6 May wealth  which  ye bestow  in food and treasure  on him who brings  you gifts and sacrifices,   
Wealth,  Gods!  which  breaks  the curse  of those  who vex us, be, Indra−Varuna,  e'en our own possession.   
7 So also, Indra−Varuna,  may our princes  have  riches  swift  to save,  with Gods  to guard  them−   
They  whose  great  might  gives  victory  in battles,  and their triumphant  glory  spreads  with swiftness.   
8 Indra.  and Varuna,  Gods  whom  we are lauding,  mingle  ye wealth  with our heroic  glory.   
May we, who praise  the strength  of what  is mighty,  pass dangers,  as with boats  we cross  the waters.   
9 Now  will I sing a dear and far−extending  hymn  to Varuna  the God,  sublime,  imperial  Lord,   
Who,  mighty  Governor,  Eternal,  as with flame,  illumines  both wide  worlds  with majesty  and power.   
10 True  to Law,  Indra−Varuna,  drinkers  of the juice,  drink  this pressed  Soma  which  shall  give you raptur
ous 
joy.  
Your  chariot  cometh  to the banquet  of the Gods,  to sacrifice,  as it were  home,  that ye may drink.   
11 Indra and Varuna,  drink  your fill, ye Heroes,  of this invigorating  sweetest  Soma.   
This juice  is shed by us that ye may quaff  it: on this trimmed  grass  be seated,  and rejoice  you  
 
HYMN  LXIX.  Indra−Visnu  
1. INDRA  and Visnu,  at my task's  completion  I urge you on with food and sacred  service.   
Accept  the sacrifice  and grant  us riches,  leading  us on by unobstructed  pathways.   
2 Ye who inspire  all hymns,  Indra  and Visnu,  ye vessels  who contain  the Soma  juices,   
May hymns  of praise  that now are sung  address  you, the lauds  that are recited by the singers.   
3 Lords  of joy−giving  draughts,  Indra  and Visnu,  come,  giving  gifts of treasure,  to the Soma.   
With  brilliant  rays of hymns  let chanted  praises,  repeated  with the lauds,  adorn  and deck  you.  
4 May your foe−conquering  horses  bring  you hither,  Indra  and Visnu,  sharers  of the banquet.   
Of all our hymns  accept  the invocations  list to my prayers  and hear the songs  I sing you.  
5 This your deed,  Indra−Visnu,  must  be lauded:  widely  ye strode  in the wild joy of Soma.   
Ye made  the firmament  of larger  compass,  and made  the regions  broad  for our existence.   
6 Strengthened  with sacred  offerings,  IndraVisnu,  first eaters,  served  with worship  ana oblation,   
Fed with the holy oil, vouchsafe  us riches  ye are the lake,  the vat that holds  the Soma.   
7 Drink of this meath,  O Indra,  thou,  and Visnu;  drink  ye your fill of Soma,  Wonder−Workers.   
The sweet  exhilarating  juice  hath reached  you. Hear  ye my prayers,  give ear unto my calling.   
8 Ye Twain  have conquered,  ne'er  have  yc been  conquered:  never  hath either of the Twain  been  vanquish
ed.  
Ye, Indra−Visnu,  when  ye fought  the battle,  produced  this infinite  with three  divisions.   
 
HYMN  LXX.  Heaven  and Earth.  
1. FILLED  full of fatness,  compassing  all things  that be, wide,  spacious,  dropping  meath,  beautiful  in theiRig Veda – English Translation  
r 
form,   
The Heaven  and the Earth  by Varuna's  decree,  unwasting,  rich in germs,  stand  parted  each from  each.   
2 The Everlasting  Pair, with full streams,  rich in milk,  in their pure rule pour fatness  for the pious  man.   
Ye who are Regents  of this world, O Earth  and Heaven,  pour into us the genial  flow that prospers  meit.   
3 Whoso,  for righteous  life, pours  offerings  to you, O Heaven  and Earth,  ye Hemispheres,  that man succe
eds.  
He in his seed is born again  and spreads  by Law:  from  you flow things  diverse in form,  but ruled  alike.   
4 Enclosed  in fatness,  Heaven  and Earth  are bright  therewith:  they mingle  with the fatness  which  they still 
increase.   
Wide,  broad,  set foremost  at election  of the priest,  to them  the singers  pray for bliss to further  them.   
 
5 May Heaven  and Earth  pour down  the balmy  rain for us, balm−dropping,  yielding  balm,  with balm  upo
n 
your path,   
Bestowing  by your Godhead  sacrifice  and wealth,  great  fame  and strength  for us and good  heroic  might.   
6 May Heaven  and Earth  make  food swell  plenteously  for us, all−knowing  Father,  jother,  wondrous  in the
ir 
works.   
Pouring  out bounties,  may,  in union,  both the Worlds,  all beneficial,  send us gain,  and power,  and wealth.   
 
HYMN  LXXI.  Savitar.  
1. FULL  of effectual  wisdom  Savitar  the God hath stretched  out golden  arms  that he may bring  forth  life.  
Young  and most  skilful,  while  he holds  the region  up, the Warrior  sprinkles  fatness  over both his hands.   
2 May we enjoy  the noblest  vivifying  force  of Savitar  the God,  that he may give us wealth:   
For thou art mighty  to produce  and lull to rest the world  of life that moves  on two feet and on four.   
3 Protect  our habitation,  Savitar,  this day, with guardian  aids around,  auspicious,  firm and true.  
God of the golden  tongue,  keep  us for newest  bliss:  let not the evil−wisher  have  us in his power.   
4 This Savitar  the God,  the golden−handed,  Friend  of the home,  hath risen  to meet  the twilight.   
With  cheeks  of brass,  with pleasant  tongue,  the Holy,  he sends  the worshipper  rich gifts in plenty.   
5 Like a Directo r, Savitar  hath extended  his golden  arms,  exceeding  fair to look on.  
He hath gone  up the heights  of earth  and heaven,  and made  each monster  fall and cease  from  troubling.   
6 Fair wealth,  O Savitar,  to−day,  to−morrow,  fair wealth  produce  for us each day that passes.   
May we through  this our song be happy  gainers,  God,  of a fair and spacious  habitation.   
 
HYMN  LXXII.  Indra−Soma.  
1. GREAT  is this might  of yours,  Indra  and Soma:  the first high exploits  were  your own achievements.   
Ye found  the Sun ye found  the light of heaven:  ye killed  all darkness  and the Gods'  blasphemers.   
2 Ye, Indra−Soma,  gave  her light to Morning,  and led the Sun on high with all his splendour.   
Ye stayed  the heaven  with a supporting  pillar,  and spread  abroad  apart,  the Earth,  the Moth er.  
3 Ye slew the flood  −obstructing  serpent  Vrtra,  Indra  and Soma:  Heaven  approved  your exploit.   
Ye urged  to speed  the currents  of the rivers,  and many  seas have  ye filled  full with waters.   
4 Ye in the unripe  udders  of the milch−kine  have  set the ripe milk,  Indra,  thou,  and Soma.   
Ye have  held fast the unimpeded  whiteness  within  these  many−coloured  moving  creatures.   
5 Verily  ye bestow,  Indra  and Soma,  wealth,  famed,  victorious,  passing  to our children.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Ye have  invested  men,  ye Mighty  Beings,  with manl y strength  that conquers  in the battle.   
 
HYMN  LXXIII.  Brhaspati.  
1. SERVED  with oblations,  first−born,  mountain−render,  Angiras'  son, Brhaspati,  the Holy,  With  twice−f
irm path,  dwelling  in light,  our Father,  roars  loudly,  as a bull, to Earth  and Heaven.  2 Brhaspati,  who mad
e for such a people  wide  room  and verge  when  Gods  were  invocated,  Slaying  his enemies,  breaks  down  th
eir castles,  quelling  his foes and conquering  those  who hate him. 3 Brhaspati  in war hath won rich treasur
es, hath won,  this God,  the great  stalls  filled  with cattle.  Striving  to win waters  and light,  resistless,  Brhas
pati with lightning  smites  the foeman.  
 
HYMN  LXXIV.  Soma−Rudra.  
1. HOLD  fast your Godlike  sway,  O Soma−Rudra:  let these  our sacrifices  quickly  reach  you.  
Placing  in every  house  your seven  great  treasures,  bring  blessing  to our quadrupeds  and bipeds.   
2 Soma  and Rudra,  chase  to every  quarter  the sickness  that hath visited  our dwelling.   
Drive  Nirrti  away  into the distance,  and give us excellent  and happy  glories.   
3 Provide,  O Soma−Rudra,  for our bodies  all needful  medicines  to heal and cure us.  
Set free and draw  away  the sin committed  which  we have still inherent  in our persons.   
4 Armed  with keen  shafts  and weapons,  kind and loving,  be gracious  unto us, Soma  and Rudra.   
Release  us from  the noose  of Varuna;  keep  us from  sorrow,  in your tender  loving−kindness.   
 
HYMN  LXXV.  Weapons  of War.  
1. THE warrior's  look is like a thunderous  rain−cloud's,  when,  armed  with mail,  he seeks  the lap of battle.   
Be thou victorious  with unwounded  body:  so let the thickness  of thy mail protect  thee.   
2 With  Bow  let us win kine,  with Bow  the battle,  with Bow  be victors  in our hot encounters.   
The Bow  brings  grief  and sorrow  to the foeman:  armed  with the Bow  may we subdue  all regions.   
3 Close  to his car, as fain to speak,  She presses,  holding  her well−loved  Friend  in her embraces.   
Strained  on the Bow,  She whispers  like a woman−this  Bowstring  that preserves  us in the combat.   
4 These,  meeting  like a woman  and her lover,  bear,  mother−like,  their child  upon  their bosom.   
May the two Bow−ends,  starting  swift  asunder,  scatter,  in unison,  the foes who hate us.  
5 With  many a son, father  of many  daughters,  He clangs  and clashes  as he goes to battle.   
Slung  on the back,  pouring  his brood,  the Quiver  vanquishes  all opposing  bands  and armies.   
6 Upstanding  in the Car the skilful  Charioteer  guides  his strong  Horses  on whithers oe'er  he will.  
See and admire  the strength  of those  controlling  Reins  which  from  behind  declare  the will of him who dri
ves.  
7 Horses  whose  hoofs  rain dust are neighing  loudly,  yoked  to the Chariots,  showing  forth  their vigour,   
With  their forefeet  descen ding on the foemen,  they,  never  flinching,  trample  and destroy  them.   
8 Car−bearer  is the name  of his oblation,  whercon  are laid his Weapons  and his Armour.   
So let us here,  each day that passes,  honour  the helpful  Car with hearts  exceeding  joyful.   
9 In sweet  association  lived  the fathers  who gave us life, profound  and strong  in trouble,   
Unwearied,  armed  with shafts  and wondrous  weapons,  free, real heroes,  conquerors  of armies.   
10 The Brahmans,  and the Fathers  meet  for Soma−draughts,  and, graciously  inclined,  unequalled  Heaven  
and 
Earth.   