Rig Veda – English Translation  
11 May this your laud,  may this your song,  O Maruts,  sung by the poet,  Mana's   
son, Mandarya,   
Bring  offspring  for ourselves  with.  food to feed us. May we find strengthening  food in full abundance.   
 
HYMN  CLXVIII.  Maruts.  
1. SWIFT  gain is his who hath you near at every  rite: ye welcome  every  song  of himwho  serves  the God
s. So may I turn you hither  with fair hymns  of praise  to give great  succour  for the weal  of both the world
s. 2 Surrounding,  as it were,  self−born,  self−powerful,  they spring  to life the shakers−down  of food and 
light;  Like as the countess  undulations  of the floods,  worthy  of praise  when  near,  like bullocks  and like 
kine.  3 They  who,  like Somas  with their well−grown  stalks pressed  out, imbibed  within  the heart,  dwell  
there  in 
friendly  wise.   
Upon  their shoulders  rests as 'twere  a warrior's  spear  and in their hand  they hold a dagger  and a ring.  
4 Self−yoked  they have  descended  lightly  from  the sky. With  your own lash, Immortals,  urge yourselve's  
to 
speed.   
Unstained  by dust the Maruts,  mighty  in their strength,  have  cast down  e'en firm things,  armed  with their 
shining  spears.   
5 Who  among  you, O Maruts  armed  with lightning−spears,  moveth  you by himself,  as with the tongu e his 
jaws?   
Ye rush from  heaven's  floor  as though  ye sought  for food,  on many  errands  like the Sun's  diurnal  Steed.   
6 Say where,  then,  is this mighty  region's  farthest  bound,  where,  Maruts,  is the lowest  depth  that ye have 
reached,   
When  ye cast down  like chaff  the firmly  stablished  pile, and from  the mountain  send the glittering  
water−flood?   
7 Your  winning  is with strength,  dazzling,  with heavenly  light,  with fruit mature,  O Maruts,  fall of 
plenteousness.   
Auspicious  is your gift like a free giver's  meed, victorious,  spreading  far, as of immortal  Gods.   
8 The rivers  roar before  your chariot  fellies  when  they are uttering  the voice  of rain−clouds.   
The lightnings  laugh  upon  the earth  beneath  them,  what  time the Maruts  scatter  forth  their fatness.   
9 Prani  brought  forth,  to fight  the mighty  battle,  the glittering  army  of the restless  Maruts.   
Nurtured  together  they begat  the monster,  and then looked  round  them  for the food that strengthens.   
10 May this your laud,  may this your song  O Maruts,  sung by the poet Mana's  son,  
Mandarya,   
Bring  offspring  for ourselves  with food to feed us. May we find strengthening  food in full abundance.   
 
HYMN  CLXIX.  Indra.  
1. As, Indra,  from  great  treason  thou protectest,  yea, from  great  treachery  these  who approach  us,  
So, marking  well,  Controller  of the Maruts  grant  us their blessings,  for they are thy dearest.   
2 The various  doings  of all mortal  people  by thee are ordered,  in thy wisdom,  Indra.   
The host of Marutg  goeth  forth  exulting  to win the light−bestowing  spoil  of battle.  
3 That spear  of thine  sat firm for us, O Indra:  the Maruts  set their whole  dread  power  in motion.   
E'en Agni  shines  resplendent  in the brush−wood:  the viands  hold him as floods  hold an island.   
4 Vouchsafe  us now that opulence,  O Indra,  as guerdon  won by mightiest  donation.   
May hymns  that please  thee cause  the breast  of Vayu  to swell  as with the mead's  refreshing  sweetness.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
5 With  thee,  O Indra,  are most  bounteous  riches  that further  every  one who lives  uprightly.   
Now  may these  Maruts  show  us loving−kindness,  Gods  who of old were  ever prompt  to help us.  
6 Bring  forth  the Men who rain down  boons,  O Indra:  exert  thee in the great  terrestrial  region;   
For their broad−chested  speckled  deer are standing  like a King's  armies  on the field of battle.   
7 Heard is the roar of the advancing  Maruts,  terrific,  glittering,  and swiftly  moving,   
Who  with their rush o'erthrow  as 'twere  a sinner  the mortal  who would  fight  with those  who love him  
8 Give  to the Manas,  Indra  with Maruts,  gifts universal,  gifts of cattle foremost.   
Thou,  God,  art praised  with Gods  who must  be lauded.  May we find strengthening  food in full abundance.
  
 
HYMN  CLXX.  Indra.  Maruts.  
1. NAUGHT  is to−day,  to−morrow  naught.  Who  comprehends  the mystery?  We must  address  ourselves  u
nto another's  thought,  and lost is then the hope  we formed.   
2 The Maruts  are thy brothers.  Why,  O Indra,  wouldst  thou take our lives?   
Agree  with them  in friend ly wise,  and do not slay us in the fight.   
3 Agastya,  brother,  why dost thou neglect  us, thou who art our friend?   
 
We know  the nature  of thy mind.  Verity  thou wilt give us naught.   
4 Let them  prepare  the altar,  let them  kindle  fire in front:  we two  
Here  will spread  sacrifice  for thee,  that the Immortal  may observe.   
5 Thou,  Lord  of Wealth,  art Master  of all treasures,  thou,  Lord  of friends,  art thy  
friends'  best supporter.   
O Indra,  speak  thou kindly  with the Maruts,  and taste oblations  in their proper  season.   
 
HYMN  CLXXI.  Maruts.  
1. To you I come  with this mine  adoration,  and with a hymn  I crave  the Strong  Ones'  favour   
A hymn  that truly  makes  you joyful,  Maruts.  Suppress  your anger  and unyoke  your horses.   
2 Maruts,  to you this laud with prayer  and worship,  formed  in the mind  and heart,  ye Gods,  is offered.   
Come  ye to us, rejoicing  in your spirit,  for ye are they who make  our prayer  effective.   
3 The Maruts,  praised  by us, shall  show  us favour;  Maghavan,  lauded,  shall  be most  propitious.   
Maruts,,  may all our days that are to follow  be very pleasant,  lovely  and triumphant.   
4 I fled in terrror  from  this mighty  Indra,  my body  trembling  in alarm,  O Maruts.   
Oblations  meant  for you had been  made  ready;  these  have we set aside:  for this forgive  us.  
5 By whom  the Manas  recognize  the day−springs,  by whose  strength  at the dawn  of endless  mornings,   
Give  us, thou Mighty,  glory  with Maruts.  fierce  with the fierce,  the Strong  who givest  triumph.   
6 Do thou,  O Indra,  guard  the conquering  Heroes,  and rid thee of thy wrath  against  the Maruts,   
With  them,  the wise,  victorious  and bestowing.  May we find strengthening  food in full abundance.   
 
HYMN  CLXXII.  Maruts.  
1. WONDERFUL  let your coming  be, wondrous  with help,  ye Bounteous  Ones,  Maruts,  who gleam  as ser
pents  gleam.   
2 Far be from  us, O Maruts,  ye free givers,  your impetuous  shaft;   
Far from  us be the stone  ye hurl.  Rig Veda – English Translation  
3 O Bounteous  Givers,  touch  ye not, O Maruts,  Trnskanda's  folk;   
Lift ye us up that we may live.  
 
HYMN  CLXXIII.  Indra.  
1. THE  praise −song  let him sing forth  bursting  bird−like:  sing we that hymn  which  like heaven's  light 
expandeth,   
That the milk−giving  cows  may,  unimpeded  call to the sacred  grass  the Gods'  assembly.   
2 Let the Bull sing with Bulls  whose  toil is worship,  with a loud roar like some  wild beast  that hungers.   
Praised  God!  the glad priest  brings  his heart's  devotion;  the holy youth  presents  twofold  oblation.   
3 May the Priest  come  circling  the measured  stations,  and with him bring  the earth's  autumnal  fruitage.   
Let the Horse neigh  led near,  let the Steer  bellow:  let the Voice  go between  both worlds  as herald,   
4 To him we offer  welcomest  oblations,  the pious  bring  their strength−inspiring  praises.   
May Indra,  wondrous  in his might,  accept  them,  car−borne  and swift  to move  like the Nasatyas.   
5 Praise  thou that Indra  who is truly  mighty,  the car−borne  Warrior,  Maghavan  the Hero;   
Stronger  in war than those  who fight  against  him, borne  by strong  steeds,  who kills enclosing  darkness;   
6 Him who surpasses  heroes  in his greatness : the earth  and heavens  suffice  not for his girdles.   
Indra  endues  the earth  to be his garment,  and, God−like,  wears  the heaven  as 'twere  a frontlet,   
7 Thee,  Hero,  guardian  of the brave  in battles,  who roamest  in the van,−to  draw  thee hither,   
Indra,  the hosts  agree  beside  the Soma,  and joy, for his great  actions,  in the Chieftain.   
8 Libations  in the sea to thee are pleasant,  when  thy divine  Floods  come  to cheer  these  people.   
To thee the Cow  is sum of all things  grateful  when  with the wish  thou seekest  men and princes.   
 
9 So may we in this One be well befriended,  well aided  as it were  through  praise  of chieftains,   
That Indra  still may linger  at our worship,  as one led swift  to work,  to hear our praises.   
10 Like men in rivalry  extolling  princes,  our Friend be Indra,  wielder  of the thunder.   
Like true friends  of some  city's  lord within  them  held in good  rule with sacrifice  they help him.  
11 For every  sacrifice  makes  Indra  stronger,  yea, when  he goes around  angry  in spirit;   
As pleasure  at the ford invite s the thirsty,  as the long way brings  him who gains  his object.   
12 Let us not here contend  with Gods,  O Indra,  for here,  O Mighty  One,  is thine  own portion,   
The Great,  whose  Friends  the bounteous  Maruts  honour,  as with a stream,  his song who pours  oblati ons.  
13 Addressed  to thee is this our praise,  O Indra:  Lord  of Bay Steeds,  find us hereby  advancement.   
So mayst  thou lead us on, O God,  to comfort.  May we find strengthening  food in full abundance.   
 
HYMN  CLXXIV.  Indra.  
1. THOU  art the King  of all the Gods,  O Indra:  protect  the men,  O Asura,  preserve  us.  
Thou  Lord  of Heroes,  Maghavan,  our saver,  art faithful,  very rich, the victory−giver.   
2 Indra,  thou humbledst  tribes  that spake  with insult  by breaking  down  seven  autumn  forts,  their refuge.   
Thou  stirredst,  Blameless!  billowy  floods,  and gavest  his foe a prey to youthful  Purukutsa.   
3 With  whom  thou drivest  troops  whose  lords  are heroes,  and bringest  daylight  now,  much  worshipped  In
dra,  
With  them  guard  lion−like  wasting  active  Agni  to dwell  in our tilled fields  and in our homestead.   
4 They  through  the greatness  of thy spear,  O Indra,  shall,  to thy praise,  rest in this earthly  station.   
To loose  the floods,  to seek,  for kine,  the battle,  his Bays  he mounted  boldly  seized  the booty.   
5 Indra,  bear Kuts a, him in whom  thou joyest:  the dark−red  horses  of the Wind  are docile.   
Let the Sun roll his chariot  wheel  anear  us, and let the Thunderer  go to meet  the foemen.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
6 Thou  Indra,  Lord  of Bays,  made  strong  by impulse,  hast slain  the vexers  of thy friends,  who give not.  
They  who beheld  the Friend  beside  the living  were  cast aside  by thee as they rode onward.   
7 Indra,  the bard sang forth  in inspiration:  thou madest  earth  a covering  for the Dasa.   
Maghavan  made  the three  that gleam  with moisture,  and to his home brought  Kuyavac  to slay him.  
8 These  thine  old deeds  new bards  have  sung,  O Indra.  Thou  conqueredst,  boundest  many  tribes  for ever.   
Like castles  thou hast crushed  the godless  races,  and bowed  the godless  scorner's  deadly  weapon.   
9 A Stormer  thou hast made  the stormy  waters  flow down,  O Indra,  like the running  rivers.   
When  o'er the flood  thou broughtest  them,  O Hero,  thou keptest  Turvaga  and Yadu  safely.   
10 Indra,  mayst  thou be ours in all occasions,  protector  of the men,  most  gentle−hearted,   
Giving  us victory  over all our rivals.  May we find strengthening  food in full abundance.   
 
HYMN  CLXXV.  Indra.  
1. GLAD  thee:  thy glory  hath been  quaffed,  Lord  of Bay Steeds,  as 'twere  the bowl's  enlivening  mead.   
For thee the Strong  there  is strong  drink,  might y, omnipotent  to win.  
2 Let our strong  drink,  most  excellent,  exhilarating,  come  to thee,   
Victorious,  Indra1  bringing  gain,  immortal  conquering  in fight,   
3 Thou,  Hero,  winner  of the spoil,  urgest  to speed  the car of man.   
Burn,  like a vessel  with the flame,  the lawless  Dasyu,  Conqueror!   
4 Empowered  by thine  own might,  O Sage,  thou stolest  Sarya's  chariot  wheel.   
Thou  barest  Kutsa  with the steeds  of Wind  to Susna  as his death.   
5 Most  mighty  is thy rapturous  joy, most  splendid  is thine  active  power,   
Whe rewith,  foe−slaying,  sending  bliss,  thou art supreme  in gaining  steeds.   
6 As thou,  O Indra,  to the ancient  singers  wast ever joy, as water  to the thirsty,   
So unto thee I sing this invocation.  May we find strengthening  food in full abundance.   
 
HYMN  CLXX VI. Indra.  
1. CHEER  thee with draughts  to win us bliss:  Soma,  pierce  Indra  in thy strength.   
Thou  stormest  trembling  in thy rage,  and findest  not a foeman  nigh.   
2 Make  our songs  penetrate  to him who is the Only  One of men;   
For whom  the sacred  food is spread,  as the steer  ploughs  the barley  in.  
3 Within  whose  hands  deposited  all the Five Peoples'  treasures  rest.  
Mark  thou the man who injures  us and kill him like the heavenly  bolt.  
4 Slay everyone  who pours  no gift, who,  hard to reach,  delights  thee not.  
Bestow  on us what  wealth  he hath:  this even  the worshipper  awaits.   
5 Thou  helpest  him the doubly  strong  whose  hymns  were  sung unceasingly.   
When  Indra  fought,  O Soma,  thou helpest  the mighty  in the fray.  
6 As thou,  O Indra,  to the ancient  singers  wast ever joy, like water  to the thirsty,   
So unto thee I sing this invocation.  May we find strengthenifig  food in full abundance.   
 
HYMN  CLXXVII.  Indra.  
1. THE  Bull of men,  who cherishes  all people,  King  of the Races,  Indra,  called  of many,  
Fame−loving,  praised,  hither  to me with succour  turn having  yoked  both vigorous  Bay Horses!   
2 Thy mighty  Stallions,  yoked  by prayer,  O Indra,  thy. Coursers  to thy mighty  chariot  harnessed,−   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Ascend  thou these,  and borne  by them  come  hither:  with Soma  juice  out. poured,  Indra,  we call thee.   
3 Ascend  thy mighty  car: the mighty  Soma  is poured  for thee and sweets  are sprinkled  round  us.  
Come  down  to us−ward,  Bull of human  races,come,  having  harnessed  them,  with strong  Bay Horses.   
4 Here  is God−reaching  sacrifice,  here the victim;  here,  Indra,are  the prayers,  here is the Soma.   
Strewn  is thesacred  grass:  come  hither,  Sakra;  seatthee  and drink:  unyoke  thy two Bay Coursers.   
5 Come  to us, Indra,  come  thou highly  lauded  to the devotions  of the singer  Mana.   
Singing,  may we find early  through  thy succour,  may we find strengthening  food in full abundance.   
 
HYMN  CLXXVIII.  Indra.  
1. IF, Indra,  thou hast given  that gracious  hearing  where  with thou helpest  those  who sang thy praises.   
Blast  not the wish  that would exalt  us may I gain all from  thee,  and pay all man's  devotions.   
2 Let not the Sovran  Indra  disappoint  us in what  shall  bring  both Sisters  to our dwelling.   
To him have  run the quickly  flowing  waters.May  Indra  come  to us with life and friendship.   
3 Victorious  with the men,  Hero  in battles,  Indra,  who hearsthe  singer's  supplication,   
Will bring  his car nigh to the man who offers,  if he himself  upholds  the songs  that praise  him.  
4 Yea,Indra,  with the men,  through  love of gloryconsumes  the sacred  food which friends  have  offered.   
The ever−strengthening  song of him who worships  is sung  in fight  amid  the clash  of voices.   
5Aided  by thee,  O Maghavan,  O Indra,  may we subdue  our foes who count  them  mighty.   
Be our protector,  strengthen  and increase  us.May  we find strengthening  food in full abundance.   
 
HYMN  CLXXIX.  Rati.  
The deified  object  of this omitted  hymn  is said to be Rati or Love,  and its Rsis or authors  are Lopamudrd, 
Agastya,  and a disciple.  Lopamudra  is represented  as inviting  the caresses  of her aged husband  Agastya,  a
nd 
complaining  of his coldness  and neglect.  Agastya  responds  in stanza  3, and in the second  half of stanza  4 t
he 
disciple  or the poet briefly  tells the result  of the dialogue.  Stanza  5 is supposed  to be spoken  by the discipl
e who  has overheard  the conversation,  but its connexion  with the rest of the hymn  is not very apparent.  In 
stanza  6 'toiling  with strong  endeavour'  is a paraphrase  and not a translation  of the original  khanamanah 
khanitraib  (ligonibus  fodiens)  which  Sayana  explains  by 'obtaining  the desired  result  by means  of lauds  an
dsacrifices.'   
M. Bergaigne  is of opinion  that the hymn  has a mystical  meaning,  Agastya  being  identifiable  with the 
celestial  Soma  whom  Lopamudra,  representing  fervent  Prayer,  succeeds  after long labour  in drawing  dow
n 
from  his secret  dwelling  place.  See La Religion  Vedique,  ii. 394 f.  
1 'Through  many  autumns  have  I toiled  and laboured,  at night  and morn,  through  age−inducing  dawnings.
  
Old age impairs  the beauty  of our bodies.  Let husbands  still come  near unto their spouses.   
2 For even  the men aforetime,  law−fulfillers,  who with the Gods  declared  eternal  statutes,−−   
They  have  decided,  but have  not accomplished:  so now let Wives  come  near unto their husbands.   
3 Non inutilis  est labor  cui Dii favent:  nos omnes  aemulos  et aemulas  vincamus.   
Superemus  in hac centum  artium  pugna  in qua duas partes  convenientes  utrinque  commovemus.   
4 Cupido  me cepit  illius  tauri [viri]  qui me despicit,  utrum  hinc utrum  illinc  ab aliqua  parte  nata sit.  
Lopamudra  taururn  [mar iturn  suum]  ad se detrahit:  insipiens  illa sapientem  anhelantern  absorbet.   
5 This Soma  I address  that is most  near us, that which  hath been  imbibed  within  the spirit,   Rig Veda – English Translation  
To pardon  any sins we have committed.  Verily  mortal  man is full of longings.   
6 Agastya  thus,  toiling  with strong  endeavour,  wishing  for children,  progeny  and. power,   
Cherished  − a sage of mighty  strength  − both classes,  and with the Gods  obtained  his prayer's  fulfilment.   
By 'both  classes'  probably  priests  and princes,  or institutors  of sacrifices,  are meant.  M. Bergaigne  
understands  the expression  to mean  the two forms  or essences  of Soma,  the celestial  and the terrestrial.   
5 Membrum  suum  virile,  quod  vrotentum  fuerat,  mas ille retraxit.  Rursus  illud quod  in juvenem  filiam  
sublatum  fuerat , non aggressurus,  ad se rerahit.   
6 Quum  jam in medio  connessu,  semiperfecto  opere,  amorem  in puellam  pater  impleverat,  ambo  disceden
tes 
seminis  paulum  in terrae  superficiem  sacrorum  sede effusum  emiserunt.   
7 Quum  pater  suam  nilam  adiverat,  cum ed congre ssus suum  semen  supra  wrrarn  effudit.  Tum Dii benigni  
precem  (brahma)  prgeduerunt,  et Vastoshpatim,  legum  sacrarum  custodem,  formaverunt.   
8 Ille tauro  similis  spumam  in certamine  jactavit,  tunc discedens  pusillaximis  huc profectus  est. Quasi  dex
tro 
pede  claudus  processit,  "inutiles  fuerunt  illi mei complexus,"  ita locutus.   
9 'The fire, burning  the people,  does not approach  quickly  (by day):  the naked  (Rakasas  approach)  not Ag
ni 
by night;  the giver  of fuel, and the giver  of food,  he, the upholder  (of the rite), is born,  overcoming  enemi
es 
by his might.'   
 
HYMN  CLXXX.  Asvins.  
1. LIGHTLY  your coursers  travel  through  the regions  when  round  thesea  of air your car is flying.   
Your  golden  fellies  scatter  drops  of moisture:  drinking  the sweetness  ye atend  the Mornings.   
2 Ye as ye travel  overtake  the Courser  who flies apart,  the Friend  of man,  most  holy.   
The prayer  is that the Sister  may convey  you, all praised,  meath−drinkers!  to support  and strengthen.   
3 Ye have  deposited,  matured  within  her, in the raw cow the first milk of the milch−cow,   
Which  the bright  offerer,  shining  like a serpent  mid trees,  presents  to you whose  form  is perfect.   
4 Ye made  the fierce  heat to be full of sweetness  for Atri at his wish,  like streaming  water.   
Fire−offering  thence  is yours, O Asvins,  Heroes:  your car−wheels  speed  to us like springs  of honey.   
5 Like Tugra's  ancient  son may I, ye Mighty,  bring  you to give your gifts with milk−oblations.   
Your  greatness  compasseth  Earth,  Heaven,  and Waters:  decayed  for you is sorrow's  net, ye Holy.   
6 When,  Bounteous  Ones,  ye drive  your yoked  team  downward,  ye send,  by your own natures,  
understanding.   
Swift  as the wind  let the prince  please  and feast  you: he, like a pious  man,  gains  strength  for increase.   
7 For verily  we truthful  singers  praise you the niggard  trafficker  is here excluded.   
Now,  even  now do ye O blameless  Advins,  ye Mighty,  guard  the man whose  God is near him.  
8 You of a truth  day after day, O Asvins,  that he might  win the very plenteous  torrent,   
Agastya,  famous  among  morta l heroes,  roused  with a thousand  lauds  like sounds  of music.   
9 When  with the glory  of your car ye travel,  when  we go speeding  like the priest  of mortals,   
 
And give good  horses  to sacrificers,  may we, Nasatyas!  gain our share  of riches.   
10 With  songs  of praise  we call to−day,  O Asvins,  that your new chariot,  for our own well−being,   
That circles  heaven  with never−injured  fellies.  May we find strengthening  food in full abundance.   
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  CLXXXI.  Asvins  
1. WHAT,  dearest  Pair, is this in strength  and riches  that ye as Priests  are bring  from  the waters?   
This sacrifice  is your glorification,  ye who protect  mankind  and give them  treasures.   
2 May your pure steeds,  rain−drinkers,  bring  you hither,  swift  as the tempest,  your celestial  coursers,   
Rapid  as thought , with fair backs,  full of vigour,  resplendent  in their native  light,  O Asvins.   
3 Your  car is like a torrent  rushing  downward:  may it come  nigh,  broad−seated,  for our welfare,−   
Car holy,  strong,  that ever would  be foremost,  thought−swift,  which  ye, for whom we long,  have  mounted
.  
4 Here  sprung  to life, they both have sung  together,  with bodies  free from  stain,  with signs  that mark  them
;  
One of you Prince  of Sacrifice,  the Victor,  the other  counts  as Heaven's  auspicious  offspring.   
5 May your car−seat,  down−gliding,  golden−coloured,  according  to your wish  approach  our dwellings.   
Men shall  feed full the bay steeds  of the other,  and, Asvins  they with roars  shall  stir the regions.   
6 Forth  comes  your strong  Bull like a cloud  of autumn,  sending  abundant  food of liquid  sweetness.   
Let them  feed with the other's  ways  and vigour:  the upper  streams  have  come  and do us service.   
7 Your  constant  song  hath been  sent forth,  Disposers!  that flows  threefold  in mighty  strength,  O Asvins.   
Thus  lauded,  give the suppliant  protection  moving  or resting  hear mine  invocation.   
8 This song  of bright  contents  for you is swelling  in the men's  hall where  three−fold  grass  is.ready.   
Your  strong  rain−cloud,  ye Mighty  Ones,  hath swollen,  honouring  men as 'twere  with milk's  outpouring .  
9 The prudent  worshipper,  like Pusan,  Asvins!  praises  you as he praises  Dawn  and Agni,   
When,  singing  with devotion,  he invokes  you. May we find strengthening  food in full abundance.   
 
HYMN  CLXXXII.  Asvins.  
1. THIS  was the task. Appear  promptly,  ye prudent  Ones.  Here  is the chariot  drawn  by strong  steeds:  be y
e 
glad.   
Heart−stirring,  longed  for, succourers  of Vispala,  here are Heaven's  Sons  whose  sway  blesses  the pious  m
an.  
2 Longed  for, most  Indra−like,  mighty,  most  Marut−like,  most  w6nderful  in deed , car−borne,  best 
charioteers,   
Bring  your full chariot  hither  heaped  with liquid  sweet:  thereon,  ye Mvins,  come  to him who offers  gifts.   
3 What  make  ye there,  ye Mighty?  Wherefore  linger  ye with folk who,  offering  not, are held in high estee
m?  
Pass over them;  make  ye the niggard's  life decay:  give light unto the singer  eloquent  in praise.   
4 Crunch  up on. every  side the dogs  who bark at us: slay ye our foes,  O Asvins  this ye understand.   
Make  wealthy  every  word  of him who praises  you: accept  with favour,  both Nasatyas,  this my laud.   
5 Ye made  for Tugra's  son amid  the water−floods  that animated  ship with wings  to fly withal,   
Whereon  with God−devoted  mind  ye brought  him forth,  and fled with easy flight  from  out the mighty  sur
ge.  
6 Four  ships  most  welcome  in the midst  of ocean,  urged  by the Asvins,  save the son of Tugra,   
Him who was cast down  headlong  in the waters,  plunged  in the thick  inevitable  darkness.   
7 What  tree was that which  stood  fixed  in surrounding  sea to which  the son of Tugra  supplicating  clung?   
Like twigs,  of which  some  winged  creature  may take hold,  ye, Asvins,  bore him off safely  to your renown
.  
8 Welcome  to you be this the hymn  of praises  uttered  by Manas,  O Nasatyas,  Heroes,   
From  this our gathering  where  we offer  Soma.  May we find strengthening  food in full abundance.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
 
HYMN  CLXXXIII.  Asvins.  
1. MAKE  ready  that which  passes  thought  in swiftness,  that hath three  wheels  and triple  seat, ye Mighty,  
Whereon  ye seek the dwelling  of the pious,  whereon,  threefold,  ye fly like birds  with pinions.   
2 Light  rolls your easy chariot  faring  earthward,  what  time,  for food,  ye, full of wisdom,  mount  it.  
May this song,  wondrous  fair, attend  your glory:  ye, as ye travel,  wait on Dawn  Heaven's  Daughter.   
3 Ascend  your lightly  rolling  car, approaching  the worshipper  who turns  him to his duties,−   
Whereon  ye come  unto the house  to quicken  man and his offspring,  O Nasatyas,  Heroes.   
4 Let not the wolf,  let not the she−wolf  harm  you. Forsake  me not, nor pass me by or others.   
Here  stands  your share,  here is your hymn,  ye Mighty:  yours  are these  vessels,  full of pleasant  juices.   
5 Gotama,  Purumilha,  Atri bringing  oblations  all invoke  you for protection.   
Like one who goes strai ht to the point  directed,  ye Nasatyas,  to mine  invocation.   
6 We have passed  o'er the limit  of this darkness:  our praise  hath been  bestowed  on you, O Asvins.   
Come  hitherward  by paths  which  Gods  have  travelled.  May we find strengthening  food in full abundance.
  
 
HYMN  CLXXXIV  Asvins.  
1. LET us invoke  you both this day and after the priest is here with lauds  when  morn  is breaking:   
Nasatyas,  wheresoe'er  ye be, Heaven's  Children,  for him who is more  liberal  than the godless.   
2 With  us, ye Mighty,  let yourselves  be joyful,  glad in our stream  of Soma  slay the niggards.   
Graciously  hear my hymns  and invitations,  marking,  O Heroes,  with your cars my longing.   
3 Nasatyas,  Pusans,  ye as Gods  for glory  arranged  and set in order  Surya's  bridal.   
Your  giant  steeds  move  on, sprung  from  the waters,  like ancient  times  of Varuna  the Mighty.   
4 Your  grace  be with us, ye who love sweet  juices:  further  the hymn  sung  by the poet Mana,   
When  men are joyful  in your glorious  actions,  to win heroic  strength,  ye Bounteous  Givers.   
5 This praise  was made,  O liberal  Lords,  O Asvins,  for you with fair adornment  by the Manas.   
Come  to our house  for us and for our children,  rejoicing,  O Nasatyas,  in Agastya.   
6 We have passed  o'er the limit  of this darkness:  our praise  hath been'bestowed  on you, O Asvins.   
Come  hitherward  by paths  which  Gods  have  travelled.  may we find strengthening  food in full abundance.   
 
HYMN  CLXXXV.  Heaven  and Earth.  
1. WHETHER  of these  is elder,  whether  later?  How  were  they born?  Who  knoweth  it, ye sages?   
These  of themselves  support  all things  existing:  as on a car the Day and Night  roll onward.   
2 The Twain  uphold,  though  motionless  and footless,  a widespread  offspring  having  feet and moving.   
Like your own fon upon  his parents'  bosom,  protect  us, Heaven  and earth,  from  fearful  danger.   
3 I call for Aditi's  unrivalled  bounty,  perfect,  celes tial, deathless,  meet  for worship.   
Produce  this, ye Twain  Worlds,  for him who lauds  you. Protect  us, Heaven  and Earth,  from  fearful  danger
.  
4 May we be close  to both the Worlds  who suffer  no pain,  Parents  of Gods,  who aid with favour,   
Both  mid the Gods,  with Day and Night  alternate.  Protect  us, Heaven  and Earth,  from  fearful  danger.   
5 Faring  together,  young,  with meeting  limits,  Twin  Sisters  lying  in their Parents'  bosom,   
Kissing  the centre  of the world  together.  Protect  us, Heaven  and Earth,  from  fearful danger.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
6 Duly  I call the two wide  seats,  the mighty,  the general  Parents,  with the God's  protection.   
Who,  beautiful  to look on, make  the nectar.  Protect  us, Heaven  and Earth,  from  fearful  danger.   
7 Wide,  vast, and manifold,  whose  bounds  are distant ,−these,  reverent,  I address  at this our worship,   
The blessed  Pair, victorious,  all−sustaining.  Protect  us, Heaven  and Earth,  from  fearful  danger.   
8 What  sin we have at any time committed  against  the Gods,  our friend,  our house's  chieftain,   
Thereof  may this our hymn  be expiation.  Protect  us, Heaven  and Earth,  from  fearful  danger.   
9 May both these  Friends  of man,  who bless,  preserve  me, may they attend  me with their help and favour.   
Enrich  the man more  liberal  than the godless.  May we, ye Gods,  be stron g with food rejoicing.   
10 Endowed  with understanding,  I have  uttered  this truth,  for all to hear,  to Earth  and Heaven.   
Be near us, keep  us from  reproach  and trouble.  Father  and Mother,  with your help preserve  us.  
11 Be this my prayer  fulfilled,  O Earth  and Heaven,  wherewith,  Father  and Mother,  I address  you.  
Nearest  of Gods  be ye with your protection.  May we find strengthening  food in full abundance.   
 
HYMN  CLXXXVI.  Visvedevas.  
1. LOVED  of all men,  may Savitar,  through  praises  offered  as sacred  food,  come  to our synod,   
That you too, through−our  hymn,  ye ever−youthful,  may gladden,  at your visit,  all our people.   
2 To us may all the Gods  come  trooped  together,  Aryaman,  Mitra,  Varuna  concordant,   
That all may be promoters  of our welfare,  and with great  might  preserve  our strength  from  slackness.   
3 Agni  I sing,  the guest  you love most  dearly:  the Conqueror  through  our lauds  is friendly−minded.   
That he may be our Varuna  rich in glory  and send food like a prince  praised  by the godly.   
4 To you I seek with reverence,  Night  and Morning,  like a cow good  to milk,  with hope  to conquer,   
Preparing  on a common  day the praise.  song  with milk of various  hues within  this udder.   
5 May the great  Dragon  of the Deep  rejoice  us: as one who nourishes  her young  comes  Sindhu,  
With  whom  we will incite  the Child  of Waters  whom  vigorous  course  swift  as thought  bring  hither.   
6 Moreover  Tvastar  also shall  approach  us, one−minded  with the princes  at his visit.   
Hither  shall  come  the Vrtra−slayer  Indra,  Ruler  of men,  as stronges t of the Heroes.   
7 Him too our hymns  delight,  that yoke  swift  horses,  like mother  cows  who lick their tender  youngling.   
To him our songs  shall  yield  themselves  like spouses,  to him the most  delightful  of the Heroes.   
8 So may the Maruts,  armed  with might y weapons,  rest here on heaven  and earth  with hearts  in concord,   
As Gods  whose  cars have dappled  steeds  like torrents,  destroyers  of the foe allies  of Mitra.   
9 They  hasten  on to happy  termination  their orders  when  they are made  known  by  
glory.   
As on a fair bright  day the arrow  flieth  o'er all the barren  soil their missiles  sparkle.   
10 Incline  the Asvins  to show  grace,  and Pusan,  for power  and might  have  they,  their own possession.   
Friendly  are Visnu,  Vata,  and Rbhuksan  so may I bring  the Gods  to make  us happy.   
11 This is my reverent  thought  of you, ye Holy;  may it inspire  you, make  you dwell  among  us,−  
Thought,  toiling  for the Gods  and seeking  treasure.  May we find strengthening  food in full abundance.   
 
HYMN  CLXXXVII.  Praise  of Food.  
1. Now  will I glorify  Food  that upholds  great  strength,  By whose  invigorating  power  Trita  rent Vrtra  limb
 frorn  limb.   
2 O pleasant  Food,  O Food  of meath,  thee have we chosen  for our own,   
So be our kind protector  thou.   
3 Come  hitherward  to us, O Food,  auspicious  with auspicious  help,   
Health−bringing,  not unkind,  a dear and guileless  friend.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
4 These  juices  which,  O Food,  are thine  throughout  the regions  are diffused.   
like winds  they have  their place  in heaven.   
5 These  gifts of thine,  O Food,  O Food  most  sweet  to taste,  
These  savours  of thy juices  work  like creatures  that have mighty  necks.   
6 In thee,  O Food,  is set the spirit  of great  Gods.   
Under  thy flag brave  deeds  were  done  he slew the Dragon  with thy help.   
7 If thou be gone  unto the splendour  of the clouds,   
Even  from  thence,  O Food  of meath,  prepared  for our enjoyment,  come.   
8 Whatever  morsel  we consume  from  waters  or from  plants  of earth,  O Soma,  wax thou fat thereby.   
9 What  Soma, we enjoy  from  thee in milky  food or barley−brew,  Vatapi,  grow  thou fat thereby.   
10 O Vegetable,  Cake  of meal,  he wholesome,  firm,  and strengthening:  Vatapi,  grow  thou fat thereby.   
11 O Food,  from  thee as such have  we drawn  forth  with lauds,  like cows,  our sacrificial  gifts,   
From  thee who banquetest  with Gods,  from  thee who banquetest  with us.  
 
HYMN  CLXXXVIII.  April  
1. WINNER  of thousands,  kindled,  thou shinest  a God with Gods  to−day.  Bear  out oblations,  envoy,  Sage
.  
2 Child  of Thyself  the sacrific e is for the righteous  blent  with meath,   
Presenting  viands  thousandfold.   
3 Invoked  and worthy  of our praise  bring  Gods  whose  due is sacrifice:   
Thou,  Agni,  givest  countless  gifts.   
4 To seat a thousand  Heroes  they eastward  have  strewn  the grass  with migh t,  
Whereon,  Adityas,  ye shine  forth.   
5 The sovran  all−imperial  Doors,  wide,  good,  many  and manifold,   
Have  poured  their streams  of holy oil.  
6 With  gay adornment,  fair to see, in glorious  beauty  shine  they forth:   
Let Night  and Morning  rest them  here.   
7 Let these  two Sages  first of all, heralds  divine  and eloquent,   
Perform  for us this sacrifice.   
8 You I address,  Sarasvati,  and Bharati,  and Ila, all:  
Urge  ye us on to glorious  fame.   
9 Tvastar  the Lord  hath made  all forms  and all the cattle  of the field  
Cause  them  to multiply  for us.  
10 Send  to the Gods,  Vanaspati,  thyself,  the sacrificial  draught:   
Let Agni  make  the oblations  sweet.   
11 Agni,  preceder  of the Gods,  is honoured  with the sacred  song:   
He glows  at offerings  blest  with Hail!   
 
HYMN  CLXXX IX. Agni.  
1. BY goodly  paths  lead us to riches,  Agni,  God who knowest  every  sacred  duty.   
Remove  the sin that makes  us stray  and wander.  most  ample  adoration  will we bring  thee.   
2 Lead  us anew  to happiness,  O Agni;  lead us beyond  all danger  and afflictio n.  
Be unto us a wide  broad  ample  castle  bless,  prosper  on their way our sons and offspring.   
3 Far from  us, Agni,  put thou all diseases  let them  strike  lauds  that have  no saving  Agni.   
God,  make  our home  again  to be a b1ess  ing, with all the Immortal  Deities, O Holy.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
4 Preserve  us, Agni,  with perpetual  succour,  refulgent  in the dwelling  which  thou lovest.   
O Conqueror,  most  youthful,  let no danger  touch  him who praises  thee to−day  or after.   
5 Give  not us up a prey to sin, O Agni,  the greedy  enemy  that brings us trouble;   
Not to the fanged  that bites,  not to the toothless:  give not us up, thou Conqueror,  to the spoiler.   
6 Such  as thou art, born after Law,  O Agni  when  lauded  give protection  to our bodies,   
From  whosoever  would  reproach  or injure:  for thou,  God,  rcscuest  from  all oppression.   
7 Thou,  well discerning  both these  classes,  comest  to men at early  morn,  O holy Agni.   
Be thou obedient  unto man at evening,  to be adorned,  as keen,  by eager  suitors.   
8 To him have  we addressed  our pious  speeches,  I, Mana's  son, to him victorious  Agni.   
May we gain countless  riches  with the sages.  May we find strengthening  food in full abundance.   
 
HYMN  CXC.  Brhaspati.  
1.GLORIFY  thou Brhaspati,  the scatheless,  who must  be praised  with hymns,  sweet−tongued  and mighty,
  
To whom  as leader  of the song,  resplendent,  worthy  of lauds,  both Gods  and mortals  listen.   
2 On him wait songs  according  to the season  even  as a stream  of pious  men set moving.   
Brhaspati−for  helaid  out the expanses−  was, at the sacrifice,  vast Matarisva n.  
 
3 The praise,  the verse  that offers  adoration,  may he bring  forth,  as the Sun sends  his arms  out,  
He who gives  daily  light through  this God's  wisdom,  strong  as a dread  wild beast,  and inoffensive.   
4 His song of praise  pervades  the earth  and heaven  − let the wise worshipper  draw  it, like a courser.   
These  of Brhaspati,  like hunters'  arrows,  go to the skies  that change  their hue like serpents.   
5 Those,  God,  who count  thee as a worthless  bullock,  and, wealthy  sinners,  live on thee the Bounteous,−   
On fools like these  no blessing  thou bestowest:  Brhaspati,  thou punishest  the spiteful.   
6 Like a fair path is he, where  grass  is pleasant,  though  hard to win, a Friend  beloved  most  early.   
Those  who unharmed  by enemies  behold  us, while:  they would  make  them  bare, stood  closely  compassed
.  
7 He to whom  songs  of praise  go forth  like torrents,  as rivers  eddying  under  banks  flow sea−ward−   
Brhaspati  the wise,  the eager,  closely  looks  upon  both,  the waters  and the vessel.   
8 So hath Brhaspati,  great,  strong  and mighty, the God exceeding  powerful,  been  brought  hither.   
May he thus lauded  give us kine and horses.  May we find strengthening  food in full abundance.   
 
HYMN  CXCI  Water.  Grass.  Sun.  
1. VENOMOUS,  slightly  venomous,  or venomous  aquatic  worm,−  Both  creatures,  stinging,  unobserved,  
with poison  have  infected  me.  
2 Coming,  it kills the unobserved;  it kills them  as it goes away,   
It kills them  as it drives  them  off, and bruising  bruises  them  to death.   
3 Sara grass,  Darbha,  Kusara,  and Sairya,  Munja,  Virana,   
Whe re all these  creatures  dwell  unseen,  with poison  have infected  me.  
4 The cows  had settled  in their stalls,  the beasts  of prey had sought  their lairs,   
Extinguished  were  the lights  of men,  when  things  unseen  infected  me.  
5 Or these,  thesereptiles,  are observed,  like lurking  thieves  at evening  time.   
Seers  of all, themselves  unseen:  be therefore  very vigilant.   
6 Heaven  is your Sire, your Mother  Earth,  Soma  your Brother,  Aditi   
Your  Sister:  seeing  all, unseen,  keep  still and dwell  ye happily.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
7 Biters  of shoulder  or of limb,  with needle−stings,  most  venomous,   
Unseen,  whatever  ye may be, vanish  together  and be gone.   
8 Slayer  of things  unseen,  the Sun, beheld  of all, mounts,  eastward,  up,  
Consuming  all that are not seen,  and evil spirits  of the night.   
9 There hath the Sun−God  mounted  up, who scorches  much  and everything.   
Even  the Aditya  from  the hills,  all−seen,  destroying  things  unseen.   
10 I hang  the poison  in the Sun, a wine−skin  in a vintner's  house,   
He will not die, nor shall  we die: his path is far: he whom  Bay Horses  bear hath turned  thee to sweet  meat
h.  
11 This little bird, so very small,  hath swallowed  all thy poison  up.  
She will not die, nor shall  we die: his path is far: he whom  Bay Horses  bear hath turned  thee to sweet  mea
th.  
12 The three−t imes−seven  bright  sparks  of fire have  swallowed  up the poison's  strength.   
They  will not die, nor shall  we die: his path is far: he whom  Bay Horses  bear hath turned  thee to sweet  me
ath.  
13 Of ninety  rivers  and of nine with power  to stay the venom's  course ,−  
The names  of all I have  secured:  his path is far: he whom  Bay Horses  bear hath turned  thee to sweet  meat
h.  
14 So have  the peahens  three−times−seven,  so have  the maiden  Sisters  Seven   
Carried  thy venom  far away,  as girls bear water  in their jars.  
15 The poison−insect  is so small;  I crush  the creature  with a stone.   
I turn the poison  hence  away,  departed  unto distant  lands.   
16 Forth  issuing  from  the mountain's  side the poison−insect  spake  and said:   
The scorpion's  venom  hath no strength  Scorpion,  thy venom  is but weak.   
 
RIG VEDA  − BOOK  THE SECOND.   
HYMN  I. Agni.  
1. THOU,  Agni,  shining  in thy glory  through  the days,  art brought  to life from  out the waters,  from  the sto
ne:  
From  out the forest  trees  and herbs  that grow  on ground,  thou,  Sovran  Lord  of men art generatad  [sic] pur
e.  
2 Thine  is the Herald's  task and Cleanser's  duly timed;  Leader  art thou,  and Kindler  for the pious  man.   
Thou  art Director,  thou the ministering  Priest:  thou art the Brahman,  Lord  and Master  in our home.   
3 Hero  of Heroes,  Agni! Thou  art Indra,  thou art Visnu  of the Mighty  Stride,  adorable:   
Thou,  Brahmanaspati,  the Brahman  finding  wealth:  thou,  O Sustainer,  with thy wisdom  tendest  us.  
4 Agni,  thou art King  Varuna  whose  laws stand  fast; as Mitra,  Wonde r−Worker,  thou must  be implored.   
Aryaman,  heroes'  Lord,  art thou,  enrich  ing all, and liberal  Amsa  in the synod,  O thou God.   
5 Thou  givest  strength,  as Tvastar,  to the worshipper:  thou wielding  Mitra's  power  hast kinship  with the 
Dames.   
Thou,  urging  thy fleet coursers,  givest  noble  steeds:  a host of heroes  art thou with great  store  of wealth.   
6 Rudra  art thou,  the Asura  of mighty  heaven:  thou art the Maruts'  host,  thou art the Lord  of food,   
Thou  goest  with red winds:  bliss hast thou in thine  home.  As Pusan thou thyself  protectest  worshippers.   
7 Giver  of wealth  art thou to him who honours  thee;  thou art God Savitar,  granter  of precious  things.   
As Bhaga,  Lord  of men!  thou rulest  over wealth,  and guardest  in his house  him who hath served  thee well.Rig Veda – English Translation  
  
8 To thee,  the people's  Lord  within  the house,  the folk press  forward  to their King  most  graciously  incline
d.  
Lord  of the lovely  look,  all things  belong  to thee:  ten, hundred,  yea, a thousand  are outweighed  by thee.   
9 Agni,  men seek thee as a Father  with their prayers,  win thee,  bright−formed,  to brotherhood  with holy a
ct.  
Thou  art a Son to him who duly worships  thee,  and as a trusty  Friend  thou guardest  from  attack.   
10 A Rbhu  art thou,  Agni,  near to be adored  thou art the Sovran  Lord  of foodful  spoil  and wealth.   
Thou  shinest  brightly  forth,  thou burnest  to bestow:  pervading  sacrifice,  thou lendest  us thine  help.   
11 Thou,  God,  art Aditi  to him who offers  gifts:  thou,  Hotri,  Bharati,  art strengthened  by the song.   
Thou  art the hundred−wintered  Ila to give strength,  Lord  of Wealth!  Vrtra−slayer  and Sarasvati.   
12 Thou,  Agni,  cherished  well,  art highest  vital power;  in thy delightful  hue are glories  visible.   
Thou  art the lofty  might  that furthers  each design:  thou art wealth  manifold,  diffused  on every  side.  
13 Thee,  Agni,  have the Adityas  taken  as their mouth;  the Bright  Ones  have  made  thee,  O Sage,  to be thei
r 
tongue.   
They  who love offerings  cling  to thee at solemn  rites:  by thee the Gods  devour  the duly offered  food.   
14 By thee,  O Agni,  all the Immortal  guileless  Gods  cat with thy mouth  the oblation  that is offered  them.   
By thee do mortal  men give sweetness  to their drink.  Bright  art thou born,  the embryo  of the plants  of eart
h.  
15 With  these  thou art united,  Agni;  yea thou,  God of noble  birth,  surpasse st them  in majesty,   
Which,  through  the power  of good,  here spreads  abroad  from  thee,  diffused  through  both the worlds,  
throughout  the earth  and heaven.   
16 The princely  worshippers  who send to those  who sing thy praise,  O Agni,  guerdon  graced  with kine an
d 
steeds,−   
Lead  thou both these  and us forward  to higher  bliss.  With  brave  men in the assembly  may we speak  aloud
.  
 
HYMN  II. Agni.  
1. WITH  sacrifice  exalt  Agni  who knows  all life; worship  him 'with  oblation  and the song  of praise,   
Well  kindled,  nobly  fed; heaven's  Lord,  Celestial  Priest,  who labours  at the pole where  deeds  of might  are 
done.   
2 At night  and morning,  Agni,  have  they called  to thee,  like milch−kine  in their stalls  lowing  to meet  their 
young.   
As messenger  of heaven  thou lightest  all night long the families  of men.  Thou  Lord  of precious  boons.   
3 Him have  the Gods  established  at the region's  base,  doer of wondrous  deeds,  Herald  of heaven  and earth
;  
 
Like a most  famous  car, Agni  the purely  bright,  like Mitra.  to be glorified  among  the folk.  
4 Him have  they set in his own dwelling,  in the vault,  like the Moon  waxing,  fulgent,  in the realm  of air.  
Bird of the firmament,  observant  with his eyes,  guard  of the place  as 'twere,  looking  to Gods  and men.   
5 May he as Priest  encompass  all the sacrifice.  men throng  to him with offerings  and with hymns  of prais
e.  
Raging  with jaws of gold among  the growing  plants,  like heaven  with all the stars,  he quickens  earth  and s
ky.  Rig Veda – English Translation  
6 Such  as thou art, brilliantly  kindled  for our weal,  a liberal  giver,  send us riches  in thy shine,   
For our advantage,  Agni,  God,  bring  Heaven  and Earth  hither  that they may taste oblation  brought  by man
.  
7 Agni,  give us great  wealth,  give riches  thousandfold.  unclose  to us, like doors,  strength  that shall  bring  
renown.   
Make  Heav en and Earth  propitious  through  the power  of prayer,  and like the sky's  bright  sheen  let mornin
gs 
beam  on us.  
8 Enkindled  night  by night  at every  morning's  dawn,  may he shine  forth  with red flame  like the realm  of 
light,−   
Agni  adored  in beauteous  rites with lauds  of men,  fair guest  of living  man and King  of all our folk.  
9 Song  chanted  by us men,  O Agni,  Ancient  One,  has swelled  unto the deathless  Gods  in lofty  heaven−   
A milch−cow  yielding  to the singer  in the rites wealth  manifold,  in hundreds,  even as he wills.   
10 Agni,  may we show  forth  our valour  with the steed  or with the power  of prayer  beyond  all other  men;   
And over the Five Races  let our glory  shine  high like the realm  of light and unsurpassable.   
11 Such,  Conqueror!  be to us, be worthy  of our praise,  thou for whom  princes  nobly  born exert  themselve
s;  
Whose  sacrifice  the strong  seek,  Agni,  when  it shines  for never−failing  offspring  in thine  own abode.   
12 Knower  of all that lives,  O Agni  may we both,  singers  of praise  and chiefs,  be in thy keep ing still.  
Help  us to wealth  exceeding  good  and glorious,  abundant,  rich in children  and their progeny.   
13 The princely  worshippers  who send to those  who sing thy praise,  O Agni,  guerdon,  graced  with kine a
nd 
steeds,−   
Lead  thou both these  and us forward  to higher  bliss.  With  brave  men in the assembly  may we speak  aloud
.  
 
HYMN  III. Apris.  
1. AGNI  is set upon  the earth  well kindled;  he standeth  in the presence  of all beings.   
Wise,  ancient,  God,  the Priest  and Purifier,  let Agni  serve  the Gods  for he is worthy.   
2 May Narasamsa  lighting  up the chambers,  bright  in his majesty  through  threefold  heaven,   
Steeping  the gift with oil diffusing  purpose,  bedew  the Gods  at chiefest  time of worship.   
3 Adored  in heart,  as is thy right,  O Agni,  serve  the Gods  first to−day  before  the mortal.   
Bring  thou the Marut  host.  Ye men do worship  to Indra  seated  on the grass,  eternal.   
4 O Grass  divine,  increasing,  rich in heroes,  strewn  for wealth'  sake,  well laid upon  this altar,−   
On this bedewed  with oil sit ye, O Vasus,  sit all ye Gods,  ye Holy,  ye Adityas.   
5 Wide  be the Doors,  the Goddesses,  thrown  open,  easy to pass,  invoked,  through  adorations,   
Let them  unfold,  expansive,  everlasting,  that sanctify  the class  famed,  rich in heroes.   
6 Good  work  for us, the glorious  Night and Morning,  like female  weavers,  waxen  from  aforetime,   
Yielders  of rich milk,  interweave  in concert  the long−extended  thread,  the web of worship.   
7 Let the two heavenly  Heralds,  first, most  wise,  most  fair, present  oblation  duly with the sacred  verse ,  
Worshipping  God at ordered  seasons  decking  them  at three  high places  at the centre  of the earth.   
8 Sarasvati  who perfects  our devotion,  Ila divine,  Bharati  all surpassing,−   
Three  Goddesses,  with power  inherent,  seated,  protect  this holy Grass,  our flawless  refuge!   
9 Born  is the pious  hero swift  of hearing,  like gold in hue, well formed,  and full of vigour.   
May Tvastar  lengthen  our line and kindred,  and may they reach  the place  which  Gods  inhabit.   
10 Vanaspati  shall  stand  anear  and start us, and Agni  with his arts prepare  oblation.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Let the skilled  heavenly  Immolator  forward  unto the Gods  the offering  thrice  anointed.   
11 Oil has been  mixt:  oil is his habitation.  In oil he rests:  oil is his proper  province.   
Come  as thy wont  is: O thou Steer,  rejoice  thee;  bear off the oblation  duly consecrated.   
 
HYMN  IV Agni.  
1. FOR  you I call theglorious  refulgent  Agni,  the guest  of men,  rich in oblations   
Whom  all must  strive  to win even  as a lover,  God among  godly  people,  Jatavedas.   
2 Bhrgus  who served  him in the home  of waters  set him of old in houses  of the living.   
Over  all worlds  let Agni  be the Sovran,  the messenger  of Gods  with rapid  coursers.   
3 Among  the tribes  of men the Gods  placed  Agni  as a dear Friend  when  they would  dwell  among  them.   
Against  the longing  nights  may he shine  brightly,  and show  the offerer  in the house  his vigour.   
4 Sweet  is his growth  as of one's  own possessions;  his look when  rushing  fain to burn is lovely.   
He darts  his tongue  forth,  like a harnessed  courser  who shakes  his flowing  tail, among  the bushes.   
5 Since  they who honour  me have  praised  my greatness,−he  gave,  as 'twere,  his hue to those  who love hi
m.  
Known  is he by his bright  delightful  splendour,  and waxing  old renews  his youth  for ever.   
6 Like one athirst,  he lighteth  up the forests;  like water  down  the chariot  ways  he roareth.   
On his black  path he shines  in burning  beauty,  marked  as it were  the heaven  that smiles  through  vapour.   
7 Around,  consuming  the broad  earth,  he wanders,  free roaming  like an ox without  a herdsman ,−  
Agni  refulgent,  burning  up the bushes,  with blackened  lines,  as though  the earth  he seasoned.   
8 I, in remembrance  of thine  ancient  favour  have  sung  my hymn  in this our third  assembly.   
O Agni,  give us wealth  with store  of heroes  and mighty  strength  in food and noble  offspring.   
9 May the Grtsamadas,  serving  in secret,  through  thee,  O Agni,  overcome  their neighbours,   
Rich  in good  heroes  and subduing  foemen.  That vital power  give thou to chiefs  and singers.   
 
HYMN  V. Agni.  
1. HERALD  and teacher  was he born,  a guardian  for our patrons'  help,  Earner  by rites of noble  wealth.  Th
at Strong  One may we grasp  and guide;  2 In whom,  Leader  of sacrifice,  the seven  reins,  far extended,  mee
t; Who  furthers,  man−like,  eighth  in place,  as Cleanser,  all the work  divine.  3 When  swift  he follows  this 
behest,  bird−like  he chants  the holy prayers.  He holds  all knowledge  in his grasp  even  as the felly rounds  t
he wheel.  4 Together  with pure mental  power,  pure,  as Director,  was he born.  Skilled  in his own unchangi
ng laws he waxes  like the growing  boughs.  5 Clothing  thern  in his hues,  the kine of him the Leader  wait o
n him. Is he not better  than the Three,  the Sisters  who have come  to us? 6 Whe n, laden  with the holy oil, t
he Sitster  [sic] by the Mother  stands,  The Priest  delights  in their approach,  as corn at coming  of the rain. 7
 For his support  let him perform  as ministrant  his priestly  task;  Yea, song  of praise  and sacrifice:  we have 
bestowed , let us obtain.  8 That so this man well skilled,  may pay worship  to all the Holy  Ones.  And,  Agni
, this our sacrifice  which  wehave  here prepared,  to thee.  
 
HYMN  VI. Agni.  
1. AGNI,  accept  this flaming  brand,  this waiting  with my prayer  on thee:   
Hear  graciously  these  songs  of praise.   
2 With  this hymn  let us honour  thee,  seeker  of horses,  Son of Strength,   Rig Veda – English Translation  
With  this fair hymn,  thou nobly  born.   
3 As such,  lover  of song,  with songs,  wealth−lover,  giver  of our wealth!   
With  reverence  let us worship  thee.   
4 Be thou for us a liberal  Prince,  giver  and Lord  of precious  things.   
Drive  those  who hate us far away.   
 
5 Such  as thou art, give rain from  heaven,  give strength  which  no man may resist:   
Give  food exceeding  plentiful.   
6 To him who lauds  thee,  craving  help, most  youthful  envoy!  through  our song,   
Most  holy Herald!  come  thou nigh.   
7 Between  both races,  Agni,  Sage,  well skilled  thou passest  to and fro,  
As envoy  friendly  to mankind.   
8 Befriend  us thou as knowing  all. Sage,  duly worship  thou the Gods,   
And seat thee on this sacred  grass.   
 
HYMN  VII. Agni.  
1. VASU,  thou most  youthful  God,  Bharata,  Agni,  bring  us wealth,  Excellent,  splendid,  much−desired.   
2 Let no malignity  prevail  against  us, either  God's  or man's.   
Save  us from  this and enmity.   
3 So through thy favour  may we force  through  all our enemies  a way,   
As 'twere  through  streaming  water−floods.   
4 Thou,  Purifier  Agni,  high shinest  forth,  bright,  adorable,   
When  worshipped  with the sacred  oil.  
5 Ours  art thou,  Agni,  Bharata,  honoured  by us with barren  cows,   
With  bullocks  and with kine in calf  
6 Wood−fed,  bedewed  with sacred  oil, ancient,  Invoker,  excellent,   
The Son of Strength,  the Wonderful.   
 
HYMN  VIII.Agni.  
1. Now  praise,  as one who strives  for strength,  the harnessing  of Agni's  car,  
The liberal,  the most  splendid  One;   
2 Who,  guiding  worshippers  aright,  withers,  untouched  by age, the foe:  
When  worshipped  fair to look upon;   
3 Who  for his glory  is extolled  at eve and morning  in our homes,   
Whose  statute  is inviolate;   
4 Who  shines  refulge nt like the Sun, with brilliance  and with fiery  flame,   
Decked  with imperishable  sheen.   
5 Him Atri, Agni,  have  our songs  Strengthened  according  to his sway:   
All glories  hath he made  his own.   
6 May we with Agni's,  Indra's  help,  with Soma's,  yea, of all the Gods,   
Uninjured  dwell  together  still, and conquer  those  who fight  with us.  
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  IX. Agni.  
1. ACCUSTOMED  to the Herald's  place,  the Herald  hath seated  him, bright,  splendid,  passing  mighty,   
Whose  foresight  keeps  the Law from  violation,  excellent,  pure−tongued,  bringing  thousands,  Agni.   
2 Envoy  art thou,  protector  from  the foeman,  strong  God,  thou leadest  us to higher  blessings.   
Refulgent,  be an ever−heedful  keeper,  Agni,  for us and for our seed offspring.   
3 May we adore  thee in thy loftiest  birth place,  and, with our praises,  in thy lower  station.   
The place  whence  thou issued  forth  I worship:  to thee well kindled  have  they paid oblations.   
4 Agni,  best Priest,  pay worship  with oblation;  quickly  commend  the gift to be presented;   
For thou art Lord  of gathered  wealth  and treasure.  of the bright  song  of praise  thou art inventor.   
5 The twofold  opulence,  O Wonder−Worker,  of thee new−born  each day never  decreases.   
 
Enrich  with food the man who lauds  thee,  Agni:  make  him the lord of wealth  with noble  offspring
. 6 May he, benevolent  with this fair aspect,  best sacrificer,  bring  the Gods  to bless  us. Sure guardi
an, our protector  from  the foemen,  shine,  Agni,  with thine  affluence  and splendour.  
 
HYMN  X. Agni.  
1.AGNI,  first, loudly  calling,  like a Father,  kindled  by man upon  the seat of worship.   
Clothed  in his glory,  deathless,  keen  of insight,  must  be adorned  by all, the Strong,  the Famous.   
2 May Agni  the resplendent  hear my calling  through  all my songs,  Immortal,  keen  of insight.   
Dark  steeds  or ruddy  draw his car, or carried  in sundry  ways  he makes  them  red of colour.   
3 On wood  supine  they got the well−formed  Infant:  a germ  in various−fashioned  plants  was Agni;   
And in the night,  not compassed  round  by darkness,  he dwells  exceeding  wise,  with rays of splendour.   
4 With  oil and sacred  gifts I sprinkle  Agni  who makes  his home  in front  of all things  living,   
Broad,  vast, through  vital power  o'er all expanded,  conspicuous,  strong  with all the food that feeds  him.  
5 I pour to him who looks  in all directions : may he accept  it with a friendly  spirit.   
Agni  with bridegroom's  grace  and lovely  colour  may not be touched  when  all his form  is fury.   
6 By choice  victorious,  recognize  thy portion:  with thee for envoy  may we speak  like Manu.   
Obtaining  wealth,  I call on perfect  Agni  who with an eloquent  tongue  dispenses  sweetness.   
 
HYMN  XI. Indra.  
1. HEAR  thou my call, O Indra;  be not heedless:  thine  may we be for thee to give us treasures;   
For these  presented  viands,  seeking  riches,  increase  thy strength  like strea ms of water  flowing.   
2 Floods  great  and many,  compassed  by the Dragon,  thou badest  swell  and settest  free, O Hero.   
Strengthened  by songs  of praise  thou rentest  piecemeal  the Dasa,  him who deemed  himself  immortal.   
3 For, Hero,  in the lauds  wherein  thou joyedst,  in hymns  of praise,  O Indra,  songs  of Rudras,   
These  streams  in which  is thy delight  approach  thee,  even as the brilliant  ones draw  near to Vayu.   
4 We who add strength  to thine  own splendid  vigour,  laying  within  thine  arms  the splendid  thunder−   
With us mayst  thou,  O Indra,  waxen  splendid,  with Surya  overcome  the Dasa  races.   
5 Hero,  thou slewest  in thy valour  Ahi concealed  in depths,  mysterious,  great  enchanter,   
Dwelling  enveloped  deep  within  the waters,  him who checked  heaven  and stayed  the floods from  flowing.
  
6 Indra,  we laud thy great  deeds  wrought  aforetime,  we laud thine  exploits  later of achievement;   
We laud the bolt that in thine  arms  lies eager;  we laud thy two Bay Steeds,  heralds  of Surya.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
7 Indra,  thy Bay Steeds  showing  forth  their vigour  have  sent a loud cry out that droppeth  fatness.   
The earth  hath spread  herself  in all her fulness:  the cloud  that was about  to move  hath rested.   
8 Down,  never  ceasing,  hath the rain−cloud  settled:  bellowing,  it hath wandered  with the Mothers.   
Swell ing the roar in the far distant  limits,  they have  spread  wide  the blast  sent forth  by Indra.   
9 Indra  hath hurled  down  the magician  Vrtra  who lay beleaguering  the mighty  river.   
Then  both the heaven  and earth  trembled  in terror  at the strong  Hero's  thunder  when  he bellowed.   
10 Loud  roared  the mighty  Hero's  bolt of thunder,  when  he, the Friend  of man,  burnt  up the monster,   
And,  having  drunk  his fill of flowing  Soma,  baffled  the guileful  Danava's  devices.   
11 Drink  thou,  O Hero  Indra,  drink  the Soma;  let the joy−giving  juices  make  thee joyful.   
They,  filling  both thy flanks,  shall  swell  thy vigour.  The juice  that satisfies  hath helped  Indra.   
12 Singers  have  we become  with thee,  O Indra:  may we serve  duly and prepare  devotion.   
Seeking  thy help we meditate  thy praises:  may we at once  enjoy  thy gift of riches.   
13 May we be thine,  such by thy help,  O Indra,  as swell  thy vigour  while  they seek thy favour.   
Give  us, thou God,  the riches  that we long for, most  powerful,  with stare  of noble  children.   
14 Give  us a friend,  give us an habitation;  Indra,  give us the company  of Maruts,   
And those  whose  minds  accord  with theirs,  the Vayus,  who drink  the first libation  of the Soma.   
15 Let those  enjoy  in whom  thou art delighted.  Indra,  drink  Soma  for thy strength  and gladness.   
 
Thou  hast exalted  us to heaven,  Preserver,  in battles,  through  the lofty  hymns  that praise  thee.   
16 Great,  verily,  are they,  O thou Protector,  who by their songs  of praise  have  won the blessing.   
They  who strew  sacred  grass  to be thy dwelling,  helped by thee have  got them  strength,  O Indra.   
17 Upon  the great  Trikadruka  days,  Hero,  rejoicing  thee,  O Indra,  drink  the Soma.   
Come  with Bay Steeds  to drink  of libation,  shaking  the drops  from  out thy beard,  contented.   
18 Hero,  assume  the might  wherewi th thou clavest  Vrtra  piecemeal,  the Danava  Aurnavabha.   
Thou  hast disclosed  the light to light the Arya:  on thy left hand,  O Indra,  sank the Dasyu.   
19 May we gain wealth,  subduing  with thy succour  and with the Arya,  all our foes,  the Dasyus.   
Our gain was that to Trta of our party  thou gavest  up Tvastar's  son Visvarupa.   
20 He cast down  Arbuda  what  time his vigour  was strengthened  by libations  poured  by Trta.   
Indra  sent forth  his whirling  wheel  like Surya,  and aided  by the Angirases  rent Vala.   
21 Now  let that wealthy  Cow  of thine,  O Indra,  yield  in return  a boon  to him who lauds  thee.   
Give  to thy praisers:  let not fortune  fail us. Loud  may we speak,  with brave  men,  in the assembly.   
 
HYMN  XII. Indra.  
1. HE who,  just born,  chief  God of lofty spirit  by power  and might  became  the Gods'  protector,   
Before  whose  breath  through  greatness  of his valour  the two worlds  trembled,  He, O men,  is Indra.   
2 He who fixed  fast and firm the earth  that staggered,  and set at rest the agitated  mountains,   
Who  measured  out the air's wide  middle  region  and gave the heaven  support,  He, men,  is Indra.   
3 Who  slew the Dragon,  freed  the Seven  Rivers,  and drove  the kine forth  from  the cave of Vala,   
Begat  the fire between  two stones,  the spoiler  in warriors'  battle,  He, O men,  is Indra.   
4 By whom  this universe  was made  to tremble,  who chased  away  the humbled  brood  of demons,   
Who,  like a gambler  gathering  his winnings  seized  the foe's riches,  He, O men,  is Indra.   
5 Of whom,  the Terrible,  they ask, Where  is He? or verily  they say of him, He is not.  
He sweeps  away,  like birds,  the foe's possessions.  Have  faith in him, for He, O men,  is Indra.   
6 Stirrer  to action  of the poor and lowly,  of priest,  of suppliant  who sings  his praises;   
Who,  fair−faced,  favours  him who presses  Soma  with stones  made  ready,  He, O men,  is Indra.   
7 He under  whose  supreme  control  are horses,  all chariots,  and the villages,  and cattle;   Rig Veda – English Translation  
He who gave being  to the Sun and Morning,  who leads  the waters,  He, O men,  is Indra.   
8 To whom  two armies  cry in close  encounter,  both enemies,  the stronger  and the weaker;   
Whom  two invoke  upon  one chariot  mounted,  each for himself,  He, O ye men,  is Indra.   
9 Without  whose  help our people  never  conquer;  whom,  battling,  they invoke  to give them  succour;   
He of whom  all this world  is but the copy,  who shakes  things  moveless,  He, O men,  is Indra.   
10 He who hath smitten,  ere they knew  their danger,  with his hurled  weapon  many  grievous  sinners;   
Who  pardons  not his boldness  who provokes  him, who slays  the Dasyti,  He, O men,  is Indra.   
11 He who discovered  in the fortieth  autumn  Sambara  as he dwelt  among  the mountains;   
Who  slew the Dragon  putting  forth  his vigour,  the demon  lying  there,  He, men,  is Indra.   
12 Who  with seven  guiding  reins,  the Bull,  the Mighty,  set free the Seven  great  Floods  to flow at pleasure
;  
Who,  thunder−armed,  rent Rauhina  in pieces  when  scaling  heaven,  He, O ye men,  is Indra.   
13 Even  the Heaven  and Earth  bow down  before  him, before  his very breath  the mountains  tremble.   
Known  as the Soma−drinker,  armed  with thunder,  who wields  the bolt, He, O ye men,  is Indra.   
14 Who  aids with favour  him who pours  the Soma  and him who brews  it, sacrificer,  singer.   
Whom  prayer  exalts,  and pouring  forth  of Soma,  and this our gift, He, O ye men,  Is Indra.   
15 Thou  verily  art fierce  and true who sendest  strength  to the man who brews  and pours  libation.   
So may we evermore,  thy friends,  O Indra,  speak  loudly  to the synod  with our heroes.   
 
HYMN  XIII. Indra.  
1. THE  Season  was the parent,  and when  born therefrom  it entered  rapidly the floods  wherein  it grows.   
Thence  was it full of sap, streaming  with milky  juice:  the milk of the plant's  stalk  is chief  and meet  for lau
ds.  
2 They  come  trooping  together  bearing  milk to him, and bring  him sustenance  who gives  support  to all.  
The way is common  for the downward  streams  to flow.  Thou  who didst  these  things  first art worthy  of ou
r 
lauds.   
3 One priest  announces  what  the institutor  gives:  one, altering  the forms,  zealously  plies  his task,  
The third  corrects  the imperfections  left by each.  Thou  who didst  these  things  first art worthy  of our lauds.
  
4 Dealing  out food unto their people  there  they sit, like wealth  to him who comes,  more  than the back can 
bear.   
Greedily  with his teeth  he eats the master's  food.  Thou  who didst  these  thing s first art worthy  of our lauds.
  
5 Thou  hast created  earth  to look upon  the sky: thou,  slaying  Ahi, settest  free the river's  paths.   
Thee,  such,  a God,  the Gods  have  quickened  with their lauds,  even  as a steed  with waters:  meet  for praise  
art 
thou.   
6 Thou givest  increase,  thou dealest  to us our food:  thou milkest  from  the moist  the dry, the rich in sweets
.  
Thou  by the worshipper  layest  thy precious  store:  thou art sole Lord  of all. Meet  for our praise  art thou.   
7 Thou  who hast spread  abroad  the streams  by stablished  law, and in the field the plants  that blossom  and 
bear seed;   
Thou  who hast made  the matchless  lightnings  of the sky,−vast,  compassing  vast realms,  meet  for our prais
e 
art thou.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
8 Who  broughtest  Narmara  with all his wealth,  for sake of food,  to slay him that the fiends  might  be 
destroyed,   
Broughtest  the face unclouded  of the strengthening  one, performing  much  even  now,  worthy  art thou of 
praise.   
9 Thou  boundest  up the Dasa's  hundred  friends  and ten, when,  at one's  hearing,  thou belpest  thy worshipp
er.  
Thou  for Dabhiti  boundest  Dasyus  not with cords;  Thou  wast a mighty  help.  Worthy  of lauds  art thou.   
10 All banks  of rivers  yielded  to his manly  might;  to him they gave,  to him, the Strong,  gave  up their weal
th.  
The six directions  hast thou fixed,  a five−fold  view:  thy victories  reached  afar. Worthy  of lauds  art thou.   
11 Meet  for high praise,  O Hero,  is thy power,  that with thy single  wisdom  thou obtainest  wealth,   
The life−support  of conquering  Jatusthira.  Indra,  for all thy deeds,  worthy  of lauds  art thou.   
12 Thou  for Turviti  heldest  still the flowing  floods,  the river−stream  for Vayya  easily  to pass  
Didst  raise  the outcast  from  the depths,  and gavest  fame  unto the halt and blind.  Worthy  of lauds  art thou.   
13 Prepare  thyself  to grant  us that great  bounty,  O Vasu,  for abundant  is thy treasure.   
Snatch  up the wonderful,  O Indra,  daily.  Loud  may we speak,  with heroes,  in assembly.   
 
HYMN  XIV. Indra.  
1. MINISTERS,  bring  the Soma  juice  for Indra,  pour forth  the gladdening  liquor  with the beakers.logeth  e
ver  
To drink  of this the Hero  offer  it to the Bull,  for this he willeth.   
2 Ye ministers,  to him who with the lightning  smote,  like a tree, the rain−withholding  Vrtra−   
Bring  it to him, him who is fain to taste it, a draught  of this which  Indra here deserveth.   
3 Ye ministers,  to him who smote  Drhhikas  who drove  the kine forth,  and discovered  Vala,   
Offer  this draught,  like Vita in the region:  clothe  him with Soma  even  as steeds  with trappings.   
4 Him who did Urana  to death,  Adhvaryus!  though  showing  arms  ninety−and−nine  in number;   
Who  cast down  headlong  Arbuda  and slew him,−speed  ye that Indra  to our offered  Soma.   
5 Ye ministers,  to him who struck  down  Svasna,  and did to death  Vyamsa  and greedy  Susna,   
And Rudhikras  and Namuci  and Pipru,−  to him, to Indra,  pour ye forth  libation.   
6 Ye ministers,  to him who as with thunder  demolished  Sambara's  hundred  ancient  castles;   
Who  cast down  Varcin's  sons,  a hundred  thousand,−to  him, to Indra,  offer  ye the Soma.   
 
7 Ye ministers,  to him who slew a hund red thousand,  and cast them  down  upon  earth's  bosom;   
Who  quelled  the valiant  men of Atithigva,  Kutsa,  and Ayu,−bring  to him the Soma.   
8 Ministers,  men,  whatever  thing  ye long for obtain  ye quickly  bringing  gifts to Indra.   
Bring  to the Glorious  One what  bands  have cleansed;  to Indra  bring,  ye pious  ones,  the Soma.   
9 Do ye, O ministers,  obey  his order:  that purified  in wood,  in wood  uplift  ye.  
Well  pleased  he longs  for what  your hands  have tended:  offer  the gladdening  Soma  juice  to Indra.   
10 As the cow's udder  teems  with milk,  Adhvaryus,  so fill with Soma  Indra,  liberal  giver.   
I know  him: I am sure of this, the Holy  knows  that I fain would  give to him more  largely.   
11 Him,  ministers,  the Lord  of heavenly  treasure  and all terrestrial  wealth  that earth  possesses,   
Him,  Indra,  fill with Soma  as a garner  is filled  with barley  full: be this your labour.   
12 Prepare  thyself  to grant  us that great  booty,  O Vasu,  for abundant  is thy treasure.   
Gather  up wondrous  wealth,  O Indra,  daily.  Loud  may we speak,  with heroes,  in assembly.   
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  XV. Indra  
1. Now,  verily,  will I declare  the exploits,  mighty  and true, of him the True  and Mighty.   
In the Trikadrukas  he drank  the Soma  then in its rapture  Indra  slew the Dragon.   
2 High  heaven  unsupported  in space  he stablis hed: he filled  the two worlds  and the air's mid−region.   
Earth  he upheld,  and gave it wide  expansion.  These  things  did Indra  in the Soma's  rapture.   
3 From  front,  as 'twere  a house,  he ruled  and measured;  pierced  with his bolt the fountains  of the rivers,   
And made  them  flow at ease by paths  far−reaching,  These  things  did Indra  in the Soma's  rapture.   
4 Compassing  those  who bore away  Dabhiti,  in kindled  fire he burnt  up all their weapons.   
And made  him rich with kine and cars and horses.  These  things  did Indra in the Soma's  rapture.   
5 The mighty  roaring  flood  he stayed  from  flowing,  and carried  those  who swam  not safely  over.   
They  having  crossed  the stream  attained  to riches.  These  things  did Indra  in the Soma's  rapture.   
6 With  mighty  power  he made  the stream  flow upward,  crushed  with his thunderbolt  the car of Usas,   
Rending  her slow  steeds  with his rapid  coursers.  These  things  did Indra  in the Soma's  rapture.   
7 Knowing  the place  wherein  the maids  were  hiding,  the outcast  showed  himself  and stood  before  them.   
The cripple  stood  erect,  the blind  beheld  them.  These  things  did Indra  in the Soma's  rapture.   
8 Praised  by the Angirases  he slaughtered  Vala,  and burst  apart  the bulwarks  of the mountain.   
He tore away  their deftly−built  defences.  These  things  did Indra  in the Soma's  rapture.   
9 Thou,  with sleep  whelming  Cumuri  and Dhuni,  slewest  the Dasyu,  keptest  safe Dabhiti.   
There  the staff−bearer  found  the golden  treasure.  These  things  did Indra  in the Soma's  rapture.   
10 Now  let that wealthy  Cow  of thine,  O Indra , yield  in return  a boon  to him who lauds  thee.   
Give  to thy praisers:  let not fortune  fail us. Loud  may we speak,  with brave  men,  in assembly.   
 
HYMN  XVI. Indra.  
1. To him, your own,  the best among  the good,  I bring  eulogy,  like oblation  in the kindled fire.  
We invocate  for help Indra  untouched  by eld, who maketh  all decay,  strengthened,  for ever young.   
2 Without  whom  naught  exists,  Indra  the Lofty  One;  in whom  alone  all powers  heroic  are combined.   
The Soma  is within  him, in his frame  vast streng th, the thunder  in his hand  and wisdom  in his head.   
3 Not by both worlds  is thine  own power  to be surpassed,  nor may thy car be stayed  by mountains  or by s
eas.  
None  cometh  near,  O Indra,  to thy thunderbolt,  when  with swift  steeds  thou fliest  over many  a league.   
4 For all men bring  their will to him the Resolute,  to him the Holy  One,  to him the Strong  they cleave.   
Pay worship  with oblation,  strong  and passing  wise.  Drink  thou the Soma,  Indra,  through  the mighty  blaz
e.  
5 The vessel  of the strong  flows  forth, the flood  of meath,  unto the Strong  who feeds  upon  the strong,  for 
drink,   
Strong  are the two Adhvaryus,  strong  are both the stones.  They  press  the Soma  that is strong  for him the 
Strong.   
 
6 Strong  is thy thunderbolt,  yea, and thy car is strong;  strong are thy Bay Steeds  and thy weapons  powerfu
l.  
Thou,  Indra,  Bull,  art Lord  of the strong  gladdening  drink.  with the strong  Soma,  Indra,  satisfy  thyself.   
7 I, bold by prayer,  come  near thee in thy sacred  rites,  thee like a saving  ship,  thee shouting  in the war.  
Verily  he will hear and mark  this word  of ours:  we will pour Indra  forth  as 'twere  a spring  of wealth.   
8 Turn  thee unto us ere calamity  come  nigh,  as a cow full of pasture  turns  her to her calf.  
Lord  of a Hundred  Powers,  may we once  firmly  cling  to thy fair favours  even  as husbands  to their wives.   
9 Now  let that wealthy  Cow  of thine,  O Indra,  yield  in return  a boon  to him who lauds  thee.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Give  to thy praisers:  let not fortune  fail us. Loud  may we speak,  with heroes,  in assembly.   
 
HYMN  XVII.  Indra.  
1. LIKE  the Angirases,  sing this new song forth  to him, for, as in ancient  days,  his mighty  powers  are sho
wn,  
When  in the rapture  of the Soma  he unclosed  with strength  the solid  firm−shut  stables  of the kine.   
2 Let him be even  that God who,  for the earliest  draught  measuring  out his power,  increased  his majesty;   
Hero  who fortified  his body  in the wars,  and through  his greatness  set the heaven  upon  his head.   
3 Thou  didst  perform  thy first great  deed  of hero might  what  time thou showedst  power,  through prayer,  
before  this folk.  
Hurled  down  by thee the car−borne  Lord  of Tawny  Steeds,  the congregated  swift  ones fled in sundry  way
s.  
4 He made  himself  by might  Lord  of all living  things,  and strong  in vital power  waxed  great  above  them  a
ll.  
He, borne  on high,  o'erspread  with light the heaven  and earth,  and, sewing  up the turbid  darkness,  closed  i
t in.  
5 He with his might  made  firm the forward−bending  hills,  the downward  rushing  of the waters  he ordaine
d.  
Fast he upheld  the earth  that nourisheth  all life, and stayed  the heaven  from  falling  by his wondrous  skill.   
6 Fit for the grasping  of his arms  is what  the Sire hath fabricated  from  all kind of precious  wealth.   
The thunderbolt,  wherewith,  loud−roaring,  he smote  down,  and striking  him to death  laid Krivi on the eart
h.  
7 As she who in her parents'  house  is growing  old, I pray to thee as Bhaga  from  the seat of all.  
Grant  knowledge,  mete  it out and bring  it to us here:  give us the share  wherewith  thou makest  people  glad
.  
8 May we invoke  thee as a liberal giver  thou givest  us, O Indra,  strength  and labours.   
Help  us with manifold  assistance,  Indra:  Migthy  One,  Indra,  make  us yet more  wealthy.   
9 Now  may that weaithy  Cow  of thine,  O Indra,  give in return  a boon  to him who lauds  thee.   
Give  to thy praisers : let not fortune  fail us. Loud  may we speak,  with heroes,  in assembly.   
 
HYMN  XVIII.  Indra  
1. THE  rich new car hath been  equipped  at morning;  four yokes  it hath,  three  whips,  seven  reins  to guide  i
t:  
Ten−sided,  friendly  to mankind,  light−winner,  that must be urged  to speed  with prayers  and wishes.   
2 This is prepared  for him the first, the second,  and the third  time:  he is man's  Priest  and Herald.   
Others  get offspring  of another  parent  he goeth,  as a noble  Bull,  with others.   
3 To Indra's  car the Bay Steeds  have  I harnessed,  that new well−spoken  words  may bring  him hither.   
Here  let not other  worshippers  detain  thee,  for among  us are many  holy singers.   
4 Indra,  come  hitherward  with two Bay Coursers,  come  thou with four,  with six when  invocated.   
Come  thou with eight,  with ten, to drink  the Soma.  Here  is the juice,  brave  Warrior:  do not scorn  it.  
5 O Indra,  come  thou hither  having  harnessed  thy car with twenty,  thirty,  forty  horses.   
Come  thou with fifty well trained  coursers,  Indra,  sixty  or seventy,  to drink  the Soma.   
6 Come  to us hitherward,  O Indra,  carried  by eighty,  ninety,  or an hundred  horses.   
This Soma  juice  among  the Sunahotras  hath been  poured  out, in love,  to glad thee,  Indra.   
7 To this my prayer,  O Indra,  come  thou hither:  bind to thy car's pole all thy two Bay Coursers.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Thou  art to be invoked  in many  places  Hero,  rejoice  thyself  in this libation.   
8 Ne'er  be my love from  Indra  disunited  still may his liberal  Milch−cow  yield  us treasure.   
So may we under  his supreme  protection,  safe in his arms,  succeed  in each forth−going.   
9 Now  may that wealthy  Cow  Of thine,  O Indra,  give in return  a boon  to him who lauds  thee.   
 
Give  to thy praisers:  let not fortune  fail us. Loud  may we speak,  with heroes,  in assembly.  
 
HYMN  XIX. Indra.  
1. DRAUGHTS  of this sweet  juice  have  been  drunk  for rapture,  of the wise Soma−presser's  offered  daint
y,  
Wherein,  grown  mighty  in the days aforetime,  Indra  hath found  delight,  and men who worship.   
2 Cheered  by this meath  Indra,  whose  hand  wields  thunder,  rent piecemea l Ahi who barred  up the waters,   
So that the quickening  currents  of the rivers  flowed  forth  like birds  unto their resting−places.   
3 Indra,  this Mighty  One,  the Dragon's  slayer,  sent forth  the flood  of waters  to the ocean.   
He gave the Sun his life, he found the cattle,  and with the night  the works  of days completed.   
4 To him who worshippeth  hath Indra  given  many  and matchless  gifts.  He slayeth  Vrtra.   
Straight  was he to be sought  with supplications  by men who struggled  to obtain  the sunlight.   
5 To him who poured  him gifts he gave up Surya,−Indra,  the God,  the Mighty,  to the mortal;   
For Etasa  with worship  brought  him riches  that keep  distress  afar, as 'twere  his portion.   
6 Once  to the driver  of his chariot,  Kutsa,  he gave up greedy  Surya,  plague  of harve st;  
And Indra,  for the sake of Divodasa  demolished  Sambara's  nine−and−ninety  castles.   
7 So have  we brought  our hymn  to thee,  O Indra,  strengthening  thee and fain ourselves  for glory.   
May we with best endeavours  gain this friendship,  and mayst  thou bend  the godless  scorner's  weapons.   
8 Thus  the Grtsamadas  for thee,  O Hero,  have  wrought  their hymn  and task as seeking  favour.   
May they who worship  thee afresh,  O Indra,  gain food and strength,  bliss,  and a happy  dwelling.   
9 Now  may that wealthy  Cow  of thine, O Indra,  give in return  a boon  to him who lauds  thee,   
Give  to thy praisers:  let not fortune  fail us. Loud  may we speak,  with heroes,  in assembly.   
 
HYMN  XX. Indra.  
1. As one brings  forth  his car when  fain for combat,  so bring  we power  to thee−  regard  us, Indra−   
Well  skilled  in song,  thoughtful  in spirit,  seeking  great  bliss from  one like thee amid  the Heroes.   
2 Indra,  thou art our own with thy protection,  a guardian  near to men who love thee truly,   
Active  art thou,  the liberal  man's  defender,  his who draws  near to thee with right  devotion.   
3 May Indra,  called  with solemn  invocations.  the young,  the Friend,  be men's  auspicious  keeper,   
One who will further  with his aid the singer,  the toiler,  praiser,  dresser  of oblations.   
4 With  laud and song let me extol  that Indra  in whom  of old men prospered  and were  mighty.   
May he, implored,  fulfil  the prayer  for plenty  of him who worships,  of the living  mortal.   
5 He, Indra  whom  the Angirases'  praise  delighted,  strengthened  their prayer  and made  their goings  prospe
r.  
Stealing  away  the mornings  with the sunlight,  he, lauded,  crushed  even  Asna's  ancient  powers.   
6 He verily,  the God,  the glorious  Indra,  hath raised  him up for man,  best Wonder−Worker.   
He, self−reliant,  mighty  and triumphant,  brought  low the dear head  of the wicked  Dasa.   
7 Indra  theVrtra−slayer,  Fort−destroyer,  scattered  the Dasa  hosts  who dwelt  in darkness.   
For men hath he created  earth  and waters,  and ever helped  the prayer  of him who worships.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
8 To him in might  the Gods  have  ever yielded,  to Indra  in the tumult  of thebattle.   
When  in his arms  they laid the bolt, he slaughtered  the Dasyus  and cast down  their forts of iron.  
9 Now  may that wealthy  Cow  of thine,  O Indra , give in return  a boon  to him who lauds  thee.   
Give  to thy praisers:  let not fortune  fail us. Loud  may we speak,  with heroes,  in assembly.   
 
HYMN  XXI.  
1. To him the Lord  of all, the Lord  of wealth,  of light;  him who is Lord  for ever,  Lord  of men and tilth, 
Him who is Lord  of horses,  Lord  of kine,of  floods,  to Indra,  to the Holy  bring  sweet  Soma  juice.  2 To h
im the potent  One,  who conquers  and breaks  down,  the Victor  never  vanquished  who disposes  all, The 
migbty−voiced,  the rider,  unassailable,  to Indra  everconquering  speak  your reverent  prayer.   
3 Still Victor,  loved  by mortals,  ruler  over men,  o'erthrower,  warrior,  he hath waxen  as he would;   
Host−gatherer,  triumphant,  honoured  mid the folk. Indra's  heroic  deeds  will I tell forth  to all.  
4 The strong  who never  yields,  who slew the furious  fiend,  the deep,  the vast, of wisdom  unattainable;   
Who  speeds  the good,  the breaker−down,  the firm,  the vast,−Indra  whose  rites bring  joy hath made  the lig
ht 
of Dawn.   
5 By sacrifice  the yearning  sages  sending  forth  their songs  found  furtherance  from  him who speeds  the flo
od.  
In Indra  seeking  help with worship  and with hymn,  they drew  him to themselves  and won them  kine and 
wealth.   
6 Indra,  bestow  on us the best of treasures,  the spirit  of ability  and fortune;   
Incre ase of riches,  safety  of our bodies,  charm  of sweet  speech,  and days of pleasant  weather.   
 
HYMN  XXII.  Indra.  
I. At the Trikadrukas  the Great  and Strong  hath drunk  drink  blent  with meal.  With  Visnu  hath he quaffed  t
he 
poured  out Soma  juice,  all that he would.  
That hath so heightened  him the Great,  the Wide,  to do his mighty  work.   
So may the God attain  the God,  true Indu Indra  who is true.  
2 So he resplendent  in the battle  overcame  Krivi  by might.  He with his majesty  hath filled  the earth  and 
heaven,  and waxen  strong.   
One share  of the libation  hath he swallowed  down:  one share  he left.  
So may the God attend  the God,  true Indu Indra  who is true.  
3 Brought  forth  together  with wisdom  and mighty  power  thou grewest  great;  with hero deeds  subduing  th
e 
malevo lent, most  swift  in act;  
Giving  prosperity,  and lovely  wealth  to him who praiseth  thee.  So may the God attend  the God,  true Indu 
Indra  who is true.  
4 This,  Indra,  was thy hero deed,  Dancer,  thy first and ancient  work,  worthy  to be told forth  in heaven,   
What  time thou sentest  down  life with a God's  own power,  freeing  the floods.   
All that is godless  may he conquer  with his might,  and, Lord  of Hundred  Powers,  find for us strength  and 
food.   
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  XXIII.  Brahmanaspati.  
1. WE call thee,  Lord  and Leader  of the heavenly  hosts,  the wise among  the wise,  the famousest  of all,  
The King  supreme  of prayers,  O Brahmanaspati:  hear us with help;  sit down  in place  of sacrifice.   
2 Brhaspati,  God immortal!  verily  the Gods  have  gained  from  thee,  the wise,  a share  in holy rites.   
As with great  light the Sun brings  forth  the rays of morn,  so thou alone  art Father  of all sacred  prayer.   
3 When  thou hast chased  away  revilers  and the gloom,  thou mountest  the refulgent  car of sacrifice;   
The awful  car, Brhaspati,  that quells  the foe, slays  demons,  cleaves  the stall of kine,  and finds  the light.   
4 Thou  leadest  with good  guidance  and preservest  men;  distress  o'ertakes  not him who offers  gifts to thee.
  
Him who hates  prayer  thou punishest,  Brhaspati,  quelling  his wrath:  herein  is thy great  mightiness.   
5 No sorrow,  no distress  from  any side, no foes,  no creatures  double−tongued  have overcome  the man,−   
Thou  drivest  all seductive  fiends  away  from  him whom,  careful  guard,  thou keepest  Brahmanaspati.   
6 Thou  art our keeper,  wise,  preparer  of our paths:  we, for thy service,  sing to thee with hymns  of praise.   
Brhaspati,  whoever  lays a snare  for us, him may his evil fate, precipitate,  destroy.   
7 Him,  too, who threatens  us without  offence  of ours,  the evilminded,  arrogant,  rapacious  man,−  
Him turn thou from  our path away,  Brhaspati:  give us fair access  to this banquet  of the Gods.   
8 Thee  as protector  of our bodies  we invoke,  thee,  saviour,  as the comforter  who loveth  us.  
Strike,  O Brhaspati,  the Gods'  revilers  down,  and let not the unrighteous  come  to highest  bliss.   
9 Through  thee,  kind −prosperer,  O Brahmanaspati,  may we obtain  the wealth  of Men which  all desire:   
And all our enemies,  who near or far away  prevail  against  us, crush,  and leave  them  destitute.   
 
10 With  thee as our own rich and liberal  ally may we, Brhaspati,  gain highest  power  of life.  
Let not the guileful  wicked  man be lord of us:−still  may we prosper,  singing  goodly  hymns  of praise.   
11 Strong,  never  yielding,  hastening  to the battle−cry,  consumer  of the foe, victori ous in the strife,   
Thou  art sin's true avenger,  Brahmanaspati,  who tamest  e'en the fierce,  the wildly  passionate.   
12 Whoso  with mind  ungodly  seeks  to do us harm,  who,  deeming  him a man of might  mid lords,  would  
slay,−   
Let not his deadly  blow  reach  us, Brhaspati;  may we humiliate  the strong  ill−doer's  wrath.   
13 The mover  mid the spoil,  the winner  of all wealth,  to be invoked  in fight  and reverently  adored,   
Brhaspati  hath overthrown  like cars of war all wicked  enemies  who fain would  injure  us.  
14 Burn  up the demons  with thy fiercest  flaming  brand,  those  who have  scorned  thee in thy manifested  mi
ght.  
Show  forth  that power  that shall  deserve  the hymn  of praise:  destroy  the evil speakers,  O Brhaspati.   
15 Brhaspati,  that which  the foe deserves  not which  shines among  the folk effectual,  splendid,   
That,  Son of Law I which  is with might  refulgent−that  treasure  wonderful  bestow  thou on us.  
16 Give  us not up to those  who,  foes in ambuscade,  are greedy  for the wealth  of him who sits at ease,   
Who  cherish  in their heart  abandonment  of Gods.  Brhaspati,  no further  rest shall  they obtain.   
17 For Tvastar,  he who knows  each sacred  song,  brought  thee to life, preeminent  o'er all the things  that be
.  
Guilt−scourger,  guilt−avenger  is Brhaspati,  who slays  the spoiler  and upholds  the mighty  Law.   
18 The mountain,  for thy glory,  cleft itself  apart  when,  Angiras!  thou openedst  the stall of kine.   
Thoul  O Brhaspati,  with Indra  for ally didst  hurl down  water−floods  which  gloom  had compa−sed  round.   
19 O Brahmanaspati,  be thou controller  of this our hymn  and prosper  thou our children.   
All that the Gods  regard  with love is blessed.  Loud  may we speak,  with heroes,  in assembly.   
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  XXIV.  Brahmanaspati.  
1. BE pleased  with this our offering,  thou who art the Lord;  we will adore  thee with this new and mighty  
song.   
As this thy friend,  our liberal  patron,  praises  thee,  do thou,  Brhaspati,  fulfil  our hearts'  desire.   
2 He who with might  bowed  down  the things  that should  be bowed,  and in his fury rent the holds  of Samb
ara:  
Who  overthrew  what  shook  not, Brahmapaspati,−he  made  his way within  the mountain  stored  with wealt
h.  
3 That was a great  deed  for the Godliest  of the Gods:  strong  things  were  loosened  and the firmly  fixed  gav
e 
way.   
He drave  the kine forth  and cleft Vala  through  by prayer,  dispelled  the darkness  and displayed  the light of 
heaven.   
4 The well with mouth  of stone  that poured  a flood  of meath,  which  Brahmapaspati  hath opened  with his 
might−   
All they who see the light have drunk  their fill thereat:  together  they have  made  the watery  fount  flow fort
h.  
5 Ancient  will be those  creatures,  whatsoe'er  they be; with moons,  with autumns,  doors  unclose  themselve
s to 
you.  
Effortless  they pass on to perfect  this and that, appointed  works  which  Brahmanaspati  ordained.   
6 They  who with much  endeavour  searching  round  obtained  the Panis'  noblest  treasure  hidden  in the cave,
−  
Those  sages,  having  marked  the falsehoods,  turned  them  back  whence  they had come,  and sought  again  to 
enter  in.  
7 The pious  ones when  they had seen the falseh oods  turned  them  back,  the sages  stood  again  upon  the loft
y 
ways.   
Cast down  with both their arms  upon  the rock they left the kindled  fire, and said, No enemy  is he.  
8 With  his swift  bow,  strung  truly,  Brahmanaspati  reaches  the mark  whate'er  it be that he desires.   
Excellent  are the arrows  wherewithal  he shoots,  keen−eyed  to look on men and springing  from  his ear.  
9 He brings  together  and he parts,  the great  High  Priest;  extolled  is he, in battle  Brahmapaspati.   
When,  gracious,  for the hymn  he brings  forth food and wealth,  the glowing  Sun untroubled  sends  forth  
fervent  heat.   
 
10 First and preeminent,  excelling  all besides  are the kind gifts of liberal  Brhaspati.   
These  are the boons  of him the Strong  who should  be loved,  whereby  both classes  and the peopl e have 
delight.   
11 Thou  who in every  way supreme  in earthly  power,  rejoicing,  by thy mighty  strength  hast waxen  great,
−  
He is the God spread  forth  in breadth  against  the Gods:  he, Brahmanaspati,  encompasseth  this All.  
12 From  you, twain  Maghavans,  all truth  proceedeth:  even the waters  break  not your commandment.   
Come  to us, Brahmanaspati  and Indra,  to our oblation  Iiie yoked  steeds  to fodder.   
13 The sacrificial  flames  most  swiftly  hear the call: the priest  of the assembly  gaineth  wealth  for hymns.   
Hating  the stern,  remitting  at his will the debt,  strong  in the shock  of fight  is Brahmanaspati.   
14 The wrath of Brahmanaspati  according  to his will had full effect  when  he would  do a mighty  deed.   
The kine he drave  forth  and distributed  to heaven,  even  as a copious  flood  with strength  flows  sundry  wayRig Veda – English Translation  
s.  
15 O Brahmanaspati,  may we be evermore  masters  of weal th well−guided,  full of vital strength.   
Heroes  on heroes  send abundantly  to us, when  thou omnipotent  through  prayer  seekest  my call.  
16 O Brahmanaspati,  be thou controller  of this our hymn,  and prosper  thou our children.   
All that the Gods  regard  with love is blessed.  Loud  may we speak,  with heroes,  in assembly.   
 
HYMN  XXV.  Brahmanaspati.  
1. HE lighting  up the flame  shall  conquer  enemies:  strong  shall  he be who offers  prayer  and brings  his gift
.  
He with his seed spreads  forth  beyond  another's  seed,  whomever  Brahmanaspati  takes  for his friend.   
2 With  heroes  he shall  overcome  his hero foes,  and spread  his wealth  by kine wise by himself  is be.  
His children  and his children's  children   
grow  in strength,  whomever  Brahmanaspati  takes  for his friend.   
3 He, mighty  like a raving  river's  billowy  flood,  as a bull conquers  oxen,  overcomes  with strength.   
Like Agni's  blazing  rush he may not be restrained,  whomever  Brahmanaspati  takes  for his friend.   
4 For him the floods  of heaven  flow never  failing  down:  first with the heroes  he goes forth  to war for kine
.  
He slays  in unabated  vigour  with great  might,  whomever  Brahmanaspati  takes  for his friend.   
5 All roaring  rivers  pour their waters  down  for him, and many  a flawless  shelter  hath been  granted  him.  
Blest  with the happiness  of Gods  he prospers  well,  whomever  Brahmanaspati  takes  for his friend.   
 
HYMN  XXVI.  Brahmanaspati.  
1. THE  righteous  singer  shall  o'ercome  his enemies,  and he who serves  the Gods  subdue  the godless  man.   
The zealous  man shall  vanquish  the invincible,  the worshipper  share  the food of him who worships  not.  
2 Worship,  thou hero,  chase  the arrogant  afar: put on auspicious  courage  for the fight with foes.   
Prepare  oblation  so that thou mayst  have  success.  we crave  the favouring  help of Brahmanaspat i.  
3 He with his folk, his house,  his family,  his sons,  gains  booty  for himself,  and, with the heroes,  
wealth,believing   
Who  with oblation  and a true heart  serves  Brahmanaspati  the Father  of the Gods.   
4 Whoso  hath honoured  him with offerings  rich in oil, him Brahmanaspati  leads  forward  on his way,   
Saves  him from  sorrow,  frees  him from  his enemy,  and is his wonderful  deliverer  from  woe.   
 
HYMN  XXVII.  Adityas.  
1. THESE  hymns  that drop down  fatness,  with the ladle  I ever offer  tothe  Kings  Adityas.   
May Mitra, Aryanian,  and Bhaga  hear us, the mighty  Varuna  Daksa,  and Amsa.   
2 With  one accord  may Aryaman  and Mitra  and Varuna  this day accept  this praise−song−   
Adityas  bright  and pure as streams  of water,  free from  all guile  and falsehood,  blameless,  perfect.   
3 These  Gods,  Adityas,  vast, profound,  and faithful,  with many  eyes,  fain to deceive  the wicked,   
Looking  within  behold  the good  and evil near to the Kings  is even  the thing  most  distant.   
 
4 Upholding  that which  moves  and that which  moves  not, Adityas,  Gods, protectors  of all being,   
Provident,  guarding  well the world  of spirits,  true to eternal  Law,  the debt−exactors.   
5 May I, Adityas,  share  m this your favour  which,  Aryaman,  brings  profit  e'en in danger.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Under  your guidance,  Varuna  and Mitra,  round  troubles  may I pass,  like rugged  places.   
6 Smooth  is your path,  O Aryaman  and Mitra;  excellent  is it, Varuna,  and thornless.   
Thereon,  Adityas,  send us down  your blessing:  grant  us a shelter  hard to be demolished.   
7 Mother  of Kings,  may Aditi  transport  us, by fair paths  Aryaman,  beyond  all hatred.   
May we uninjured,  girt by many  heroes,  win Varuna's  and Mitra's  high protection.   
8 With  their support  they stay three  earths,  three  heavens;  three  are their functions  in the Gods'  assembly.   
Mighty  through  Law,  Adityas,  is your greatness;  fair is it, Aryaman,  Varuna,  and Mitra.   
9 Golden  and splendid,  pure like streams  of water,  they hold aloft the three  bright  heavenly  regions.   
Ne'er  do they slumber,  never  close  their eyelids,  faithful,  far−ruling  for the right eous mortal.   
10 Thou  over all, O Varuna,  art Sovran,  be they Gods,  Asura!  or be they mortals.   
Grant  unto us to see a hundred  autumns  ours be the blest  long lives  of our forefathers.   
11 Neither  the right  nor left do I distinguish,  neither  the cast nor yet the west,  Adityas.   
Simple  and guided  by your wisdom,  Vasus!   
may I attain  the light that brings  no danger.   
12 He who bears  gifts unto the Kings,  true Leaders,  he whom  their everlasting  blessings  prosper,   
Moves  with his chariot  first in rank and wealth y, munificent  and lauded  in assemblies.   
13 Pure,  faithful,  very strong,  with heroes  round  him, he dwells  beside  the waters  rich with pasture.   
None  slays,  from  near at hand  or from  a distance,  him who is under  the Adityas'  guidance.   
14 Aditi,  Mitra,  Varu na, forgive  us however  we have  erred  and sinned  against  you.  
May I obtain  the broad  light free from  peril:  O Indra,  let not during  darkness  seize  us.  
15 For him the Twain  united  pour their fulness,  the rain from  heaven:  he thrives  most  highly  favoured.   
He goes to war mastering  both the mansions:  to him both portions  of the world  are gracious.   
16 Your  guiles,  ye Holy  Ones,  to quell  oppressors,  your snares  spread  out against  the foe, Adityas,   
May I car−borne  pass like a skilful  horseman:  uninjured  may we dwell  in spacious  shelter.   
17 May1  not live, O Varuna,  to witness  my wealthy,  liberal,  dear friend's  destitution.   
King,  may1  never  lack well−ordered  riches.  Lond  may we speak,  with heroes,  in assembly.   
 
HYMN  XXVIII.  Varuna  
1. THIS  laud of the self−ra diant  wise Aditya  shall  be supreme  o'er all that is in greatness.   
1 beg renown  of Varuna  the Mighty,  the God exceeding  kind to him who worships.   
2, Having  extolled  thee.  Varuna,  with thoughtful  care may we have  high fortune  in thy service,   
Sinffing  thy praises  like the fires at coming,  day after day, of mornings  rich in cattle.   
3 May we be in thy keeping,  O thou Leader  wide−ruling  Varuna,  Lord  of many  heroes.   
O sons of Aditi,  for ever faithful,  pardon  us, Gods,  admit  us to your friendship.   
4 He made  them flow,  the Aditya,  the Sustainer:  the rivers  run by Varuna's  commandment.   
These  feel no weariness,  nor cease  from  flowing:  swift  have  they flown  like birds  in air around  us.  
5 Loose  me from  sin as from  a bond  that binds  me: may we swell,  Varuna,  thy spring  of Order.   
Let not my thread,  while  I weave  song,  be severed,  nor my work's  sum,  before  the time,  be shattered.   
6 Far from  me, Varuna,  remove  all danger  accept  me graciously,  thou Holy  Sovran.   
Cast off, like cords  that hold a calf, my troubles:  I am not even  mine  eyelid's  lord without  thee.   
7 Strike  us not, Varuna,  with those  dread  weapons  which,  Asura,  at thy bidding  wound  the sinner.   
Let us not pass away  from  light to exile.  Scatter,  that we may live, the men who hate us  
8 O mighty  Varuna,  now and hereafter,  even  as of old, will we speak  forth  our worship.   
For in thyself,  invincible  God,  thy statutes  ne’er  to be moved  are fixed  as on a mountain.   
9 Move  far from  me what  sins I have  committed:  let me not suffer,  King,  for guilt of others.   
Full many  a morn  remains  to dawn  upon  us: in these,  O Varuna,  while  we live direct  us.  Rig Veda – English Translation  
 
10 O King,  whoever,  be he friend  or kinsman,  hath threatened  me affrighted  in my slumber−  
If any wolf or robber  fain would  harm  us, therefrom,  O Varuna,  give thou us protec tion. 11M
ay I not live O Varuna,  to witness  my wealthy,  liberal  dear friend's  destitution.  King,  may I n
ever lack well−ordered  riches.  Loud  may we speak,  with heroes,  in assembly.  
 
HYMN  XXIX.  Visvedevas.  
I. UPHOLDERS  of the Law,  ye strong  Adityas,  remove  my sin like her who bears  in secret.   
You,  Varuna,  Mitra  and all Gods  who listen,  I call to help me, I who know  your goodness.   
2 Ye, Gods,  are providence  and ye are power:  remove  ye utterly  all those  who hate us.  
As givers  of good  things  deal with us kindly:  this day be gracious  to us and hereafter.   
3 What  service  may we do you with our future,  what  service,  Vasus,  with our ancient  friendship?   
O Aditi,  and VaruVa  and Mitra,  Indra  and Maruts,  make  us well and happy.   
4 Ye, O ye Gods,  are verily  our kinsmen as such be kind to me who now implore  you.  
Let not your car come  slowly  to our worship:  of kinsmen  such as you ne'er  let us weary.   
5 I singly  have  sinned  many  a sin against  you, and ye chastised  me as a sire the gambler.   
Far be your nets, far, Gods,  be mine  offences:  seize  me not like a bird upon  her offspring.   
6 Turn  yourselves  hitherward  this day, ye Holy,  that fearing  in my heart  I may approach  you.  
Protect  us, God;  let not the wolf destroy  us. Save  us, ye Holy,  from  the pit and falling.   
7 May I not live, O Varuna,  to witness  my wealthy,  liberal,  dear friend's  destitution.   
King,  may I never  lack well−ordered  riches.  Loud  may we speak,  with heroes,  in assembly.   
 
HYMN  XXX.  Indra  and Others.  
1. THE  streams  unceasing  flow to Indra,  slayer  of Ahi, Savitar,  God,  Law's  fulfiller,   
Day after day goes on the sheen  of waters.  What  time hath past since  they were  first set flowing?   
2 His Mother−for  she knew−spake  and proclaimed  him who was about  to cast his bolt at Vrtra.   
Cutting  their paths  according  to his pleasure  day after day flow to their goal the rivers.   
3 Aloft  he stood  above  the airy region,  and against  Vrtra  shot his deadly  missile.   
Enveloped  in a cloud  he rushed  upon  him. Indra  subdued  the foe with sharpened  weapons.   
4 As with a bolt, Brha spati,  fiercely  flaming,  pierce  thou Vrkadvaras',  the Asura's,  heroes.   
Even  as in time of old with might  thou slewest,  so slay even  now our enemy,  O Indra.   
5 Cast down  from  heaven  on high thy bolt of thunder  wherewith  in joy thou smitest  dead  the foeman.   
For gain of children  make  us thine,  O Indra,  of many  children's  children  and of cattle.   
6 Whomso  ye love,  his power  ye aid and strengthen;  ye Twain  are the rich worshipper's  advancers.   
Graciously  favour  us, Indra  and Soma;  give us firm standing  in this time of danger.   
7 Let it not vex me, tire me, make  me slothful,  and never  let us say, Press  not the Soma;   
For him who cares  for me, gives  gifts,  supports  me, who comes  with kine to me who pour libations.   
8 Sarasvati,  protect  us: with the Maruts  allied  thou boldly  conquerest  our foemen,   
While  Indra  does to death  the daring  chieftain  of Sandikas  exulting  in his prowess.   
9 Him who waylays,  yea, him who would  destroy  us,−aim  at him, pierce  him with thy sharpened  weapon.
  
Brhaspati,  with arms  thou slayest  foemen  O King,  give up the spoiler  to destruction.   
10 Perform,  O Hero,  with our valiant  heroes  the deeds  heroic  which  thou hast to finish.   
Long  have  they been  inflated  with presumption:  slay them,  and bring  us hither  their possessions.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
11 I craving  joy address  with hymn  and homage  your heavenly  host,  the company  of Maruts,   
That we may gain wealth  with full store  of heroes,  each day more  famous,  and with troops  of children.   
 
HYMN  XXXI.  Visvedevas.  
1. HELP,  Varuna  and Mitra,  O ye Twain  allied  with Vasu s, Rudras,  and Adityas,  help our car,  
That,  as the wild birds  of the forest  from  their home,  our horses  may fly forth,  glad,  eager  for renown.   
2 Yea, now ye Gods  of one accord  speed  on our car what  time among  the folk it seeks  an act of might;   
When,  hasting through  the region  with the stamp  of hoofs,  our swift  steeds  trample  on the ridges  of the ea
rth.  
3 Or may our Indra  here,  the Friend  of all mankind,  coming  from  heaven,  most.wise,  girt by the Marut  ho
st,  
Accompany,  with aid untroubled  by a foe, our car to mighty  gain,  to win the meed  of strength.   
4 Or may this Tvastar,  God who rules  the world  with power,  one−minded  with the Goddesses  speed  forth  
our 
car;  
Ila and Bhaga  the celestial,  Earth  and Heaven,  Pusan,  Purandhi,  and the Asvins,  ruling  Lords.   
5 Or, seen alternate,  those  two blessed  Goddesses,  Morning  and Night  who stir all living  things  to act:  
While  with my newest  song I praise  you both,  O Earth,  that from  what  moves  not ye may spread  forth  
threefold  food.   
6 Your  blessing  as a boon  for suppl iants  we desire:  the Dragon  of the Deep,  and Aja−Ekapad,   
Trita,  Rbhuksan,  Savitar  shall  joy in us, and ihe Floods'  swift  Child  in our worship  and our prayer.   
7 These  earnest  prayers  I pray to you, ye Holy:  to pay you honour,  living  men have  formed  them,   
Men fain to win the prize  and glory.  May they win, as a car−horse  might  the goal,  your notice.   
 
HYMN  XXXII.  Various  Deities.  
1. GRACIOUSLY  further,  O ye Heaven  and Earth,  this speech  striving  to win reward,  of me your 
worshipper.   
First rank I give to you, Immortal,  high extolled!  I, fain to win me wealth,  to you the migbty  Pair.  
2 Let not man's  guile  annoy  us, secret  or by day: give not us up a prey to these  calamities.   
Sever  not thou our friendship:  think  thereon  for us. This,  with a heart  that longs for bliss,  we seek from  th
ee.  
3 Bring  hither  with benignant  mind  the willing  Cow  teeming  with plenteous  milk,  full, inexhaustible.   
O thou invoked  by many,  day by day I urge thee with my word,  a charger  rapid  in his tread.   
4 With  eulogy  I call on Raka  swift  to hear may she, auspicious,  hear us, and herself  observe.   
With  never−breaking  needle  may she sew her work,  and give a hero son most  wealthy,  meet  for praise.   
5 All thy kind thoughts,  O Raka,  lovely  in their form,  wherewith  thou grantest  wealth  to him who offers  
gifts−   
With  these  come  thou to us this day benevolent,  O Blessed  One,  bestowing  food of thousand  sorts.   
6 O broad−tressed  Sinivali,  thou who art the Sister  of the Gods,   
Accept  the offered  sacrifice,  and, Goddess,  grant  us progeny.   
7 With  lovely  fingers,  lovely  arms,  prolific  Mother  of many  sons−   
Present  the sacred  gifts to her, to Sinlivali  Queen  of men.   
8 Her, Sinivali,  her, Gungu,  her, Raka,  her, Sarasvati,  Indrani  to mine  aid I call, and Vartunani  for my wea
l.  
 