Rig Veda – English Translation  
juice,   
Shinest,  true Singer!  mid the upholders  of the voice.  Increase  thy Consorts  thou,  lively  at sacrifice.   
6 Like as he is beheld  such is he said to be.  
They  with effectual  splendour  in the floods  have  made   
Earth  yield  us room  enough  and amply  wide  extent,  great  might  invincible,  with store  of hero sons.   
 
7 Surya  the Sage,  as if unwedded,  with a Spouse,  in battle−loving  spirit  moveth  o'er the foes.   
May he, self−excellent,  grant  us a sheltering  home,  a house  that wards  the fierce  heat off on every  side.  
8 Thy name,  sung  forth  by Rsis in these  hymns  of ours, goes to the loftier  One with this swift  mover's  ligh
t.  
By skill he wins  the boon  whereon  his heart  is set: he who bestirs  himself  shall  bring  the thing  to pass.   
9 The chief  and best of these  abideth  in the sea, nor doth libation  fail wherein  it is prolonged.   
The heart  of him who praiseth  trembleth  not in fear there  where  the hymn  is found  connected  with the pur
e.  
10 For it is he: with though  to of Ksatra,  Manasa,  of Yajata,  and Sadhri,  and Evavada,   
With  Avatsara's  sweet  songs  will we strive  to win the mightiest  strength  which  even  he who knows  shoul
d 
gain.   
11 The Hawk  is their full source,  girth−stretching  rapturous  drink  of Visvavara,  of Mayin,  and Yajata.   
They  ever seek a fresh  draught  so that they may come,  know  when  thy time to halt and drink  thy fill is ne
ar.  
12 Sadaprna  the holy,  Tarya,  Srutavit,  and Bahuvrkta,  joined  with you, have  slain  the foes.   
He gains  his wish  in both the worlds  and brightly  shines−when  he adores  the host with well−advancing  
steeds.   
13 The worshipper's  defender  is Sutambhara,  producer  and uplifter  of all holy thoughts.   
The milch−cow  brought,  sweet−flavoured  milk was dealt  around.  Who  speaks  the bidding  text knows  this
, 
not he who sleeps.   
11 The sacred  hymns  love him who wakes  and watches:  to him who watches  come  the Sama verses.   
This Soma  saith  unto the man who watches,  I rest and have  my dwelling  in thy friendship.   
15 Agni  is watchful,  and the gcas love him; Agni  is watchful,  Sama  verses  seek him.  
Agni  is watchful,  to him saith  this Soma,  I rest and have  my dwellin g in thy friendship.   
 
HYMN  XLV.  Visvedevas.  
1. BARDS  of approaching  Dawn  who know  the heavens  are come  with hymns  to throw  the mountain  ope
n.  
The Sun hath risen  and oped  the stable  portals:  the doors  of men,  too, hath the God thrown  open.   
2 Surya  hath spread  his light as splendour:  hither  came  the Cows'  Mother,  conscious,  from  the stable,   
To streams  that flow with biting  waves  to deserts;  and heaven  is stablished  like a firm−set  pillar.   
3 This laud hath won the burden  of the mountain.  To aid the ancient birth  of mighty  waters   
The mountain  parted,  Heaven  performed  his office.  The worshippers  were  worn  with constant  serving.   
4 With  hymns  and God−loved  words  will I invoke  you, Indra  and Agni,  to obtain  your favour,   
For verily  sages,  skilled  in sacrifi cing,  worship  the Maruts  and with lauds  invite  them.   
5 This day approach  us: may our thoughts  be holy,  far from  us let us cast away  misfortune.   
Let us keep those  who hate us at a distance,  and haste  to meet  the man who sacrifices.   
6 Come,  let us carry  out, O friends,  the purpose  wherewith  the Mother  threw  the Cow's  stall open,   Rig Veda – English Translation  
That wherewith  Manu  conquered  Visisipra,  wherewith  the wandering  merchant  gained  heaven's  water.   
7 Here,  urged  by hands,  loudly  hath rung the press−stone  wherewith  Navagvas  throu gh ten months  sang 
praises.   
Sarama  went  aright  and found  the cattle.  Angiras  gave effect  to all their labours.   
8 When  at the dawning  of this mighty  Goddess,  Angirases  all sang forth  with the cattle,−   
Their  spring  is in the loftiest  place  of meeting,−Sar ama found  the kine by Order's  pathway.   
9 Borne  by his Coursers  Seven  may Surya  visit the field that spreadeth  wide  for his long journey.   
Down  on the Soma  swooped  the rapid  Falcon.  Bright  was the young  Sage  moving  mid his cattle.   
10 Surya  hath mounted  to the shining  ocean  when  he hath yoked  his fair−backed  Tawny  Horses.   
The wise have  drawn  him like a ship through  water:  the floods  obedient  have  descended  hither.   
11 I lay upon  the Floods  your hymn,  lightwinning,  wherewith  Navagvas  their ten months  comple ted.  
Through  this our hymn  may we have  Gods  to guard  us: through  this our hymn  pass safe beyond  affliction.
  
 
HYMN  XLVI.  Visvedevas.  
1. WELL  knowing  I have  bound  me, horselike,  to the pole:  I carry  that which  bears  as on and gives  us hel
p.  
I seek for no release,  no turning  back  therefrom.  May he who knows  the way,  the Leader,  guide  me straig
ht.  
2 O Agni,  Indra,  Varuna,  and Mitra,  give,  O ye Gods,  and Marut  host,  and Visnu.   
May both Nasatyas,  Rudra,  heavenly  Matrons,  Pusan,  Sarasvati,  Bhaga,  accept  us.  
3 Indra  and Agni,  Mitra,  Varuna,  Aditi,  the Waters,  Mountains,  Maruts,  Sky, and Earth  and Heaven,   
Visnu  I call, Pusan,  and Brahmanaspati,  and Bhaga,  Samsa,  Savitar  that they may help.   
4 May Visnu  also and Vata  who injures  none,  and Soma  granter  of possessions  give us joy;  
And may the Rbhus  and the Asvins,  Tvastar  and Vibhvan  remember  us so that we may have  wealth.   
5 So may the band  of Maruts  dwelling  in the sky, the holy,  come  to us to sit on sacred  grass;   
Brhaspati  and Pusan  grant  us sure defence,  Varuna,  Mitra,  Aryaman  guard  and shelter  us.  
6 And may the Mountains  famed  in noble  eulogies,  and the fair−gleaming  Rivers  keep  us safe from  harm.
  
May Bhaga  the Dispenser  come  with power  and grace,  and far−pervading  Aditi  listen  to my call.  
7 May the Gods' Spouses  aid us of their own freewill,  aid us to offspring  and the winning  of the spoil.   
Grant  us protection,  O ye gracious  Goddesses,  ye who are on the earth  or in the waters'  realm.   
8 May the Dames,  wives  of Gods,  enjoy  our presents,  Rat, Asvini,  Agnayi, and Indrani.   
May Rodasi  and Varunani  hear us, and Goddesses  come  at the Matrons'  season.   
 
HYMN  XLVII.  Visvedevas.  
1. URGING  to toil and making  proclamation,  seeking  Heaven's  Daughter  comes  the Mighty  Mother:   
She comes,  the youthful  Hymn,  unto the Fathers,  inviting  to her home  and loudly  calling.   
2 Swift  in their motion,  hasting  to their duty,  reaching  the central  point  of life immortal,   
On every  side about  the earth  and heaven  go forth  the spacious  paths  without  a limit.   
3 Steer,  Sea, Red Bird with strong  wings,  he hath entered  the dwelling−place  of the Primeval  Father.   
A gay−hued  Stone  set in the midst  of heaven,  he hath gone  forth  and guards  mid−air's  two limits.   
4 Four  bear him up and give him rest and quiet,  and ten invigorate  the Babe  for travel.   
His kine most  excellent,  of threefold  nature,  pass swiftly  round  the boundaries  of heaven.   
5 Wondrous,  O people,  is the mystic  knowledge  that while  the waters  stand  the streams  are flowing:   Rig Veda – English Translation  
That,  separate  from  his Mother,  Two support  him, close ly−united,  twins,  here made  apparent.   
6 For him they lenghten  prayers  and acts of worship:  the Mothers  weave  garments  for him their offspring.
  
Rejoicing,  for the Steer's  impregning  contact,  his Spouses  move  on paths  or heaven  to meet  him.  
7 Be this our praise,  O Varuna  and Mitra  may this be health  and force  to us, O Agni.   
May we obtain  firm ground  and room  for resting:  Glory  to Heaven,  the lofty  habitation!   
 
HYMN  XLVIII.  Visvedevas.  
1. WHAT  may we meditate  for the beloved  Power,  mighty  in native  strength and glorious  in itself,   
Which  as a magic  energy  seeking  waters  spreads  even  to theimmeasurable  middle  region's  cloud?   
2 O'er all the region  with their uniform  advance  these  have spread  out the lore that giveth  heroes  strength.   
Back,  with their course reversed,  the others  pass away:  the pious  lengthens  life with those  that are before.   
3 With  pressing−stones  and with the bright  beams  of the day he hurls  his broadest  bolt against  the Guilefu
l 
One.   
Even  he whose  hundred  wander  in his own abode,  drivin g the days afar and bringing  them  again.   
4 I, to enjoy  the beauty  of his form,  behold  that rapid  rush of his as 'twere  an axe's  edge,   
What  time he gives  the man who calls on him in fight  wealth  like a dwelling−house  filled  full with store  o
f 
food.   
5 Four−faced  and nobly  clad,  Varuna,  urging  on the pious  to his task, stirs himself  with the tongue.   
Naught  by our human  nature  do we know  of him, him from  whom  Bhaga  Savitar  bestows  the boon.   
 
HYMN  XLIX.  Visvedevas.  
1. THIS  day I bring  God Savitar  to meet  you, and Bhaga  who allots  the wealth  of mortals.   
You,  Asvins,  Heroes  rich in treasures,  daily  seeking  your friendship  fain would  I turn hither.   
2 Knowing  full well the Asura's  time of coming,  worship  God Savitar  with hymns  and praises.   
Let him who right ly knoweth  speak  with homage  to him who dealeth  out man's  noblest  treasure.   
3 Not for reward  doth Pusan  send his blessings,  Bhaga,  or Aditi:  his garb is splendour.   
May Indra,  Visniu,  Varuna,  Mitra,  Agni  produce  auspicious  days,  the Wonder−Workers.   
4 Sending  the shelter  which  we ask, the foeless  Savitar  and the Rivers  shall  approach  us.  
When  I, the sacrifice's  priest,  invite  them,  may we he lords  of wealth  and rich possessions.   
5 They  who devote  such worship  to the Vasus,  singing  their hymns  to Varuna  and Mitra,   
Vouchsafe  them  ample  room,  far off be danger.  Through  grace  of Heaven  and Earth  may we be happy.   
 
HYMN  L. Visvedevas.  
1. LET every  mortal  man elect  the friendship  of the guiding  God.  Each  one solicits  him for wealth  and see
ks renown  to prosper  him.  
2 These,  leading  God,  are thine,  and these  here ready  to speak  after us.  
As such may we attain  to wealth  and wait with services  on thee.   
3 So further  honour  as our guests  the Hero  Gods  and then the Dames.   
May he remove  and keep  afar our foes and all who block  our path.   
4 Where  fire is set, and swiftly  runs the victim  dwelling  in the trough,   Rig Veda – English Translation  
He wins,  with heroes  in his home,  friendly  to man,  like constant  streams.   
5 May these  thy riches,  Leader  God!  that rule the car, be blest  to us,  
Yea, blest  to us for wealth  and weal.  This will we ponder  praising  strength,  this ponder  as we praise  the G
od.  
 
HYMN  LI. Visvedevas.  
1. WITH  all assistants,  Agni,  come  hither  to drink  the Soma−juice;  With  Gods  unto our sacred  gifts.   
2 Come  to the sacrifice,  O ye whose  ways  are right,  whose  laws are true,  
And drink  the draught  with Agni's  tongue.   
3 O Singer,  with the singers,  O Gracio us, with those  who move  at dawn,   
Come  to the Soma−draught  with Gods.   
4 To Indra  and to Vayu  dear,  this Soma,  by the mortar  pressed,   
Is now poured  forth  to fill the jar.  
5 Vayu,  come  hither  to the feast,  wellpleased  unto our sacred  gifts:   
Drink  of the Soma  juice  effused  come  to the food.   
6 Ye, Indra,  Vayu,  well deserve  to drink  the juices  pressed  by us.  
Gladly  accept  them,  spotless  Pair come  to the food.   
7 For Indra  and for Vayu  pressed  are Soma  juices  blent  with curd,   
As rivers  to the lowland  flow:  come  to the food.   
8 Associate  with all the Gods,  come,  with the Asvins  and with Dawn,   
Agni,  as erst with Atri, so enjoy  the juice.   
9 Associate  with Varuna,  with Mitra,  Soma,  Visnu,  come,   
Agni,  as erstwith  Atri, so enjoy  the juice.   
10 Associate  with Vasus,  with Adityas,  Indra,  Viyu,  come,  Agni  as erst with Atri, so enjoy  the juice.   
11 May Bhaga  and the Asvins  grant  us health  and wealth,  and Goddess  Adid  and he whom  none  resist.   
The Asura  Pusan  grant  us all prosperity,  and Heaven  and Earth  most  wise vouchsafe  us happiness.   
12 Let us solicit  Vayu  for prosperity,  and Soma  who is Lord  of all the world  for weal;   
 
For weal  Brhaspati  with all his company.  May the Adityas  bring  us health  and happiness.   
13 May all the Gods,  may Agni  the beneficent,  God of all men,  this day be with us for our weal.   
Help  us the Rbhus,  the Divine  Ones,  for our good.  May Rudra  bless  and keep  us from  calamity.   
14 Prosper  us, Mitra,  Varuna.  O wealthy  Pathya,  prosper  us.  
Indra  and Agni,  prosper  us; prosper  us thou,  O Aditi.   
15 Like Sun and Moon  may we pursue  in full prosperity  our path,   
And meet  with one who gives  again,  −who  knows  us well and slays  us not.  
 
HYMN  LII Maruts.  
1. SING  boldly  forth,  Syavasva,  with the Maruts  who are loud in song,  Who,  holy,  as their wont  is, joy in 
glory  that is free from  guile.   
2 For in their boldness  they are friends  of firm and sure heroic  strength.   
They  in their course,  bold−spirited,  guard  all men of their own accord.   
3 Like steers  in rapid  motion  they advance  and overtake  the nights;   
And thus the Maruts'  power  in heaven  and on the earth  we celebrate.   
4 With  boldness  to your Maruts  let us offer  laud and sacrifice:   
Who  all, through  ages of mankind,  guard  mortal  man from  injury.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
5 Praiseworthy,  givers  of good  gifts,  Heroes  with full and perfect  strength  −  
To Maruts,  Holy  Ones  of heaven,  will I extol  the sacrifice.   
6 The lofty  Heroes  cast their spears  and weapons  bright  with gleaming  gold.   
After  these  Maruts  followed  close,  like laughing  lightning  from  the sky, a splendour  of its own accord.   
7 They  who waxed  mighty,  of the earth, they who are in the wide  mid−air,   
Or in the rivers'  compass,  or in the abode  of ample  heaven.   
8 Praise  thou the Maruts'  company,  the valorous  and truly strong,   
The Heroes,  hasting,  by themselves  have  yoked  their deer for victory.   
9 Fair−gleaming,  on Parusni  they have  clothed  themselves  in robes  of wool,   
And with their chariot  tires they cleave  the rock asunder  in their might.   
10 Whether  as wanderers  from  the way or speeders  on or to the path,   
Under  these  names  the spreading  band  tend well the sacrifice  for me.  
11 To this the Heroes  well attend,  well do their teams  attend  to this.  
Visible  are their varied  forms.  Behold,  they are Paravatas.   
12 Hymn−singing,  seeking  water,  they,  praising,  have  danced  about  the spring.   
What  are they unto me? No thieves,  but helpers,  splendid  to behold.   
13 Sublime,  with lightnings  for their spears,  Sages  and Orderers  are they.   
Rsi, adore  that Marut  host,  and make  them  happy  with thy song.   
14 Rsi, invite  the Marut  band  with offerings,  as a maid  her friend.   
From  heaven,  too, Bold  Ones,  in your might  haste  hither  glorified  with songs.   
15 Thinking  of these  now let him come,  as with the escort  of the Gods,   
And with the splendid  Princes,  famed  for rapid  courses,  to the gifts.   
16 Princes,  who,  when  I asked  their kin, named  Prsni  as their Mother−cow,   
And the impetuous  Rudra  they,  the Mighty  Ones,  declared  their Sire.  
17 The mighty  ones,  the seven  times  seven,  have  singly  given  me hundred  gifts.   
I have  obtained  on Yamuna  famed  wealth  in kine and wealth  in steeds.   
 
HYMN  LIII. Maruts.  
1. Who  knows  the birth  of these,  or who lived  in the Maruts'  favour  in the days of old  
What  time their spotted  deer were  yoked?   
2 Who,  when  they stood  upon  their cars, hath heard  them  tell the way they went?   
 
Who  was the bounteous  man to whom  their kindred  rains  flowed  down  with food of sacrifice?   
3 To me they told it, and they came  with winged  steeds  radiant  to the draught,   
Youths,  Heroes  free from  spot or stain:  Behold  us here and praise  thou us;  
4 Who  shine  self−luminous  with ornaments  and swords,  with breastplates,  armlets,  and with wreaths,   
Arrayed  on chariots  and with bows.   
5 O swift  to pour your bounties  down,  ye Maruts,  with delight  I look upon  your cars,  
Like splendours  coming  through  the rain.  
6 Munificent  Heroes,  they have  cast heaven's  treasury  down  for the worshipper's  behoof:   
They  set the storm−cloud  free tostream  through  both the worlds,  and rainfloods  flow o'er desert  spots.   
7 The bursting  streams  m billowy  flood  have  spread  abroad,  like milch−kine,  o'er the firmament.   
Like swift  steeds  hasting  to their journey's  resting−place,  to every  side run glittering  brooks.   
8 Hither,  O Maruts,  come  from  heaven,  from  mid−air,  or from  near at hand   
Tarry  not far away  from  us.  
9 So let not Rasa,  Krumu,  or Anitabha,  Kubha,  or Sindhu  hold you back.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Let not the watery  Sarayti  obstruct  your way.  With  us be all the bliss ye give.   
10 That brilliant  gathering  of your cars, the company  of Maruts,  of the Youthful  Ones,   
The rain−showers,  speeding  on, attend.   
11 With  eulogies  and hymns  may we follow  your army,  troop  by troop,  and band  by band,   
And company  by company.   
12 To what  oblation−giver,  sprung  of noble  ancestry,  have sped  
The Maruts  on this course  to−day?   
13 Vouchsafe  to us the bounty,  that which  we implore,  through  whic h, for child  and progeny,   
Ye give the seed of corn that wasteth  not away,  and bliss that reacheth  to all life.  
14 May we in safety  pass by those  who slander  us, leaving  behind  disgrace  and hate.   
Maruts,  may we be there  when  ye, at dawn,  in rest and toil, rain waters  down  and balm.   
15 Favoured  by Gods  shall  he the man,  O Heroes,  Marutr!  and possessed  of noble  sons,   
Whom  ye protect.  Such  may we be.  
16 Praise  the Free−givers.  At this liberal  patron's  rite they joy like cattle  in the mead.   
So call thou unto them  who come  as ancient  Friends:  hymn  those  who love thee with a song.   
 
HYMN  LIV. Maruts.  
1. THIS  hymn  will I make  for the Marut  host who bright  in native  splendour  cast the mountains  down.   
Sing the great  strength  of those  illustrious  in renown,  who stay the heat,  who sacrifice  on heights  of heave
n.  
2 O Maruts,  rich in water,  strengtheners  of life are your strong  bands  with harnessed  steeds,  that wander  f
ar.  
Trita  roars  out at him who aims the lightning−flash.  The waters  sweeping  round  are thunde ring on their w
ay.  
3 They  gleam  with lightning,  Heroes,  Casters  of the Stone,  wind−rapid  Maruts,  overthrowers  of the bills,   
Oft through  desire  to rain coming  with storm  of hail, roaring  in onset,  violent  and exceeding  strong.   
4 When,  mighty  Rudras,  through the nights  and through  the days,  when  through  the sky and realms  of air, 
shakers  of all,  
When  over the broad  fields  ye drive  along  like ships,  e'en to strongholds  ye come,  Maruts,  but are not 
harmed.   
5 Maruts,  this hero strength  and majesty  of yours  hath,  like the Sun, extended  o'er a lengthened  way,   
When  in your course  like deer with splendour  unsubdued  ye bowed  the hill that gives  imperishable  rain.  
6 Bright  shone  your host,  ye Sages,  Maruts,  when  ye smote  the waving  tree as when  the worm  consumet h
 it.  
Accordant,  as the eye guides  him who walks,  have  ye led our devotion  onward  by an easy path.   
7 Never  is he, O Maruts,  slain  or overcome,  never  doth he decay  ne'er  is distressed  or harmed;   
His treasures,  his resources,  never  waste  away,  whom.  wheth er he be prince  or Rsi, ye direct.   
8 With  harnessed  team  like heroes  overcoming  troops,  the friendly  Maruts,  laden  with their water−casks,   
Let the spring  flow,  and when  impetuous'  they roar they inundate  the earth  with floods  of pleasant  meath.   
 
9 Free for the Maruts  is the earth  with sloping  ways,  free for the rushing  Ones  is heaven  with steep  descen
ts.  
The paths  of air's mid−region  are precipitous,  precipitous  the mountains  with their running  streams.   
10 When,  as the Sun hath risen  up, ye take deligh t, O bounteous  radiant  Maruts,  Heroes  of the sky,  
Your  coursers  weary  not when  speeding  on.their  way,  and rapidly  ye reach  the end of this your path.   
11 Lances  are on your shoulders,  anklets  on your feet, gold chains  are on your breasts,  gems,  Maruts,  on yRig Veda – English Translation  
our 
car.  
Lightnings  aglow  with flame  are flashing  in your hands,  and visors  wroughtof  gold are laid upon  your hea
ds.  
12 Maruts,  in eager  stir ye shake  the vault  of heaven,  splendid  beyond  conception,  for its shining  fruit.   
They  gathered  when  they let their deeds  of might  flash  forth.  The Pious  Ones  send forth  a far−resounding  
shout.   
13 Sage  Maruts,  may we be the drivers  of the car of riches  ful I of life that have  been  given  by you.  
O Maruts,  let that wealth  in thousands  dwell  with us which  never  vanishes  like Tisya  from  the sky.  
14 Maruts,  ye further  wealth  with longedfor  heroes,  further  the Rsi skilled  in chanted  verses.   
Ye give the Bharata  as his strength,  a charger,  and ye bestow  a king who quickly  listens.   
15 Of you, most  swift  to succour!  I solicit  wealth  wherewith  we may spread  forth  mid men like as the Sun
.  
Accept,  O Maruts,  graciously  this hymn  of mine  that we may live a hundred  winters  through  its power.   
 
HYMN  LV. Maruts.  
1. WITH  gleaming  lances,  with their breasts  adorned  with gold,  the Maruts,  rushing  onward,  hold high po
wer 
of life.  
They  hasten  with swift  steeds  easy to be controlled.  Their  cars moved  onward  as they went  to victory.   
2 Ye, as ye wist,  have gained  of your own selves  your power:  high,  O ye Mighty  Ones,  and wide  ye shine 
abroad.   
They  with their strength  have even  measured  out the sky.  
Their  cars moved  onward  as they went  to victory.   
3 Strong,  born together,  they together  have  waxed  great:  the Heroes  more  and more  have  grown  to majest
y  
Resplendent  as the Sun's  beams  in their light are they.  Their  cars moved  onward  as they went  to victory.   
4 Maruts,  your mightiness  deserves  to be adored,  sight  to be longed  for like the shining  of the Sun.  
So lead us with your aid to immortality.   
Their  cars moved  onward  as they went  to victory.   
5 O Maruts,  from  the Ocean  ye uplift  the rain, and fraught  with vaporous  moisture  pour the torrents  down.
  
Never,  ye Wonder−Workers,  are your Milch−kine  dry. Their  cars moved  onward  as they went  to victory.   
6 When  to your car−poles  ye have  yoked your spotted  deer to be your steeds,  and put your golden  mantles
 on,  
O Maruts,  ye disperse  all enemies  abroad.  Their  cars moved  onward  as they went  to victory.   
7 Neither  the mountains  nor the rivers  keep  you back:  whither  ye have  resolved  thither  ye, Maruts,  go.  
Ye compass  round  about  even the heaven  and earth.  Their  cars moved  onward  as they went  to victory.   
Whate'er  is ancient,  Maruts,  what  of recent  time,  whate'er  is spoken,  Vasus,  what  is chanted  forth,   
They  who take cognizance  of all of this are ye. Their  cars moved  onward  as they went  to victory.   
9 Be gracious  unto us, ye Maruts,  slay us not extend  ye unto us shelter  of many  a sort.  
Pay due regard  unto our friendship  and our praise.  Their  cars moved  onward  as they went  to victory.   
10 O Maru ts, lead us on to higher  fortune  deliver  us, when  lauded,  from  afflictions.   
Accept,  ye Holy  Ones,  the gifts we bring  you. May we be masters  of abundant  riches.   
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  LVI. Maruts.  
1. AGNI,  that valorous  company  adorned  with ornaments  of gold,  The people  of the Maruts,  I call down  t
o−day  even  from  the luminous  realm  of heaven.   
2 Even  as thou thinkest  in thy heart,  thither  my wishes  also tend.   
Those  who have come  most  near to thine  invoking  calls,  strengthen  them  fearful  to behold.   
 
3 Earth,  like a boun teous  lady,  liberal  of her gifts,  struck  down  and shaken,  yet exultant,  comes  to us.  
Impetuous  as a bear,  O Maruts,  is youi rush terrible  as a dreadful  bull..   
4 They  who with mighty  strength  o'erthrow  like oxen  difficult  to yoke,   
Cause  e'en the heavenly  stone  to shake  ' yea, shake  the rocky  mountain  as they race along.   
5 Rise up! even  now with lauds  I call the very numerous  company,   
Unequalled,  of these  Maruts,  like a herd of kine,  grown  up together  in their strength.   
6 Bind  to your car the bright  red mares,  yoke  the red coursers  to your car.  
Bind  to the pole,  to draw,  the fleet−foot  tawny  steeds,  the best at drawing,  to the pole.   
7 Yea, and this loudly−neighing  bright  red vigorous  horse  who hath been  sutioned,  fair to see,  
Let him not cause  delay,  O Maruts,,  in your course,  urge ye him onward  in your cars.  
8 The Maruts'  chariot,  ever fain to gather  glory,  we invoke,   
Which  Rodasi  hath mounted,  bringing  pleasant  gifts,  with Maruts  in her company.   
9 I call that brilliant  band  of yours,  adorable,  rapid on the car  
Whereon  the bounteous  Dame,  auspicious,  nobly  born,  shows  glorious  with the Marut  host.   
 
HYMN  LVII.  Maruts.  
1. OF one accord,  with Indra,  O ye Rudras,  come  borne  on your golden  car for our prosperity.   
An offering  from  us, this hymn  is brought  to you, as, unto one who th irsts for water,  heavenly  springs.   
2 Armed  with your daggers,  full of wisdom,  armed  with spears,  armed  with your quivers,  armed  with arro
ws, 
with good  bows,   
Good  horses  and good  cars have  ye, O Prsni's  Sons:  ye, Maruts,  with good  weapons  go to victory.   
3 From  hills and heaven  ye shake  wealth  for the worshipper:  in terror  at your coming  low the woods  bow 
down.   
Ye make  the earth  to tremble,  Sons  of Prsni,  when  for victory  ye have  yoked,  fierce  Ones!  your spotted  de
er.  
4 Bright  with the blasts  of wind,  wrapped  in their robes  of rain, like twins  of noble  aspect  and of lovely  fo
rm,  
The Maruts,  spotless,  with steeds  tawnyhued  and red, strong  in their mightiness  and spreading  wide  like 
heaven.   
5 Rich  in adornment,  rich in drops, munificent,  bright  in their aspect,  yielding  bounties  that endure,   
Noble  by birth,  adorned  with gold upon  their breasts,  the Singers  of the sky have  won immortal  fame.   
6 Borne  on both shoulders,  O ye Maruts,  are your spears:  within  your arms  is laid your energy  and 3trengt
h.  
Bold  thoughts  are in your heads,  your weapons  in your cars, all glorious  majesty  is moulded  on your form
s.  
7 Vouchsafe  to us, O Maruts,  splendid  bounty  in cattle  and in steeds,  in cars and heroes.   
Children  of Rudra,  give us high distinction:  may I enjoy  your Godlike  help and favour.   
8 Ho! Maruts,  Heroes,  skilled  in Law,  immortal,  be gracious  unto us, ye rich in treasures,   
Ye hearers  of the truth,  ye sage and youthful,  grown  mighty,  dwelling  on the lofty mountains.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
 
HYMN  LVIII. Maruts.  
1. Now  do I glorify  their mighty  cohort,  the company  of these  the youthful  Maruts,   
Who  ride impetuous  on with rapid  horses,  and radiant  in themselves,  are Lords  of Amrta.   
2 The mighty  glittering  band,  arm−bound  with bracelets,  givers  of bliss, unmeasured  in their greatness,   
With  magical  powers,  bountiful,  ever−roaring,−these,  liberal  Heroes,  venerate  thou singer.   
3 This day may all your water−bringers,  Maruts,  they who impel  the falling  rain, approach  us.  
This fire, O Maruts,  hath been  duly kindled;  let it find favour  with you, youthful  Sages.   
4 Ye raise  up for the folk an active  ruler  whom,  Holy  Ones!  a Master's  hand  hath fashioned.   
Ye send the fighter  hand  to hand,  armmighty,  and the brave  hero,  Maruts  with good  horses.   
5 They  spring  forth more  and more,  strong  in their glories,  like days,  like spokes  where  none  are last in or
der.  
Highest  and mightiest  are the Sons  of Prsni.  Firm  to their own intention  cling  the Maruts.   
6 When  ye have  hastened  on with spotted  coursers,  O Maruts,  on your cars with strong−wrought  fellies,   
 
The waters  are disturbed,  the woods  are shattered.  Let Dyaus  the Red Steer  send his thunder  downward.   
7 Even  Earth  hath spread  herself  wide  at their coming,  and they as husbands  have  with power  impregned  
her.  
They  to the pole have  yoked  the winds  for coursers:  their sweat  have  they made  rain, these  Sons  of Rudra.
  
8 Ho! Maruts,  Heroes,  skilled  in Law,  immortal,  be gracious  unto us, ye rich in treasures,   
Ye hearers  of the truth,  ye sage and youthful,  grown  mighty,  dwelling  on the lofty mountains.   
 
HYMN  LIX. Maruts.  
1. YOUR  spy hath called  to you to give prosperity.  I sing to Heaven  and Earth  and offer  sacrifice.   
They  bathe  their steeds  and hasten  through  the firmament:  they spread  abroad  their radiance  through  the s
ea 
of cloud.   
2 Earth  shakes  and reels  in terror  at their onward  rush,  like a full ship which,  quivering,  lets the water  in.  
Marked  on their ways  are they,  visible  from  afar: the Heroes  press  between  in mighty  armament.   
3 As the exalted  horn of bulls  for splendid  might,  as the Sun's  eye set in the firmament's  expanse,   
Like vigorous  horses  ye are beauteous  to behold,  and for your glory  show  like bridegrooms,  O ye Men.   
4 Who,  O ye Maruts,  may attain  the mighty  lore of you the mighty,  who may reach  your manly  deeds?   
Ye, verily,  make  earth  tremble  like a ray of light what  time ye bring  your boons  to give prosperity,   
5 Like steeds  of ruddy  colour,  scions  of one race,  as foremost  champions  they have  battled  in the van.  
The Heroes  have  waxed  strong  like we.1grown  manly  youths;  with floods  of rain they make  the Sun's  eye 
fade away,   
6 Having  no eldest  and no youngest  in their band,  no middlomost,  preeminent  they have  waxed  in might,   
These  Sons  of Prsni,  sprung  of noble  ancestry:  come  hitberward  to us, ye bridegrooms  of the sky.  
7 Like birds  of air they flew with might  in lengthened  lines  from  heaven's  high ridges  to the borders  of the 
sky.  
The steeds  who carry  them,  as Gods  and mortals  know,  have  caused  the waters  of the mounuains  to desGe
nd.  
8 May Dyaus,  the Infinite,  roar for our banquet:  may Dawns  toil for us, glittering  with moisture.   
Lauded  by thee,  these  Maruts,  Sons  o Rudra,  O Rsi, have sent down  the heavenly  treasure.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
 
HYMN  LX. Maruts.  
1. I LAUD  with reverence  the gracious  Agni:  here may he sit and part our meed  among  us.  
As with spoil−seeking  cars I bring  oblation:  turned  rightward  I will swell  the Marut's,  praise−song.   
2 The Maruts,  yea, the Rudras,  who have  mounted  their famous  spotted  deer and cars swift−moving,−   
Before  you, fierce  Ones!  woods  bow down  in terror:  Earth,  even  the mountain,  trembles  at your coming.   
3 Though  vast and tall, the mountain  is affrighted,  the height  of heaven  is shaken  at your roaring   
When,  armed  with lances,  ye are sporting,  Maruts,  and rush along  together  like the waters.   
4 They,  like young  suitors,  sons of wealthy  houses,  have with their golden  natures  decked  their bodies.   
Strong  on their cars, the lordly  Ones,  for glory,  have  set their splendours  on their forms  for ever.   
5 None  being  eldest,  none  among  them youngest,  as brothers  they have  grown  to happy  fortune.   
May their Sire Rudra,  young  and deft, and Prsni  pouring  much  milk,  bring  fair days to the Maruts.   
6 Whether,  O blessed  Maruts,  ye be dwelling  in highest,  midmost,  or in lowest  heaven,   
Thence,  O ye Rudras,  and thou also, Agni,  notice  the sacrificial  food we offer.   
7 O Maruts,  Lords  of all, when  Agni  and when  ye drive  downward  from  sublimest  heaven  along  the heigh
ts,  
Shakers  of all, rejoicing,  slayers  of the foe, give riches  to the Soma−pressing  worshipper.   
8 O Agni,  with the Maruts  as they gleam  and sing,  gathered  in troop,  rejoicing  drink  the Soma  juice;   
With  these  the living  ones who cleanse  and further  all, joined  with thy banner,  O Vaisvanara,  from  of old.
  
 
HYMN  LXI. Maruts.  
1. 1. O HEROES  lordliest  of all, who are ye that have singly  come  Forth  from  a region  most  remote
?  
 
2. 2. Where  are your horses,  where  the reins?  How  came  ye? how had ye the power?   
Rein  was on nose and seat on back.   
3 The whip  is laid upon  the flank.  The heroes  stretch  their thighs  apart,   
Like women  when  the babe is born.   
4 Go ye, O Heroes,  far away,  ye bridegrooms  with a lovely  Spouse   
That ye may warm  you at the fire.  
5 May she gain cattle  for her meed,  hundreds  of sheep  and steeds  and kine,   
Who  threw  embracing  arms  around  the hero whom  gyavaiva  praised.   
6 Yea, many  a woman  is more  firm and better  than the man who turns   
Away  from  Gods,  andoffers  not.  
7 She who discerns  the weak  and worn,  the man who thirsts  and is in want   
She sets her mind  upon  the Gods.   
8 And yet full many  a one, unpraised,  mean  niggard,  is entitled  man:   
Only  in weregild  is he such.   
9 And she, the young,  the joyous−spirited,  divulged  the path to Syava,  yea, to me.  
Two red steeds  carried  me to Purumilha's  side, that sage of far−extended  fame,   
10 Him who,  like Vaidadasvi,  like Taranta,  hath bestowed  on me  
A hundred  cows  in liberal  gift.  
11 They  who are borne  by rapid  steeds,  drinking  the meath  that gives  delight,   
They  have  attained  high glories  here.   
12 They  by whose  splendour  both the world s are over−spread  they shine  on cars  Rig Veda – English Translation  
As the gold gleams  above  in heaven.   
13 That Marut  band  is ever young,  borne  on bright  cars, unblamable,   
Moving  to victory,  checked  by none.   
14 Who  knoweth,  verily,  of these  where  the All−shakers  take delight,   
Born,  spotless,  after sacred  Law?   
15 Guides  are ye, lovers  of the song to mortal  man through  holy hymn,   
And hearers  when  he cries  for help.   
16 Do ye, destroyers  of the foe, worshipful  and exceeding  bright,   
Send  down  the treasures  that we crave.   
17 OUrmya,  bear thou far away  to Darbhya  this my hymn  of praise,   
Songs,  Goddess,  as if chariot−borne.   
18 From  me to Rathaviti  say, when  he hath pressed  the Soma  juice,   
The wish  I had departeth  not.  
19 This wealthy  Rathaviti  dwells  among  the people  rich in kine,   
Among  the mountains,  far withdrawn.   
 
 
HYMN  LXII.  Mitra−Varuna  
1. BY your high Law firm order  is established  there  where  they loose  for travel  Surya's  horses.   
Ten hundred  stood  together:  there  I looked  on this the most  marvellous  Deities'  one chief  glory.  
2 This,  Mitra−Varuna,  is your special  greatness:  floods  that stood  there  they with the days attracted.   
Ye cause  to flow all voices  of the cowpen:  your single  chariotfelly  hath rolled  hither.   
3 O Mitra−Varuna,  ye by your greatness,  both Kings,  have  firmly stablished  earth  and heaven,   
Ye caused  the cows  to stream,  the plants  to flourish,  and, scattering  swift  drops,  sent down  the rain−flood.
  
4 Let your well−harnessed  horses  bear you hither:  hitherward  let them  come  with reins  drawn  tightly.   
 
A coveri ng cloud  of sacred  oil attends  you, and your streams  flow to us from  days aforetime.   
5 To make  the lustre  wider  and more  famous,  guarding  the sacred  grass  with veneration,   
Ye, Mitra−Varuna,  firm,  strong,  awe−inspiring,  are seated  on a throne  amid  oblatio ns.  
6 With  hands  that shed no blood,  guarding  the pious,  whom,  Varuni3,  ye save amid  oblations.   
Ye Twain,  together,  Kings  of willing  spirit,  uphold  dominion  based  on thousand  pillars.   
7 Adorned  with gold,  its columns  are of iron. in heaven  it glitters  like a whip  for horses;   
Or stablished  on a field deep−spoiled  and fruitful.  So may we share  the meath  that loads  your car−seat.   
8 Ye mount  your car gold−hued  at break  of morning,  and iron−pillared  when  the Sun is setting,   
And from  that place,  O Varuna  and Mitra,  behold  infinity  and limit~tion.   
9 Bountiful  guardians  of the world!  the shelter  that is impenetrable,  strongest,  flawless,   
Aid us with that, O Varuna  and Mitra,  and when  we long to win may we be victors.   
 
HYMN  LXIII.  Mitra−Varuna.  
1. GUARDIAN S of Order,  ye whose  Laws  are ever true, in the sublimest  heaven  your chariot  ye ascend.   
O Mitra−Varuna  whomsoe'er  ye: favour,  here,  to him the rain with sweetness  streameth  down  from  heave
n.  
2 This world's  imperial  Kings,  O Mitra−Varuna,  ye rule in holy synod,  looking  on the light.   
We pray for rain, your boon,  and immortality.  Through  heaven  and over earth  the thunderers  take their waRig Veda – English Translation  
y.  
3 Imperial  Kings,  strong,  Heroes,  Lords  of earth  and heaven,  Mitra  and Varuna,  ye ever active  Ones,   
Ye wait on thund er with the many−tinted  clouds,  and by the Asura's  magic  power  cause  Heaven  to rain.  
4 Your  magic,  Mitra−Varuna,  resteth  in the heaven.  The Sun, the wondrous  weapon,  cometh  forth  as light
.  
Ye hide him in the sky with cloud  and flood  of rain, and water−dr ops, Parjanya!  full of sweetness  flow.   
5 The Maruts  yoke  their easy car for victory,  O Mitra−Varuna,  as a hero in the wars.   
The thunderers  roam  through  regions  varied  in their hues.  Imperial  Kings,  bedew  us with the milk of heav
en.  
6 Refreshing  is your voice,  O Mitra−Varuna:  Parjanya  sendeth  out a wondrous  mighty  voice.   
With  magic  power  the Maruts  clothe  them  with the clouds.  Ye Two cause  Heaven  to rain, the red, the 
spotless  One.   
7 Wise,  with your Law and through  the Asura's  magic  power  ye guard  the ordinances,  Mitra−Varuna.   
Ye by eternal  Order  govern  all the world.  Ye set the Sun in heaven  as a refulgent  car.  
 
HYMN  LX1V.  Mitra−Varuna  
1. You,  foeman−slaying  Varuna  and Mitra,  we invoke  with song,  Who,  as with penfold  of your arms,  enc
ompass  round  the realm  of light.   
2 Stretch  out your arms  with favouring  love unto this man who singeth  hymns,   
For in all places  is sung forth  your evergracious  friendliness.   
3 That I may gain a refuge  now,  may my steps  be on Mitra's  path.   
Men go protected  in the charge of this dear Friend  who harms  us not.  
4 Mitra  and Varuna,  from  you may I, by song,  win noblest  meed.   
That shall  stir envy  in the homes  of wealthy  chiefs  and those  who praise.   
5 With  your fair splendours,  Varuna  and Mitra,  to our gathering  come,   
That in their homes  the wealthy  chiefs  and they who are your friends  may thrive.   
6 With  those,  moreover,  among  whom  ye hold your high supremacy,   
Vouchsafe  us room  that we may win strength  for prosperity  and wealth.   
7 When  morning  flushes,  Holy  Ones!  in the Gods'  realm  where  white  Cows  shine,   
Supporting  Arcananas,  speed,  ye Heroes,  with your active  feet hither  to my pressed  Soma  juice.   
 
HYMN  LXV Mitra−Varuna.  
1. FULL  wise is he who hath discerned:  let him speak  to us of the Gods,−   
The man whose  praise−songs  Varuna  the beautiful,  or Mitra,  loves.   
2 For they are Kings  of noblest  might,  of glorious  fame  most  widely  spread;   
Lords  of the brave,  who strengthen  Law,  the Holy  Ones  with every  race.   
3 Approaching  you with prayer  for aid, together  I address  you first  
We who have good  steeds  call on you, Most  Sage,  to give us strength  besides.   
4 E'en out of misery  Mitra  gives  a way to dwelling  at our case,   
For he who worships  hath the grace  of Mitra,  fighter  in the van. '  
5 In Mitra's  shelter  that extends  to utmost  distance  may we dwell,   
Unmenaced,  guarded  by the care,  ever as sons of Varuna.   
6 Ye, Mitra,  urge this people  on, and to one end direct  their ways.   
Neglect  not ye the wealthy  chiefs,  neglect  not us the Rsis:  be our guardians  when  ye quaff  the milk.   
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  LXVI.  Mitra−Varuna.  
1. O SAPIENT  man,  call the Two Gods,  the very wise,  who slay the foe. For Varuna,  whose  form  is Law,
 place  offerings  for his great  delight.   
2 For they have  won unbroken  sway  in full perfection,  power  divine.   
And,  like high laws,  the world  of man hath been  made  beautiful  as light.   
3 Therefore  we praise  you that your cars may travel  far in front  of ours−   
You who accept  the eulogy  of Ratahavya  with his hymns.   
4 And ye show  wMom,  Wondrous  Gods  with fulness  of intellIgence.   
By men's  discernment  are Ve marked,  O ye whose  might  is purified.   
5 This is the Law sublime,  O Earth:  to aid the Rsis'  toil for fame   
The Two,  wide−spreading,  are prepared.  They  come  with ample  overflow.   
6 Mitra,  ye Gods  with wandering  eyes,  would  that the worshippers  and we  
Might  strive  to reach  the realm  ye rule, most  spacious  and protected  well,   
 
HYMN  LXVII.  Mitra−Varuna.  
1. YE Gods , Adityas,  Varuna,  Aryaman,  Mitra,  verily  Have  here obtained  supremest  sway,  high,  holy,  set
 apart  for you.  
2 When,  Varuna  and Mitra,  ye sit in your golden  dwelling−place,   
Ye Twain,  supporters  of mankind,  foeslayers,  give felicity.   
3 All these,  possesso rs of all wealth,  Varuna,  Mitra,  Aryaman,   
Follow  their ways,  as if with feet, and guard  from  injury  mortal  man.   
4 For they are true, they cleave  to Law,  held holy among  every  race,   
Good  leaders,  bounteous  in their gifts,  deliverers  even  from  distress.   
5 Which  of your persons,  Varuna  or Mitra,  merits  not our praise?   
Therefore  our thought  is turned  to you, the Atris'  thought  is turned  to you.  
 
HYMN  LXVIII.  Mitra−Varuna.  
1. SING  forth  unto your Varuna  and Mitra  with a song  inspired.  They,  Mighty  Lords,  are lofty Law  
2 Full springs  of fatness,  Sovran  Kings,  Mitra.  and Varuna,  the Twain,   
Gods  glorified  among  the Gods.   
3 So help ye us to riches,  great  terrestrial  and celestial  wealth:   
 
Vast is your sway  among  the Gods.   
4 Carefully  tending  Law with Law they have  attained  their vigorous  might.   
The two Gods  wax devoid  of guile.   
5 With  rainy  skies  and streaming  floods,  Lords  of the strength  that bringeth  gifts,   
A lofty  seat have  they attained.   
 
HYMN  LXIX.  Mitra−Varuna.  
1. THREE  spheres  of light,  O Varuna,  three  heavens,  three  firmaments  ye comprehend,  O Mitra:   
Waxed  strong,  ye keep  the splendour  of dominion,  guarding  the Ordinance  that lasts for ever.   
2 Ye, Varuna,  have  kine who yield  refreshm ent; Mitra,  your floods  pour water  full of sweetness.   
There  stand  the Three  Steers,  splendid  in their brightness,  who fill the three  world−bowls  with genial  Rig Veda – English Translation  
moisture.   
3 I call at dawn  on Aditi  the Goddess,  I call at noon  and when  the Sun is setting.   
I pray, O Mitra−Varuna,  for safety,  for wealth  and progeny,  in rest and trouble.   
4 Ye who uphold  the region,  sphere  of brightness,  ye who support  earth's  realm  Divine  Adityas,   
The Immortal  Gods,  O Varuna  and Mitra,  never  impair  your everlasting  statutes.   
 
HYMN  LXX.  Mitra−Varuna.  
1. EVEN  far and wide,  O Varuna  and Mitra,  doth your grace  extend.  May I obtain  your kind good−will.   
2 From  you, benignant  Gods,  may we gain fully  food for sustenance.   
Such,  O ye Rudras,  my we be.  
3 Guard  us, O Rudras.  with your guar4  save us, ye skilled  to save,  my we  
Subdue  the Dasyus,  we ourselves,   
4 Or ne'er  may we, O Wondrous  Strong,  enjoy  another's  solemn  feast,   
Ourselves,  our sons,  or progeny.   
 
HYMN  LXXI.  Mitra−Varuna.  
1. O Varuna  and Mitra,  ye who slay the foemen,  come with might  To this our goodly  sacrifice.   
2 For, Varuna  and Mitra,  ye Sages  are Rulers  over all. Fill full our songs,  for this ye can.  
3 Come  to the juice  that we have  pressed.  Varuna,  Mitra,  come  to drink   
This Soma  of the worshipper.   
 
HYMN  LXXIL  Mitra−Varuna.  
1 To Varuna  and Mitra  we offerwith  songs,  as Atri did. Sit on the sacred  grass  to drink  the Soma  juice.   
2 By Ordinance  and Law ye dwell  in peace  secure,  bestirring  men.   
Sit on the sacred  grass  to drink  the Soma  juice.   
3 May Varuna  and Mitra, for our help,  accept  the sacrifice.   
Sit on the sacred  grass  to drink  the Soma  juice.   
 
HYMN  LXXIII.  Asvins.  
1. WHETHER,  O Asvins,  ye this day be far remote  or near at hand,  In
 many  spots  or in mid−air,  come  hither,  Lords  of ample  wealth.   
2 These  here, who show  o'er widest  space,  bringing  full many  a wondrous  act,  
Resistless,  lovingly  I seek,  I call the Mightiest  to enjoy.   
3 Another  beauteous  wheel  have  ye fixed  there  to decorate  your car.  
With  others  through  the realms  ye roam  in might  unto the neighbouring  tribes.   
4 That deed  of yours  that is extolled,  Visvas!  hath all been  done  with this.  
Born  otherwise,  and spotless,  ye have  entered  kinship's  bonds  with us.  
5 When  Surya  mounted  on your car that rolls for ever rapidly,   
Birds  of red hue were  round  about  and burning  splendours  compassed  you.  
6 Atri bethinks  himself  of you, O Heroes,  with a friendly  mind,   
What  time,  Nasatyas,  with his mouth  he stirs the spotless  flame  for you.  
7 Strong  is your swiftly  moving  steed,  famed  his exertion  in the course  Rig Veda – English Translation  
Whe n by your great  deeds,  Atyins,  Chiefs,  Atri is brought  to us again.   
8 Lovers  of sweetness,  Rudras,  she who streams  with sweetness  waits  on you.  
When  ye have  travelled  through  the seas men bring  you gifts of well−dressed  food.   
9 Asvins,  with truth  they call you Twain  bestowers  of felicity;   
At sacrifice  most  prompt  to hear,  most  gracious  ye at sacrifice.   
10 Most  pleasing  to the Asvins  be these  prayers  which  magnify  their might,   
Which  we have  fashioned,  even  as cars high reverence  have  we spoken  forth.   
 
HYMN  LXXIV.  Asvins.  
1. WHERE  in the heavens  are ye to−day,  Gods,  Asvins,  rich in constancy?  Hear  this, ye excellent  as Steer
s: Atri inviteth  you to come.   
2 Where  are they now?  Where  are the Twain,  the famed  Nasatyas,  Gods  in heaven?   
Who  is the man ye strive  to reach?  Who  of your suppliants  is with you?   
3 Whom  do ye visit,  whom  approach?  to whom  direct  your harnessed  car?  
With  whose  devotions  are ye pleased?  We long for you to further  us.  
4 Ye, Strengtheners,  for Paura  stir the filler  swimming  in the flood,   
Advancing  to be captured  like a lion to the ambuscade.   
5 Ye from  cyavana  worn  with age removed  his skin as 'twere  a robe.   
So, when  ye made  him young  again,  he stirred  the longing  of a dame.   
6 Here  is the man who lauds  you both:  to see your glory  are we here.   
Now  bear me, come  with saving  help,  ye who are rich in store  of wealth.   
7 Who  among  many  mortal  men this day hath won you to himself?   
What  bard,  accepters  of the bard?  Who,  rich in wealth!  with sacrifice?   
8 O Asvins,  may your car approach,  most  excellent  of cars for speed.   
Through  many  regions  may our praise  pass onward  among  mortal  men.   
9 May our laudation  of you Twain,  lovers  of meath!  be sweet  to you.  
Fly hitherward,  ye wise of heart,  like falcons  with your winged  steeds.   
10 O Asvins,  when  at any time ye listen  to this call of mine,   
For you is dainty  food prepared:  they mix refreshing  food for you.  
 
HYMN  LXXV.  Asvins.  
1. To meet  your treasure−bringing  car, the mighty  car most  dear to us, Asvins,  the Rsi is prepared,  your ra
iser, with his song of prais e. Lovers  of sweetness,  hear my call.  
2 Pass,  O ye Asvins,  pass away  beyond  all tribes  of selfish  men,   
Wonderful,  with your golden  paths,  most  gracious,  bringers  of the flood.  Lovers  of sweetness,  hear my ca
ll.  
3 Come  to us, O ye Asvin  Pair, bringing  your precious  treasures,  come   
Ye Rudras,  on your paths  of gold,  rejoicing,  rich in store  of wealth.  Lovers  of sweetness,  hear my call.  
 
4 O strong  and Good,  the voice  of him who lauds  you well cleaves  to your car.  
And that great  beast,  your chariot−steed,  fair, wonderful,  makes  dainty  food.  Lovers  of sweetness,  hear m
y 
call.  
5 Watchful  in spirit,  born on cars, impetuous,  listing  to his cry,  
Asvins,  with winged  steeds  ye speed  down  to cyavana  void of guile.  Lovers  of sweetness,  hear my call.  Rig Veda – English Translation  
6 Hither,  O Heroes,  let your steeds,  of dappled  hue, yoked  at the thought,   
Your  flying  steeds,  O Asvins,  bring  you hitherward,  with bliss,  to drink.  Lovers  of sweetness,  hear my cal
l.  
7 O Asvins,  hither  come  to us; Nasatyas,  be not disinclined.   
Through  longing  for the pious  turn out of the way to reach  our home.  Lovers  of sweetness,  bear my call.  
8 Ye Lords  of Splendour,  free from  guile,  come,  stand  at this our sacrifice.   
Beside  the singer,  Asvins,  who longs  for your grace  and lauds  you both.  Lovers  of sweetness,  hear my cal
l.  
9 Dawn  with her white  herd hath appeared,  and in due time hath fire been  placed.   
Harnessed  is your immortal  car, O WonderWorkers,  strong  and kind.  Lovers  of sweetness,  bear my call.  
 
HYMN  LXXVI.  Asvins  
1. AGNI,  the bright  face of the Dawns,  is shining;  the singers'  pious  voices  have  ascended.   
Borne  on your chariot,  Asvins,  turn you hither  and come  unto our full and rich libation.   
2 Most  frequent  guests,  they scorn  not what  is ready:  even now the lauded  Asvins  are beside  us.  
With  promptest  aid they come  at morn  and evening,  the worshipper's  most  blessed  guards  from  trouble.   
3 Yea, come  at milking−time,  at early  morning,  at noon  of day and when  the Sun is setting,   
By day, by night,  with favour  most auspicious.  Not only now the draught  hath drawn  the Asvins.   
4 For this place,  Asvins,  was of old your dwelling,  these  were  your houses,  this your habitation.   
Come  to us from  high heaven  and from  the mountain.  Come  from  the waters  bringing  food and vigour.  
5 May we obtain  the Asvins'  newest  favour,  and gain their health−bestowing  happy  guidance.   
Bring  riches  hither  unto us, and heroes,  and all felicity  and joy, Immortals!   
 
HYMN  LXXVII.  Asvins.  
1. FIRST  worship  those  who come  at early  morning:  let the Twain  drink  before  the giftless  niggard.   
The Asvins  claim  the sacrifice  at daybreak:  the sages  yielding  the first share  extol  them.   
2 Worship  at dawn  and instigate  the Asvins:nor  is the worshipper  at eve rejected.   
Besides  ourselves  another  craves  and worships:  each first in worship  is most  highly  favoured.   
3 Covered  with gold,  meath−tinted,  dropping  fatness,  your chariot  with its freight  of food comes  hither,   
Swift  as thought,  Asvins,  rapid  as the tempest,  wherewith  ye travel  over all obstructions.   
4 He who hath served  most  often  the Nasatyas,  and gives  the sweetest  food at distribution,   
Furthers  with his own holy works  his offspring,  and ever passes  those  whose  flames  ascend  not.  
5 May we obtain  the Asvins'  newest  favour,  and gain their health−be stowing  happy  ildance.   
Bring  riches  hither  unto us, and heroes,  and all felicity  and joy, Immortals!   
 
HYMN  LXXVIII.  Asvins.  
1. YE Asvins,  hither  come  to us: Nasatyas,  be not disinclined.  Fly hither  like two swans  unto the juice  we 
shed.   
2 O Asvins,  like a pair of deer,  like two wild cattle  to the mead:   
Fly hither  like two swans  unto the juice  we shed.   
3 O Asvins  rich in gifts,  accept  our sacrifice  to prosper  it:  
Fly hither  like two swans  unto the juice  we shed.   
4 As Atri when  descending  to the cavem called  on you loudly  like a wailing  woman.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Ye came  to him, O Asvins,  with the freshest  and most  auspicious  fleetness  of a falcon.   
 
5 Tree,  part asunder  like the side of her who bringeth  forth  a child.   
Ye Asvins,  listen  to my call: loose  Saptavadhri  from his bonds.   
6 For Saptavadhri,  for the seer affrighted  when  he wept  and wafled,   
Ye, Asvins,  with your magic  powers  rent up the tree and shattered  it.  
7 Like as the wind  on every  side ruffles  a pool of lotuses,   
So stir in thee the babe  unborn,  so may the ten−month  babe  descend.   
8 Like as the wind,  like as the wood,  like as the sea is set astir,   
So also, ten−month  babe,  descend  together  with the after−birth.   
9 The child  who hath for ten months'  time been  lying  in his mother's  side,−   
May he come  forth alive,  unharmed,  yea, livingfrorn  the living  dame.   
 
HYMN  LXXIX.  Dawn.  
1. O HEAVENLY  Dawn,  awaken  us to ample  opulence  to−day  Even  as thou hast wakened  us with Satyas
ravas,  Vayya's  son, high−born!  delightful  with thy steeds!   
2 Daughter  of Heaven,  thou dawnedst  on Sunitha  Sucadratha's  son,  
So dawn  thou on one mightier  still, on Satyasravas,  Vayya's  son, high−born!  delightful  with thy steeds!   
3 So, bringing  treasure,  dawn  to−day  on us thou Daughter  of the Sky,  
As thou,  O mightier  yet. didst  shine  for Satyatravas,  Vayya's  son, high−born!  delightful  with thy steeds!   
4 Here  round  about  thee are the priests  who laud thee,  Bright  One,  with their hymns,   
And men with gifts,  O Bounteous  Dame,  splendid  with wealth  and offering  much,  high−born!  delightful  
with 
thy steeds!   
5 Whatever  these  thy bands  perform  to please  thee or to win them  wealth,   
E'en fain they gird us round  and give rich gifts which  ne'er  are reft away,  high−born!  delightful  with thy 
steeds!   
6 Give  to these  wealthy  patrons  fame,  O affluent  Dawn, with hero sons,   
To these  our princes  who have brought  rich gifts ne'er  to be reft away,  highborn!  delightful  with thy steed
s!  
7 Bring  lofty  and resplendent  fame,  O thou munificent  Dawn,  to these   
Our wealthy  patrons  who bestow  rich gifts on us of steeds and kine,  high−born!  delightful  with thy steeds
!  
8 Bring  us, O Daughter  of the Sky, subsistence  in our herds  of kine,   
Together  with the sunbeams,  with the shine  of pure refulgent  flames,  highborn!  delightful  with thy steeds!
  
9 O Daughter  of the Sky, shine  forth;  delay  not to perform  thy task.  
Let not the Sun with fervent  heat consume  thee like a robber  foe, high−born!  delightful  with the steeds!   
10 So much,  and more  exceedingly,  O Dawn,  it suits thee to bestow,   
Thou  Radiant  One who ceasest  not to shine for those  who sing thy praise,  highborn!  delightful  with thy 
steeds!   
 
HYMN  LXXX.  Dawn.  
1. THE  singers  welcome  with their hymns  and praises  the Goddess  Dawn  who bringeth  in the sunlight,   
Sublime,  by Law true to eternal  Order,  bright  on her path,  red−tinted,  far−refulgent.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
2 She comes  in front,  fair, rousing  up the people,  making  the pathways  easy to be travelled.   
High,  on her lofty  chariot,  all−impelling,  Dawn  gives  her splendour  at the days'  beginning.   
3 She, harnessing  her car with purple  oxen.  injuring  none,  hath brought  perpetual  riches.   
Opening  paths  to happiness,  the Goddess  shines,  praised  by all, giver  of every  blessing.   
4 With  changing  tints she gleams  in double  splendour  while  from  the eastward  she displays  her body.   
She travels  perfe ctly the path of Order,  nor fails to reach,  as one who knows,  the quarters.   
5 As conscious  that her limbs  are bright  with bathing,  she stands,  as 'twere,  erect  that we may see her.  
Driving  away  malignity  and darkness,  Dawn,  Child  of Heaven,  hath come  to us with lustre.   
6 The Daughter  of the Sky, like some  chaste  woman,  bends,  opposite  to men,  her forehead  downward.   
 
The Maid,  disclosing  boons  to him who worships,  hath brought  again  the daylight  as aforetime.  
 
HYMN  LXXXI.  Savitar.  
1. THE  priests  of him the lofty  Priest  well−skilled  in hymns  harness  their spirit,  yea, harness  their holy 
thoughts.   
He only knowing  works  assigns  their priestly  tasks.  Yea, lofty  is the praise  of Savitar  the God.   
2 The Sapient  One arrays  himself  in every  form:  for quadruped  and biped  he hath brought  forth  good.   
Excellent  Savitar  hath looked  on heaven's  high vault,  and shineth  after the outgoing  of the Dawn.   
3 Even  he, the God whose  going−forth  and majesty  the other  Deities  have  followed  with their might,   
He who hath measu red the terrestrial  regions  out by his great  power,  he is the Courser  Savitar.   
4 To the three  spheres  of light thou goest,  Savitar,  and with the rays of Sidrya  thou combinest  thee.   
Around,  on both sides  thou encompassest  the night:  yea, thou,  O God,  art Mitra  through  thy righteous  law
s.  
5 Over  all generation  thou art Lord  alone:  Pusan  art thou,  O God,  in all thy goings−forth.   
Yea, thou hast domination  over all this world.  Syavasva  hath brought  praise  to thee,  O Savitar,   
 
HYMN  LXXXII.  Savitar.  
1. WE crave of Savitar  the God this treasure  much  to be enjoyed.  The best, all−yielding,  conquering  gift o
f Bhaga  we would  gladly  win.  
2 Savitar's  own supremacy,  most  glorious  and beloved  of all,  
No one diminisheth  in aught.   
3 For Savitar  who is Bhaga  shall  send riches  to his worshipper.   
That wondrous  portion  we implore.   
4 Send  us this day, God Savitar,  prosperity  with progeny.   
Drive  thou the evil dream  away.   
5 Savitar,  God,  send far away  all sorrows  and calamities,   
And send us only what  is good.   
6 Sinles s in sight  of Aditi  through  the God Savitar's  influence,   
May we obtain  all lovely  things.   
7 We with our hymns  this day elect  the general  God,  Lord  of the good,   
Savitar  whose  decrees  are true.  
8 He who for ever vigilant  precedes  these  Twain,  the Day and Night,   
Is Savitar  the thoughtful  God.   
9 He who gives  glory  unto all these  living  creatures  with the song,   Rig Veda – English Translation  
And brings  them  forth,  is Savitar.   
 
HYMN  LXXXIII.  Parjanya.  
1. SING  with these  songs  thy welcome  to the Mighty,  with adoration  praise  and call Parjanya.   
The Bull,  loud roaring,  swift  to send his bounty,  lays in the plants  the seed.  for germination.   
2 He smites  the trees  apart,  he slays  the demons:  all life fears  him who wields  the mighty  weapon.   
From  him exceeding  strong  fices  e'en the guiltle ss, when  thundering  Parjanya  smites  the wicked.   
3 Like a car−driver  whipping  on his horses,  he makes  the messengers  of rain spring  forward.   
Far off resounds  the roaring  of the lion, what  time Parjanya  fills the sky with rain−cloud.   
4 Forth  burst  the winds, down  come  the lightning−flashes:  the plants  shoot  up, the realm  of light is stream
ing.  
Food  springs  abundant  for all living  creatures,  what  time Parjanya  quickens  earth  with moisture.   
5 Thou  at whose  bidding  earth  bows  low before  thee,  at whose  comma nd hoofed  cattle  fly in terror,   
At whose  behest  the plants  assume  all colours,  even  thou Parjanya,  yield  us great  protection.   
6 Send  down  for us the rain of heaven,  ye Maruts,  and let the Stallion's  flood  descend  in torrents.   
 
Come  hither  with this thunder while  thou pourest  the waters  down,  our heavenly  Lord  and Father.   
7 Thunder  and roar:  the germ  of life deposit.  Fly round  us on thy chariot  waterladen.   
Thine  opened  water−skin  draw  with thee downward,  and let the hollows  and the heights  be level.   
8 Lift up the mighty  vessel,  pour down  water,  and let the liberated  streams  rush forward.   
Saturate  both the earth  and heaven  with fatness,  and for the cows  let there  be drink  abundant.   
9 When  thou,  with thunder  and with roar, Parjanya,  smitest  sinners  down ,  
This universe  exults  thereat,  yea, all that is upon  the earth.   
10 Thou  hast poured  down  the rain−flood  now withhold  it. Thou  hast made  desert  places  fit for travel.   
Thou  hast made  herbs  to grow  for our enjoyment:  yea, thou hast won thee praise  from  living creatures.   
 
HYMN  LXXXIV.  Prthivi.  
1. THOU,  of a truth,O  Prthivi,  bearest  the tool that rends  the hills:  Thou  rich in torrents,  who with might  q
uickenest  earth,  O Mighty  One.   
2 To thee,  O wanderer  at will, ring out the lauds  with beams  of day,  
Who  drivest,  like a neighing  steed,  the swelling  cloud,  O bright  of hue.  
3 Who  graspest  with thy might  on earth.  e'en the strong  sovrans  of the wood,   
When  from  the lightning  of thy cloud the rain−floods  of the heaven  descend.   
 
HYMN  LXXXV.  Varuna.  
1. SING  forth  a hymn  sublime  and solemn,  grateful  to glorious.  Varuna,  imperial  Ruler,   
Who  hath struck  out, like one who slays  the victim,  earth  as a skin to spread  in front  of Surya.   
2 In the tree−tops  the air he hath extended,  put milk in kine and vigorous  speed  in horses,   
Set intellect  in hearts,  fire in the waters,  Siurya  in heaven  and Soma  on the mountain.   
3 Varuna  lets the big cask,  opening  downward,  flow through  the heaven  and earth and air's mid−region.   
Therewith  the universe's  Sovran  waters  earth  as the shower  of rain bedews  the barley.   
4 When  Varuna  is fain for milk he moistens  the sky, the land,  and earth  to her foundation.   
Then  straight  the mountains  clothe  them  in the rain− cloud:  the Heroes,  putting  forth  their vigour,  loose  thRig Veda – English Translation  
em.  
5 I will declare  this mighty  deed  of magic,  of glorious  Varuna  the Lord  Immortal,   
Who  standing  in the firmament  hath meted  the earth  out with the Sun as with a measure.   
6 None,  verily,  hath ever let or hindered  this the most  wise God's  mighty  deed  of magic,   
Whereby  with all their flood,  the lucid  rivers  fill not one sea wherein  they pour their waters.   
7 If we have  sinned  against  the man who loves  us, have ever wronged  a brother,  friend,  or comr ade,  
The neighbour  ever with us, or a stranger,  O Varuna,  remove  from  us the trespass.   
8 If we, as gamesters  cheat  at play,  have  cheated,  done  wrong  unwittingly  or sinned  of purpose,   
Cast all these  sins away  like loosened  fetters,  and, Varuna  let us be thine  own beloved.   
 
HYMN  LXXXVI.  Indra−Agni.  
1. THE  mortal  man whom  ye, the Twain,  Indra  and Agni,  help in fight,  Breaks  through  e'en strongly−guar
ded wealth  as Trta burst  his way through  reeds.   
2 The Twain  invincible  in war, worthy  to be renowned  in frays,   
Lords  of the Fivefold.  People,  these,  Indra  and Agni,  we invoke.   
3 Impetuous  is their strength,  and keen  the lightning  of the mighty  Pair,  
Which  from  their arms  speeds  with the car to Vrtra's  slayer  for the kine.   
4 Indra  and Agni,  we invoke  you both,  as such,  to send your cars:   
Lords  of quick−coming  bounty,  ye who know,  chief  lovers  of the song.   
5 These  who give increase  day by day, Gods  without  guile  for mortal  man,   
Worthy  themselves,  I honour  most,  Two Gods  as partners,  for my horse.   
 
6 The strength−bestowing  offering  thus to Indra−Agni  hath been  paid,  as butter,  purified  by stones.  Deal  t
o our princes  high renown,  deal wealth  to those  who sing your praise,  deal food to those  who sing your 
praise.  
 
HYMN  LXXXVII.  Maruts.  
1. To Visnu,  to the Mighty  whom  the Maruts  follow  let your hymns  born in song go forth,  Evayamarut;   
To the impetuous,  strong  band,  adorned  with bracelets,  that rushes  on in joy and ever roars  for vigour.   
2 They  who with might  were  manifest,  and who willingly  by their own knowledge  told it forth,  Evayamar
ut.  
Maruts,  this strength  of yours  no wisdom  comprehendeth:  through  their gifts'  greatness  they are moveless  
as 
the mountains.   
3 Who  by the psalm  they sing are heard,  from  lofty  heaven,  the strong,  the brightly  shining  Ones,  
Evayamarut;   
In whos e abode  there  is no mightier  one to move  them,  whose  lightnings  are as fires,  who urge the roaring  
rivers.   
4 He of the Mighty  Stride  forth  strode,  Evayamarut,  out of the spacious  dwelling−place,  their home  in 
common.   
When  he, himself,  hath yoked  his emul ous strong  horses  on heights,  he cometh  forth,  joy−giving,  with the 
Heroes.   
5 Like your tremendous  roar, the rainer  with light flashing,  strong,  speeding,  hath made  all tremble,  
Evayamarut,   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Wherewith  victorious  ye, self−luminous,  press  onward,  with stron g reins,  decked  with gold,  impetuous  an
d 
well−weaponed.   
6 Unbounded  is your greatness,  ye of mighty  power:  may your bright  vigour  be our aid, Evayamarut;   
For ye are visible  helpers  in the time of trouble:  like fires,  aglow  with light,  save us from  shame  and insult
.  
7 So may the Rudras,  mighty  warriors,  Evayamarut,  with splendid  brilliancy,  like fires,  be our protectors;   
They  whose  terrestrial  dwelling−place  is wide−extended,  whom  none  suspect  of sin, whose  bands  have  lo
fty 
courage.   
8 Come  in a friendly  spirit,  come  to us, O Maruts,  and hear his call who praises  you, Evayamarut.   
Like car−borne  men,  one−minded  with the mighty  Visnu,  keep  enmity  far from  us with your deeds  of 
wonder.   
9 Come  to our sacrifice,  ye Hnly  Ones,  to bless  it, and, free from  demo ns, hear our call, Evayamarut.   
Most  excellent,  like mountains  in the air's raid−region,  be irresistible,  ye, Wise,  to this man'a  hater.   
 
RIG VEDA  − BOOK  THE SIXTH  
HYMN  I. Agni.  
1. THOU,  first inventor  of this prayer,  O Agni,  Worker  of Marvels,  hast become  our Herald.   
Thou,  Bull,  hast made  us strength  which  none  may conquer,  strength  that shall  overcome  all other  prowes
s.  
2 As Priest  thou sattest  at the seat of worship,  furthering  us, best Offerer,  meet  for honour.   
So first to thee have  pious  men resorted,  turning  thy mind  to thoughts  of ample  riches.   
3 In thee,  still watching,  they have  followed  riches,  who goest  with much  wealth  as with an army,   
The radiant  Agni,  lofty,  fair to look on, worshipped  with marrow,  evermore  resplendent.   
4 They  who approached  the God's  abode  with homage,  eager  for glory,  won them  perfect  glory:   
Yea, they gained  even  sacrificial  titles,  and found  delight  in thine  auspicious  aspect.   
5 On earth  the people  magnify  thee greatly,  thee their celestial  and terrestrial  riches .  
Thou,  Helper,  must  be known  as our Preserver,  Father  and Mother  of mankind  for ever.   
 
6 Dear  priest  among  mankind,  adorable  Agni  hath seated  him, joy−giver,  skilled  in worship.   
Let us approach  thee shining  in thy dwelling,  kneeling  upon  our knees,  with adoration.   
7 Longing  for bliss,  pure−minded,  God−devoted,  Agni,  we seek thee,  such,  meet to be lauded.   
Thou,  Agni,  leddest  forth  our men to battle,  refulgent  with the heaven's  exalted  splendour.   
8 Sage  of mankind,  all peoples'  Lord  and Master,  the Bull of men,  the sender  down  of blessings,   
Still pressing  on, promoting,  purifying,  Agni  the Holy  One,  the Lord  of riches.   
9 Agni,  the mortal  who hath toiled  and worshipped,  brought  thee oblations  with his kindled  fuel,  
And well knows  sacrifice  with adoration,  gains  every  joy with thee to guard  and help him.  
10 Mightily  let us worship  thee the Mighty,  with reverence,  Agni!  fuel and oblations,   
With  songs,  O Son of Strength,  with hymns,  with altar:  so may we strive  for thine  auspicious  favour.   
11 Thou  who hast covered  heaven  and earth  with splendour  and with thy glories,  glorious  and triumphant .
  
Continue  thou to shine  on us, O Agni,  with strength  abundant,  rich, and long enduring.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
12 Vouchsafe  us ever,  as man needs,  O Vasu,  abundant  wealth  of kine for son and offspring.   
Food  noble,  plenteous,  far from  sin and evil, he with us, and fair fame  to make  us happy.   
13 May I obtain  much  wealth  in many  places  by love of thee and through  thy grace,  King  Agni;   
For in thee Bounteous  One,  in thee the Sovran,  Agni,  are many  boons  for him who serves  thee.   
 
HYMN  II. Agni.  
1. THOU,  Agni,  even  as Mitra,  hast a princely  glory  of thine  own.  Thou,  active  Vasu,  makest  fame  increa
se like full prosperity.   
2 For, verily,  men pray to thee with sacrifices  and with songs.   
To thee the Friendly  Courser,  seen of all, comes  speeding  through  the air.  
3 Of one accord  men kindle  thee Heaven's  signal  of the sacrifice,   
When,  craving  bliss,  this race of man invites  thee to the solemn  rite.  
4 Let the man thrive  who travails  sore,  in prayer,  far thee the Bountiful.   
He with the help of lofty  Dyaus  comes  safe through  straits  of enmity.   
5 The mortal  who with fuel lights  thy flame  and offers  unto thee,   
Supports  a house  with many  a branch,  Agni,  to live a hundred  years.   
6 Thy bright  smoke  lifts itself  aloft,  and far−extended  shines  in heaven.   
For, Purifier!  like the Sun thou beamest  with thy radiant  glow.   
7 For in men's  houses  thou must  be glorified  as a well−loved  guest,   
Gay like an elder  in a fort, claiming  protection  like a son.  
8 Thou,  Agni,  like an able steed,  art urged  by wisdom  in the wood.   
Thou  art like wind;  food,  home  art thou,  like a young  horse  that runs astray.   
9 E'en things  imperishable,  thou,  O Agni,  like a gazing  ox,  
Eatest,  when  hosts,  Eternal  One!  of thee the Mighty  rend the woods.   
10 Agni,  thou enterest  as Priest  the home  of men who sacrifice.   
Lord  of the people,  prosper  them.  Accept  the ofrering,  Angiras!   
11 O Agni,  God with Mitra's  might,  call hither  the favour  of the Gods  from  earth  and heaven.   
Bring  weal  from  heaven,  that men may dwell  securely.  May we o'ercome  the foe's malign  oppressions,  m
ay 
we o'ercome  them,  through  thy help o'ercome  them.   
 
HYMN  III. Agni.  
1. TRUE,  guardian  of the Law,  thy faithful  servant  wins  ample  light and dwells  in peace,  O Agni,  Whom  t
hou, as Varuna  in accord  with Mitra,  guardest,  O God,  by banishing  his trouble.  2 He hath paid sacrifices,
 toiled  in worship,  and offered  gifts to wealth−increasing  Agni.   
Him the displeasure  of the famous  moves  not, outrage  and scorn  affect  not such a mortal.   
3 Bright  God,  whose  look is free from  stain  like Surya's,  thou,  swift,  what  time thou earnestly  desirest,   
Hast gear to give us. Come  with joy at evening,  where,  Child  of Wood,  thou mayest  also tarry.   
4 Fierce  is his gait and vast his wondrous  body:  he champeth  like a horse  with bit and bridle,   
And,  darting  forth  his tongue,  as 'twere  a hatchet,  burning  the woods,  smelteth  them  like a smelter.   
5 Archer−like,  fain toshoot,  he sets his arrow,  and whets  his splendour  like the edge  of iron:   
The messenger  of night  with brilliant  pathway,  like a tree−roosting  bird of rapid  pinion.   
6 In beams  of morn  he clothes  him like the singer,  and bright  as Mitra  with his splendour  crackles.   
Red in the night,  by day the men's  possession:  red, he belongs  to men by day, Immortal.   
7 Like Heaven's  when  scattering  beams  his voice  was uttered:  among  the plants  the radiant  Hero  shouted,   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Who  with his glow  in rapid  course  came  hither  to fill both worlds,  well−wedded  Dames,  with treasure.   
8 Who,  with supporting  streams  and rays that suit him, hath flashed  like lightning  with his native  vigour.   
Like the deft Maker  of the band  of Maruts,  the bright  impetuous  One hath shone  refulgent.   
 
HYMN  IV Agni.  
1. As at man's  service  of the Gods,  Invoker,  thou,  Son of Strength,  dost sacrifice  and worship,   
So bring  for us to−day  all Gods  together,  bring  willingly  the willing  Gods,  O Agni.   
2 May Agni,  radiant  Herald  of the morning,  meet  to be known,  accept  our praise  with favour.   
Dear  to all life, mid mortal  men Immortal,  our guest,  awake  at dawn,  is Jatavedas.   
3 Whose  might  the very heavens  regard  with wonder:  bright as the Sun he clothes  himself  with lustre.   
He who sends  forth,,  Eternal  Purifier,  hath shattered  e'en the ancient  works  of Asna.   
4 Thou  art a Singer,  Son! our feast−companion:  Agni  at birth  prepared  his food and pathway.   
Therefore  vouchsafe  us streng th, O Strength−bestower.  Win like a King:  foes trouble  not thy dwelling.   
5 Even  he who cats his firm hard food with swiftness,and  overtakes  the nights  as Vayu  kingdoms.   
May we o'ercome  those  who resist  thine  orders,  like a steed  casting  down  the flying  foemen.   
6 Like Surya  with his fulgent  rays,  O Agni,  thou overspreadest  both the worlds  with splendour.   
Decked  with bright  colour  he dispels  the darkness,  like Ausija,  with clear  flame  swifily  flying.   
7 We have elected  thee as most  delightful  for thy beam s' glow:  hear our great  laud,  O Agni.   
The best men praise  thee as the peer of Indra  in strength,  mid Gods,  like Viyu  in thy bounty.   
8 Now,  Agni,  on the tranquil  paths  of riches  come  to us for our weal:  save us from  sorrow.   
Grant  chiefs  and bard this boon. May we live happy,  with hero children,  through  a hundred  winters.   
 
HYMN  V. Agni.  
1. I INVOCATE  your Son of Strength,  the Youthful,  with hymns,  the Youngest  God,  whose  speech  is 
guileless;   
Sage  who sends  wealth  comprising  every  treasure,  bringer  of many boons,  devoid  of malice.   
2 At eve and morn  thy pious  servants  bring  thee their precious  gifts,  O Priest  of many  aspects,   
On whom,  the Purifier,  all things  living  as on firm.  ground  their happiness  have stablished.   
3 Thou  from  of old hast dwelt  among  these  people,  by mental  power  the charioteer  of blessings.   
Hence  sendest  thou,  O sapient  Jatavedas,  to him who serves  thee treasures  in succession.   
4 Agni,  whoever  secretly  attacks  us, the neighbour,  thou with Mitra's  might!  who harms  us,  
Burn  him with thine  own Steers  for ever youthful,  burning  with burning  heat,  thou fiercest  burner.   
5 He who serves  thee with sacrifice  and fuel, with hymn,  O Son of Strength,  and chanted  praises,   
Shines  out, Immortal!  in the midst  of mortals,  a sage,  with wealth,  with splendour  and with glory.   
6 Do this, O Agni,  when  we urge thee,  quickly,  triumphant  in thy might  subdue  our foemen.   
When  thou art praised  with words  and decked  with brightness,  accept  this chanted  hymn,  the singer's  
 
worship.   
7 Help  us, that we may gain this wish,  O Agni,  gain riches,  Wealthy  One!  with store  of heroes.   
Desiring  strength  from  thee may we be strengthened,  and win, Eternal!  thine  eternal  glory.   
 
HYMN  VI. Agni.  
1. HE who seeks  furtherance  and grace  to help him goes to the Son of Streng th with newest  worship,   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Calling  the heavenly  Priest  to share  the banquet,  who rends  the wood,  bright,  with his blackened  pathway.
  
2 White−hued  and thundering  he dwells  in splendour,  Most  Youthful,  with the loudvoiced  and eternal−   
Agni,  most  variform,  the Purifier,  who follows  crunching  many  ample  forests.   
3 Incited  by the wind  thy flames,  O Agni,  move  onward,  Pure One!  pure,  in all directions.   
Thy most  destructive  heavenly  Navagvas  break  the woods  down  and devastate  them  boldly.   
4 Thy pure white  horse s from  their bonds  are loosened:  O Radiant  One,  they shear  the ground  beneath  the
m,  
And far and wide  shines  out thy flame,  and flickers  rapidly  moving  over earth's  high ridges.   
5 Forth  darts  the Bull's  tongue  like the sharp  stone  weapon  discharged  by him who fights  to win the cattle.
  
Agni's  fierce  flame  is like a hero's  onset:  dread  and resistless  he destroys  the forests.   
6 Thou  with the sunlight  of the great  Impeller  hast boldly  over−spread  the earth's  expanses.   
So drive  away  with conquering  might  all perils.  fighting  out foemen  burn up those  who harm  us.  
7 Wondrous!  of wondrous  power!  give to the singer  wealth  wondrous,  marked,  most  wonderful,  life−givi
ng.  
Wealth  bright,  O Bright  One,  vast, with many  heroes,  give with thy bright  flames  to the man who lauds  th
ee.  
 
HYMN  VII. Agni.  
1. Him,  messenger  of earth  and head  of heaven,  Agni  Vaisvanara,  born in holy Order,   
The Sage,  the King,  the guest  of men,  a vessel  fit for their mouths,  the Gods  have generated.   
2 Him have  they praised,  mid−point  of sacrifices,  great  cistern  of libations,  seat of riches.   
Vaisvanara,  conveyer  of oblations,  ensign  of worship,  have  the Gods  engendered.   
3 From  thee,  O Agni,  springs  the mighty  singer,  from  thee come  heroes  who subdue  the foeman.   
O King,  Vaisvanara,  bestow  thou on us excellent  treasures  worthy  to belonged  fo r.  
4 To thee,  Immortal!  when  to life thou springest,  all the Gods  sing for joy as to their infant.   
They  by thy mental  powers  were  made  immortal,  Vaisvanara,  when  thou shonest  from  thy Parents.   
5 Agni  Vaisvanara,  no one hath ever resisted  these  thy mighty  ordinances,   
When  thou,  arising  from  thy Parents'  bosom,  foundest  the light for days'  appointed  courses.   
6 The summits  of the heaven  are traversed  through  and through  by the Immortal's  light,  Vaisvanar a's 
brilliancy.   
All creatures  in existence  rest upon  his head.  The Seven  swift−flowing  Streams  have  grown  like branches  
forth,   
7 Vaisvanara,  who measured  out the realms  of air, Sage  very wise who made  the lucid  spheres  of heaven,   
The Undeceivable  who spread out all the worlds,  keeper  is he and guard  of immortality.   
 
HYMN  VIII. Agni.  
1. AT Jatavedas'  holy gathering  I will tell aloud  the conquering  might  of the swift  red−hued  Steer.   
A pure and fresher  hymn  flows  to Vaisvanara,  even  as for Agni  lovely  Soma is made  pure.   
2 That Agni,  when  in loftiest  heaven  he sprang  to life, Guardian  of Holy  Laws,  kept and observed  them  w
ell.  
Exceeding  wise,  he measured  out the firmament.  Vaisvanara  attained  to heaven  by mightiness.   
3 Wonderful  Mitra  propped  the heave n and earth  apart,  and covered  and concealed   
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
the darkness  with his light.   
He made  the two bowls  part asunder  like two skins.  Vaisvanara  put forth  all his creative  power.   
4 The Migbty  seized  him in the bosom  of the floods:  the people  waited  on the King  who should  be praise
d.  
As envoy  of Vivasvan  MatariSvan  brought  Agni  Vaisvanara  hither  from  far away.   
5 In every  age bestow  upon  the singers  wealth,  worthy  of holy synods,  glorious,  ever new.   
King,  undecaying,  as it were  with sharpened  bolt, smite  down  the sinner  like a tree with lightning−flash.   
6 Do thou bestow,  O Agni,  on our wealthy  chiefs,  rule, with good  heroes,  undecaying,  bending  not.  
So may we win for us strength.  O Vaisvanara,  hundredfold,  thousandfold,  O Agni,  by thy help.   
7 O thou who dwell est in three  places,  Helper,  keep  with effective  guards  our princely  patrons.   
Keep  our band,  Agni,  who have  brought  thee presents.  Lengthen  their lives,  Vaisvanara,  when  lauded.   
 
HYMN  IX. Agni.  
1. ONE  half of day is dark,  and bright  the other:  both atmospheres  move  on by sage devices.   
Agni  Vaisvanara,  when  born as Sovran,  hath with his lustre  overcome  the darkness.   
2 I know  not either  warp  or woof,  I know  not the web they weave  when  moving  to the contest.   
Whose  son shall  here speak  words  that must  be spoken  without  assistance  from  the Father  near him?   
3 For both the warp  and woof  he understandeth,  and in due time shall  speak  what  should  be spoken,   
Who  knoweth  as the immortal  world's  Protector,  descending,  seeing  with no aid from  other.   
4 He is the Priest,  the first of all: behold  him. Mid mortal  men he is the light immortal.   
Here  was he born,  firm−seated  in his station  Immortal,  ever waxing  in his body.   
5 A firm light hath been  set for men to look on: among  all things  that fly the mind  is swiftest.   
All Gods  of one accord,  with one intention,  move  unobstructed  to a single  purpose.   
6 Mine ears unclose  to hear,  mine  eye to see him; the light that harbours  in my spirit  broadens.   
Far roams  my mind  whose  thoughts  are in the distance.  What  shall  I speak,  what  shall  I now imagine?   
7 All the Gods  bowed  them  down  in fear before  thee,  Agni,  when thou wast dwelling  in the darkness.   
Vaisvanara  be gracious  to assist  us, may the Immortal  favour  us and help us.  
 
HYMN  X. Agni.  
1. INSTALL  at sacrifice,  while  the rite advances,  your pleasant,  heavenly  Agni,  meet  for praises.   
With  hymns−for  he illumines  us−install  him. He, Jatavedas,  makes  our rites successful.   
2 Hear  this laud,  Radiant  Priest  of many  aspects,  O Agni  with the fires of man enkindled,   
Laud  which  bards  send forth  pure as sacred  butter,  strength  to this man,  as 'twere  for self−advantage.   
3 Mid mortal  men that singer  thrives  in glory  who offers  gifts with hymns  of praise  to Agni,   
And the God,  wondrous  bright,  with wondrous  succours  helps  him to win a stable  filled  with cattle.   
4 He, at his birth,  whose  path is black  behind  him, filled  heaven  and earth  with far−apparent  splendour:   
And he himself  hath been.  through  night's  thick  darkness,  made  manifest  by light,  the Purifier.   
5 With  thy most  mighty  aid, confer,  O Agni,  wonderful  wealth  on us and on our princes,   
Who  stand preeminent,  surpassing  others  in liberal  gifts,  in fame,  and hero virtues.   
6 Agni,  accept  this sacrifice  with gladness,  which,  seated  here,  the worshipper  presenteth.   
Fair hymns  hadst  thou among  the Bharadvajas,  and holpest  them  to gain abundant  vigour.  
7 Scatter  our foes,  increase  our store.  May we he glad a hundred  winters  with brave  sons.   
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  XI. Agni.  
1. EAGERLY  Sacrifice  thou,  most  skilful,  Agni!  Priest,  pressing  on as if the Maruts  sent thee.   
To our oblation  bring  the two Nasatyas,  Mitra  and Varuna  and Earth  and Heaven.   
2 Thou  art our guileless,  most  delightful  Herald,  the God,  among  mankind,  of holy synods.   
A Priest  with purifying  tongue,  O Agni,  sacrifice  with thy mouth  to thine  own body.   
3 For even  the blessed  longing  that is in thee would  bring  the Gods  down  to the singer's  worship,   
When  the Angirases'  sagest  Sage,  the Poet,  sings  the sweet  measure  at the solemn  service.   
4 Bright  hath he beamed,  the wise,  the far−refulgent.  Worship  the two widespreading  Worlds,  O Agni,   
Whom  as the Living  One rich in oblations  the Five Tribes,  bringing  gifts,  adorn  with homage.   
5 When  I with reverence  clip the grass  for Agni,  when  the trimmed  ladle,  fullof  oil, is lifted,   
Firm  on the seat of earth  is based  the altar:  eye−like,  the sacrifice  is directed  Sun−ward.   
6 Enrich  us, O thou Priest  of many  aspects,  with the Gods,  Agni,  with thy fires,  enkindled.   
O Son of Strength,  clad in the robe of riches,  may we escape  from  woe as from   
a prison.   
 
HYMN  XII. Agni.  
1. KING  of trimmed  grass,  Herald  within the dwelling,  may Agni  worship  the Impeller's  World−halves.  H
e, Son of Strength,  the Holy,  from  a distance  hath spread  himself  abroad  with light like Surya.  2 In thee,  
most  wise,  shall  Dyaus,  for full perfection,  King!  Holy  One!  pronounce  the call to worship.  Found  in thre
e places,  like the Speeder's  footstep,  come  to present  men's  riches  as oblations!  3 Whose  blaze  most  splen
did, sovran  in the forest,  shines  waxing  on his way like the − Impeller.  He knows  himself,  like as a guilele
ss smelter,  not to be stayed  among  the plants,  Immortal.  4 Our friends  extol  him like a steed  for vigour  ev
en Agni  in the dwelling,  jatave~as.  Trce−fed,  he fights  with power  as doth a champion,  like Dawn's  Sire t
o be praised  with sacrifices.  5 Men wonder  at his shining  glows  when, paring  the woods  with case,  o'er th
e broad  earth  he goeth,  And,  like a rushing  flood,  loosed  quickly,  burneth,  swift  as a guilty  thief,  o'er dese
rt places.  6 So mighty  thou protectest  us from  slander,  O Champion,  Agni!  with all fires enkindled.  Bring  
opulence  and drive  away  affliction.  May brave  sons gladden  us through  a hundred  winters.  
 
HYMN  XIII. Agni.  
1. FROM  thee,  as branches  from  a tree, O Agni,  from  thee,  Auspicious  God!  spring  all our blessings−   
Wealth  swiftly,  strength  in battle  with our foemen,  the rain besought  of heaven,  the flow of waters.   
2 Thou  art our Bhaga  to send wealth  thou dwellest,  like circumambient  air, with wondrous  splendour.   
Friend  art thou of the lofty  Law,  like Mitra,  Controller,  Agni!  God!  of many  a blessing.   
3 Agni!  the hero slays  with might  his foeman;  the singer  bears  away  the Pani's  booty−   
Even  he whom  thou,  Sage,  born in Law,  incitest  by wealth,  accordant  with the Child  of Waters.   
4 The man who,  Son of Strength  1 with sacrifices,  hymns,  lauds,  attracts  thy fervour  to the altar,   
Enjoys  each precious  thing,  O God,  O Agni,  gains  wealth  of corn and is the lord of treasures .  
5 Grant,  Son of Strength,  to men for their subsistence  such things  as bring  high fame  and hero children.   
For thou with might  givest  much  food in cattle  even  to the wicked  wolf when  he is hungry.   
6 Eloquent,  Son of Strength,  Most  Mighty,  Agni,  vouchsaf e us seed and offspring,  full of vigour.   
May I by all my songs  obtain  abundance.  May brave  sons gladden  us through  a hundred  winters.   
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  XIV. Agni.  
1. WHOSO  to Agni  hath endeared  his thought  and service  by his hymns,  That mortal  cats before  the rest, 
and finds  sufficiency  of food.   
2 Agni,  in truth,  is passing  wise,  most  skilled  in ordering,  a Seer.   
At sacrifices  Manus'  sons glorify  Agni  as their Priest.   
3 The foeman's  wealth  in many  a place,  Agni,  is emulous  to help.   
Men fight  the fiend,  and seek by rites to overcome  the riteless  foe.  
4 Agni  bestows  the hero chief,  winner  of waters,  firm in fray.  
Soon  as they look upon  his might  his enemies  tremble  in alarm.   
5 For with his wisdom  Agni,  God,  protects  the mortal  from  reproach,   
Whose  conquering  wealth  is never  checked,  is never  checked  in deeds  of might.   
6 O Agni,  God with Mitra's  might  call hither  the favour  of the Gods  from  earth  and heaven.   
Bring  weal  from  heaven  that men may dwell  securely.  May we o'ercome  the foe's malign  oppressions,  ma
y 
we o'ercome  them,  through  thy help o'ercome  them.   
 
HYMN  XV. Agni.  
1. WITH  this my song  I strive  to reach  this guest  of yours,  who wakes  at early  morn,  the Lord  of all the 
tribes.   
Each  time he comes  from  heaven,  the Pure One from  of old: from  ancient  days the Child  cats everlasting  
food.   
2 Whom,  well−dis  sed, the Blirgus  stablished  as a rriend,  whom  men must  glorify,  high−flaming  in the w
ood.  
As such,  most  friendly,  thou art every  day extolled  in lauds  by Vitahavya,  O thou wondrous  God.   
3 Be thou the foeless  helper  of the skilful  man,  subduer  of the enemy  near or far away.   
Bestow  a wealthy  home  on men,  O Son of Strength.  Give  Vitahavya  riches  spreading  far and wide,  give 
Bharadvaja  wide−spread  wealth.   
4 Him,  your refulgent  guest,  Agni  who comes  from  heaven,  the Herald  of mankind,  well−skilled  in sacred  
rites,   
Who,  like a holy singer,  utters  heavenly  words,  oblation−bearer,  envoy,  God,  I seek with hymns.   
5 Who  with his purifying,  eye−attracting  form  hath shone  upon  the earth  as with the light of Dawn;   
Who  speeding  on, as in the fight  of Etaia,  cometh,  untouched  by age, as one athirst  in heat.   
6 Worship  ye Agni,  Agni,  with your log of wood;  praise  your beloved,  your beloved  guest  with songs.   
Invite  ye the Immortal  hither  with your hymns.  A God among  the Gods,  he loveth  what  is choice,  loveth  o
ur 
service,  God mid Gods.   
7 Agni  inflamed  with fuel in my song  I sing,  pure,  Cleanser,  steadlast,  set in tront  at sacrifice.   
Wise  Jatavedas  we implore  with prayers  for bliss the Priest,  the holy Singer,  bounteo us, void of guile.   
8 Men,  Agni,  in each age have made  thee,  Deathiess  One,  their envoy,  offering−bearer,  guard  adorable.   
With  reverence  Gods  and mortals  have established  thee,  the ever−watchful,  omnipresent  Household  Lord.
  
9 Thou,  Agni,  ordering  the works and ways  of both,  as envoy  of the Gods  traversest  both the worlds.   
When  we lay claim  to thy regard  and gracious  fare, be thou to us a thriceprotecting  friendly  guard.   
10 Him fair of face,  rapid,  and fair to look on, him very wise may we who know  not follow.   
Let him who knows  all rules  invite  for worship,  Agru  announce  our offering  to the Immortals.   
11 Him,  Agni,  thou deliverest  and savest  who brings  him prayer  to thee the Wise,  O Hero,   Rig Veda – English Translation  
The end of sacrifice  or its inception;  yea, thou endowest  him with power  and riches.   
12 Guard  us from  him who would  assail  us, Agni;  preserve  us, O thou Victor,  from  dishonour.   
Here  let the place  of darkening  come  upon  thee:  may wealth  be ours,  desirable  in thousands.   
13 Agni,  the Priest,  is King,  Lord  of the homest ead, he, Jatayedas,  knows  all generations.   
Most  skilful  worshipper  mid Gods  and mortals,  may he begin  the sacrifice,  the Holy.   
 
14 Whate'er  to−day  thou,  bright−flamed  Priest,  enjoyest  from  the man's  rite−for  thou art sacrificer−   
Worship,  for duly dost thou spread  in greatness:  bear off thine  ofrerings  of to−day,  Most  Youthful.   
15 Look  thou upon  the viands  duly laid for thee.  Fain would  he set thee here to worship  Heaven  and,Earth
.  
Help  us, O liberal  Agni,  in the strife  for spoil,  so that we may o'ercome  all things  that trouble  us, o'ercome
, 
o'ercome  them  with thy help.   
16 Together  with all Gods,  O fair−faced  Agni,  be seated  first upon  the woollined  altar,   
Nest−like,  bedewed  with oil. Bear  this our worship  to Savitar  who sacrifices  rightly.   
17 Here  the arranging  priests,  as did Atharvan,  rub this Agni  forth,   
Whom,  not bewildered,  as he moved  in winding  ways,  they brought  from  gloom.   
18 For the Gods'  banquet  be thou born,  for full perfection  and for weal.   
Bring  the Immortal  Gods  who strengthen  holy Law:  so let our sacrifice  reach  the Gods.   
19 O Agni,  Lord  and Master  of men's  homesteads,  with kindled  fuel we have  made  thee migh ty.  
Let not our household  gear be found  defective.  Sharpen  us with thy penetrating  splendour.   
 
HYMN  XVI. Agni.  
1. PRIEST  of all sacrifices  hast thou been  appointed  by the Gods,  Agni,  amid  the race of man.   
2 So with thy joyous  tongues  for us sacrifice  nobly  in this rite.  
Bring  thou the Gods  and worship  them.   
3 For well,  O God,  Disposer,  thou knowest,  straight  on, the paths  and ways,   
Agni,  most  wise in sacrifice.   
4 Thee,  too, hath Bharata  of old, with mighty  men,  implored  for bliss.   
And worshipped  thee the worshipful.   
5 Thou  givest  these  abundant  boons  to Divodasa  pouring  forth,   
To Bharadvaja  offering  gifts.   
6 Do thou,  Immortal  Messenger,  bring  hither  the Celestial  Folk;   
Hearing  the singer's  eulogy.   
7 Mortals  with pious  thought  implore  thee,  Agni, God,  at holy rites,   
To come  unto the feast  of Gods.   
8 I glorify  thine  aspect  and the might  of thee the Bountilul.   
All those  who love shall  joy in thee,   
9 Invoker  placed  by Manus,  thou,  Agni,  art near,  the wisest  Priest:   
Pay worship  to the Tribes  of Heaven.   
10 Come,  Agni,  lauded,  to the feast;  come  to the offering  of the gifts.   
As Priest  be seated  on the grass.   
11 So, Angiras,  we make  thee strong  with fuel and with holy oil.  
Blaze  high,  thou youngest  of the Gods.   
12 For us thou winnest,  Agni,  God, heroic  strength  exceeding  great,   
Far−spreading  and of high renown.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
13 Agni,  Atharvan  brought  thee forth,  by rubbing,  from  the lotus−flower,   
The head  of Visva,  of the Priest.   
14 Thee.  Vrtra's  slayer,  breaker  down  of castles,  hath Atharvan's  son,  
Dadhyac  the Rsi, lighted  up.  
15 The hero Pathya  kindled  thee the Dasyus'.  most  destructive  foe,  
Winner  of spoil  in every  fight.   
16 Come,  here,  O Agni,  will I sing verily  other  songs  to thee,   
And with these  drops  shalt  thou grow  strong.   
17 Where'er  tby mind applies  itself,  vigour  preeminent  bast thou:   
 
There  wilt thou gain a dwelling−place.   
18 Not for a moment  only lasts thy bounty,  good  to many  a one!  
Our service  therefore  shalt  thou gain.   
19 Agni,  the Bharata,  hath been  sought,  the Vrtra−slayer,  marked  of all,  
Yea, Divodasa's  Hero  Lord.   
20 For he gave riches  that surpass  in greatness  all the things  of earth,   
Fighting  untroubled,  unsubdued.   
21 Thou,  Agni,  as in days of old, with recent  glory,  gathered  light,   
Hast overspread  the lofty  heaven.   
22 Bring  to your Agni,  O my friends,  boldly  your laud and sacrifice:   
Give  the Disposer  praise  and song.   
23 For as sagacious  Herald  he hath sat through  every  age of man,   
Oblation−bearing  messenger.   
24 Bring  those  Two Kings  whose  ways  are pure,  Adityas,  and the Marut  host,   
Excellent  God!  and Heaven  and Earth.  
25 For strong  and active  mortal  man,  excellent,  Agni,  is the look Of thee Immortal,  Son of Strength   
26 Rich  through  his wisdom,  noblest  be the giver  serving  thee to−day:   
The man hath brought  his hymn  of praise.   
27 These,  Agni,  these  are helped  by thee, who strong  and active  all their lives,   
O'ercome  the malice  of the foe, fight  down  the malice  ofthe  foe.  
28 May Agni  with his pointed  blaze  cast down  each fierce  devouring  fiend   
May Agni  win us wealth  by war.  
29 O active  Jatavedas,  bring  riches  with store  of hero sons:   
Slay thou the demons,  O Most  Wise.   
30 Keep  us, O Jatavedas,  from  the troubling  of the man of sin:  
Guard  us thou Sage  who knowest  prayer.   
31 Whatever  sinner,  Agni,  brings  oblations  to procure  our death,   
Save  us from  woe that he would work.   
32 Drive  from  us with thy tongue,  O God,  the man who doeth  evil deeds,   
The mortal  who would  strike  us dead.   
33 Give  shelter  reaching  far and wide  to Bharadvaja,  conquering  Lord!   
Agni,  send wealth  most  excellent.   
34 May Agni  slay the Vrtras,− fain for riches,  through  the lord of song,   
Served  with oblation,  kindled,  bright.   
35 His Father's  Father,  shining  in his Mother's  everlasting  side,  
Set on the seat of holy Law.   
36 O active  Jatavedas,  bring  devotion  that wins  progeny,  Agni,  that it may shine  to heaven.   
37 O Child  of Strength,  to thee whose  look is lovely  we with dainty  food,   Rig Veda – English Translation  
O Agni,  have  poured  forth  our songs.   
38 To thee for shelter  are we come,  as to the shade  from  fervent  heat  
Agni,  who glitterest  like gold.   
39 Mighty  as one who slays  with shafts,  or like a bull with sharpened  horn,   
Agni,  thou breakest  down  the forts.   
40 Whom,  like an infant  newly  born,  devourer,  in their arms  they bear,   
Men's  Agni,  skilled  in holy rites.   
41 Bear  to the banquet  of the Gods  the God best finder− out of wealth,   
Let him he seated  in his place.   
42 In Jatavedas  kindle  ye the dear guest  who hath now appeared   
In a soft place,  the homestead's  Lord.   
43 Harness,  O Agni,  O thou God,  thy steeds  which  are most  excellent:   
They  bear thee as thy spirit  wills.  
 
44 Come  hither,  bring  the Gods  to us to taste the sacrificial  feast,   
To drink  the draught  of Soma  juice.   
45 O Agni  of the Bharatas,  blaze  high with everlasting  might,   
Shine  forth  and gleam,  Eternal  One.   
46 The mortal  man who serves  the God with banquet,  and, bringing  gifts at sacrifice,  lauds  Agni,   
May well attract,  with prayer  and hands  uplifted,  the Priest  of Heaven  and Earth,  true Sacrificer.   
47 Agni,  we bring  thee,  with our hymn,  oblation  fashioned  in the heart.   
Let these  be oxen  unto thee,  let these  be bulls  and kine to thee.   
48 The Gods  enkindle  Agni,  best slayer  of Vrtra,  first in rank,   
The Mighty,  One who brings  us wealth  and crushes  down  the Raksasas.   
 
HYMN  XVII.  Indra.  
1. DRINK  Soma,  Mighty  One,  for which,  when  lauded,  thou breakes t through  the cattle−stall,  O Indra;   
Thou  who,  O Bold  One,  armed  with thunder  smotest  Vrtra  with might,  and every  hostile  being.   
2 Drink  it thou God who art impetuous  victor,  Lord  of our hymns,  with beauteousjaws,  the Hero,   
Render  of kine−stalls,  car−bo rne, thunder−wielding,  so pierce  thy way to wondrous  strength,  O Indra.   
3 Drink  as of old, and let the draught  delight  thee.  hear thou our prayer  and let our songs  exalt  thee.   
Make  the Sun visible,  make  food abundant,  slaughter  the foes,  pierce  through  and free the cattle.   
4 These  gladdening  drops,  O Indra,  Self−sustainer,  quaffed  shall  augment  thee in thy mighty  splendour.   
Yea, let the cheering  drops  delight  thee greatly,  great,  perfect,  strong,  powerful,  all−subduing.   
5 Gladdened  whereby,  bursting  the firm enclosures,  thou gavest  splendour  to the Sun and Morning.   
The mighty  rock that compassed  in the cattle,  ne'er  moved,  thou shookest  from  its seat, O Indra.   
6 Thou  with thy wisdom,  power,  and works  of wonder,  hast stored  the ripe milk in the raw cows' udders   
Unbarred  the firm doors  for the kine of Morning,  and, with the Angirases,  set free the cattle.   
7 Thou  hast spread  out wide  earth,  a mighty  marvel,  and, high thyself,  propped  lofty heaven,  O Indra.   
Both  worlds,  whose  Sons  are Gods,  thou hast supported,  young,  Mothers  from  old time ofholy  Order.   
8 Yea, Indra,  all the Deities  installed  thee their one strong  Champion  in the van for battle.   
What  time the godless  was the Gods'  assailant,  Indra  they chose  to win the light of heaven.   
9 Yea, e'en that heaven  itself  of old bent backward  before  thy bolt, in terror  of its anger,   
When  Indra,  life of every  living  creature,  smote  down  within  his lair the assailing  Dragon.   
10 Yea, Strong  One!  Tvastar  turned  for thee,  the Mighty,  the bolt with thousand  spikes and hundred  edges
,  