Rig Veda – English Translation  
7 When  the wood−pile,  made  of good  logs,  is ready,  at the Sun's  worship  to bind fast the Bullock,   
Then  when  thou shinest  forth  through  days of action  for the Car−borne,  the Swift,  tile Cattle−seeker.   
8 Eight  steeds  thou broughtest  down  from  mighty  heaven,  when  fighting  for the well that giveth  splendou
r,  
That men might  press  with stones  the gladdening  yellow,  strengthened  with milk,  fermenting,  to exalt  the
e.  
9 Thou  hurledst  forth  from  heaven  the iron missile,  brought by the Skilful,  from  the sling  of leather,   
When  thou,  O Much−invoked,  assisting  Kutsa  with endless  deadly  darts  didst  compass  Susna.   
10 Bolt−armed,  ere darkness  overtook  the sunlight,  thou castest  at the veiling  cloud  thy weapon,   
Thou  rentest,  out of heaven,  though  firmly  knotted,  the might  of Susna  that was thrown  around  him.  
11 The mighty  Heaven  and Earth,  those  bright  expanses  that have  no wheels,  joyed,  Indra,  at thine  exploit
.  
Vrtra,  the boar who lay amid  the waters,  to sleep  thou sentest  with thy mighty  thunder.   
12 Mount  Indra,  lover  of the men thou guardest,  the well−yoked  horses  of the wind,  best bearers.   
The bolt which  Kavya  Usana  erst gave thee,  strong,  gladdening,  Vrtra−slaying,  hath he fashioned  *  
13 The strong  Bay Horses  of the Sun thou stayedst:  this Etasa  drew  not the wheel,  O Indra.   
Casting  them  forth  beyond  the ninety  rivers  thou dravest  down  into the pit the godless.   
14 Indra,  preserve  thou us from  this affliction  Thunder−armed,  save us from  the misery  near us.  
Vouchsafe  us affluence  in chariots,  founded  on horses,  for our food and fame  and gladness.   
15 Never  may this thy loving−kindness  fail us; mighty  in strength,  may plenteous  food surround  us.  
Maghavan,  make  us share  the foeman's  cattle:  may we be thy most  liberal  feast  companions.   
 
HYMN  CXXII  Visvadevas.  
1. SAY,  bringing  sacrifice  to bounteous  Rudra,  This juice  for drink  to you whose  wrath  is fleeting!   
With  Dyaus  the Asura's  Heroes  I have  lauded  the Maruts  as with prayer  to Earth  and Heaven.   
2 Strong  to exalt  the early invocation  are Night  and Dawn  who show  with varied  aspect.   
The Barren  clothes  her in wide−woven  raiment,  and fair Morn  shines  with Surya's  golden  splendour.   
3 Cheer  us the Roamer  round,  who strikes  at morning,  the Wind  delight  us, pourer  forth  of waters!  
Sharpen  our wits,  O Parvata  and Indra.  May all the Gods  vouchsafe  to us this favour.   
4 And Ausija  shall  call for me that famous  Pair who enjoy  and drink,  who come  to brighten.   
Set ye the Offspring  of the Floods  before  you; both Mothers  of the Living  One who beameth.   
5 For you shall  Ausija  call him who thunders,  as, to win Arjuna's  assent,  cried  Ghosa.   
I will invoke,  that Pusan  may be bounteous  to you, the rich munificence  of Agni.   
 
6 Hear,  Mitra−Varuna,  these  mine  invocations,  hear them  from  all men in the hall of worship.   
Giver  of famous  gifts,  kind hearer,  Sindhu  who gives  fair fields,  listen  with all his waters  1  
7 Praised,  Mitra,  Varuna!  is your gift, a hundred  cows  to the Prksayamas  and the Pajra.   
Presented  by car−famous  Priyaratha,  supplying  nourishment,  they came  directly.   
8 Praised  is the gift of him the very wealthy:  may we enjoy  it, men with hero children:   
His who hath many  gifts to give the Pajras,  a chief  who makes  me rich in cars and horses.   
9 The folk, O Mitra−Varuna,  who hate you, who sinfully  hating  pour you no libations,   
Lay in their hearts,  themselves,  a wasting  sickness,  whereas  the righteous  gaineth  all by worship.   
10 That man,  most  puissant,  wondrously  urged onward,  famed  among  heroes,  liberal  in giving,   
Moveth  a warrior,  evermore  undaunted  in all encounters  even  with the mighty.   
11 Come  to the man's,  the sacrificer's  calling:  hear,  Kings  of Immortality,  joy−givers!   
While  ye who speed  through  clouds  decre e your bounty  largely,  for fame,  to him the chariot  rider.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
12 Vigour  will we bestow  on that adorer  whose  tenfold  draught  we come  to taste,  so spake  they.   
May all in whom  rest splendour  and great  riches  obtain  refreshment  in these  sacrifices.   
13 We will rejoice  to drink  the tenfold  present  when  the twicefive  come  bearing  sacred  viands.   
What  can he do whose  steeds  and reins  are choicest?  These,  the all−potent,  urge brave  men to conquest.   
14 The sea and all the Deities  shall  give us him with the golden  car and neck bejewelled.   
Dawns,  hasting  to the praises  otthe  pious,  be pleased  with us. both offerers  and singers.   
15 Four  youthful  sons of Masarsara  vex me, three,  of the king,  the conquering  Ayavasa.   
Now  like the Sun, O Varuna  and Mitra,  your car hath shone,  long−shaped  and reined  with splendour.   
 
HYMN  CXXIII.  Dawn.  
1. THE  Daksina's  broad  chariot  hath been  harnessed:  this car the Gods  Immortal  have  ascended.   
Fain to bring  light to homes  of men the noble  and active  Goddess  hath emerged  from  darkness.   
2 She before  all the living  world  hath wakened,  the Lofty  One who wins  and gathers  treasure.   
Revived  and ever young  on high she glances.  Dawn  hath come  first unto our morning  worship.   
3 If, Dawn,  thou Goddess  nobly  born,  thou dealest  fortune  this day to all the race of mortals,   
May Savitar  the God,  Friend  of the homestead,  declare  before  the Sun that we are sinless.   
4 Showing  her wonted  form  each day that passeth,  spreading  the light she visiteth  each dwelling.   
Eager  for conquest,  with bright  sheen  she cometh.  Her portion  is the best of goodly  treasures.   
5 Sister  of Varuna,  sister  of Bhaga,  first among  all sing forth,  O joyous  Morning.   
Weak  be the strength  of him who worketh  evil − may we subdue  him with our car the guerdon.   
6 Let our glad hymns  and holy thoughts  rise upward,  for the flames  brightly  burning  have  ascended.   
The far−refulgent  Mornings  make  apparent  the lovely  treasures  which  the darkness  covered.   
7 The one departeth  and the other  cometh:  unlike  in hue day's,  halves  march  on successive .  
One hides  the gloom  of the surrounding  Parents.  Dawn  on her shining  chariot  is resplendent.   
8 The same  in form  to−day,  the same  tomorrow,  they still keep  Varuna's  eternal  statute.   
Blameless,  in turn they traverse  thirty  regions,  and dart across  the spirit in a moment.   
9 She who hath knowledge  Of the first day's  nature  is born refulgent  white  from  out the darkness.   
The Maiden  breaketh  not the law of Order,  day by day coming  to the place  appointed.   
10 In pride  of beauty  like a maid  thou goest,  O Godde ss, to the God who longs  to win thee,   
And smiling  youthful,  as thou shinest  brightly,  before  him thou discoverest  thy bosom.   
11 Fair as a bride  embellished  by her mother  thou showest  forth  thy form  that all may see it.  
Blessed  art thou O Dawn.  Shine  yet more  widely.  No other  Dawns  have reached  what  thou attainest.   
12 Rich  in kine,  horses,  and all goodly  treasures,  in constant  operation  with the sunbeams,   
The Dawns  depart  and come  again  again  assuming  their wonted  forms  that promise  happy  fortune.   
13 Obedient  to the rein of Law Eternal  give us each thought  that more  and more  shall  bless  us.  
Shine  thou on us to−day,  Dawn,  swift  to listen.  With  us be riches  and with chiefs  who worship.   
 
HYMN  CXXIV.  Dawn.  
1. THE  Dawn  refulgent  when  the fire is kindled,  and the Sun rising,  far diffuse  their brightness.   
Savitar,  God,  hath sentus  forth  to labour,  each quadruped,  each biped,  to be active.   
2 Not interrupting  heavenly  ordinances,  although  she minisheth  human  generations.   
The last of endless  morns  that have departed,  the first of those  that come,  Dawn  brightly  shineth.   
3 There  in the eastern  region  she, Heaven's  Daughter,  arrayed  in garments  all of light,  appeareth.   
Truly  she fo1loweth  the path of Order,  nor faileth,  knowing  well,  the heavenly  quarters.   
4 Near  is she seen,  as 'twere  the Bright  One's  bosom:  she showeth  sweet  things  like a new song−singer.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
She cometh  like a fly awaking  sleepers,  of all. returning  dames  most  true and constant.   
5 There  in the east half of the watery  region  the Mother  of the Cows  hath shown  her ensign.   
Wider  and wider  still she spreadeth  onward,  and filleth  full the laps of both heir Parents.   
6 She, verily,  exceeding  vast to look on debarreth  from  her light nor kin nor stranger.   
Proud  of her spotless  form  she, brightly  shim ing, turneth  not from  the high nor froom  the humble.   
7 She seeketh  men,  as she who hath no brother,  mounting  her car, as 'twere  to gather  riches.   
Dawn,  like a loving  matron  for her husband,  smiling  and well attired,  unmasks  her beauty.   
8 The Sister  quitteth, for the elder  Sister,  her place,  and having  looked  on her departeth.   
She decks  her beauty,  shining  forth  with sunbeams,  like women  trooping  to the festal  meeting.   
9 To all these  Sisters  who ere now have vanished  a later one each day in course  succe edeth.   
So, like the past, with days of happy  fortune,  may the new Dawns  shine  forth  on us with riches.   
10 Rouse  up, O Wealthy  One,  the liberal  givers;  let niggard  traffickers  sleep  on unwakened:   
Shine  richly,  Wealthy  One,  on those  who worship,  richly,  glad.  
Dawn  while  wasting,  on the singer.   
11 This young  Maid  from  the east hath shone  upon  us; she harnesseth  her team  of bright  red oxen.   
She will beam  forth,  the light will hasten  hither,  and Agni  will be present  in each dwelling.   
12 As the birds  fly forth from  their resting  places,  so men with store  of food rise at thy dawning.   
Yea, to the liberal  mortal  who remaineth  at home,  O Goddess  Dawn,  much  good  thou bringest.   
13 Praised  through  my prayer  be ye who should  be lauded.  Ye have  increased  our wealt h, ye Dawns  who 
love 
us.  
Goddesses,  may we win by your good  favour  wealth  to be told by hundreds  and by thousands.   
 
HYMN  CXXV.  Svanaya.  
1. COMING  at early  morn  he gives  his treasure;  the prudent  one receives  and entertains  him.  
Thereby  increasing  still his life and offspring,  he comes  with brave  sons to abundant  riches.   
2 Rich  shall  he be in gold and kine and horses.  Indra  bestows  on him great  vital power,   
Who  stays  thee,  as thou comest,  with his treasure,  like game  caught  in the net, O early  comer.   
3 Longing,  I came  this morning  to the pious,  the son of sacrifice,  with car wealth.  laden.   
Give  him to drink  juice  of the stalk  that gladdens;  prosper  with pleasant  hymns  the Lord  of Heroes.   
4 Health−bringing  streams,  as milch−cows,  flow to profit  him who hath worshipped,  him who now will 
worship.   
To him who freely  gives  and fills on all sides  full streams  of fatness  flow and make  him famous.   
5 On the high ridge  of heaven  he stands  exalted,  yea, to the Gods  he goes,  the liberal  giver.   
The streams,  the waters  flow for him with fatness:  to him this guerdon  ever yields  abundance.   
6 For those  who give rich meeds  are all these  splendours,  for those  who give rich meeds  suns shine  in hea
ven.  
The givers  of rich meeds  are made  immortal;  the givers  of rich fees prolong  their lifetime.   
7 Let not the liberal  sink to sin and sorrow,  never  decay  the pious  −chiefs  who worship!   
Let every  man besides  be their protection,  and let affliction  fall upon  the niggard.   
 
HYMN  CXXVI.  Bhavayavya.  
1. WITH  wisdom  I present  these lively  praises  of Bhavya  dweller  on the bank  of Sindhu;   
For he, unconquered  King,  desiring  glory,  hath furnished  me a thousand  sacrifices.   
2 A hundred  necklets  from  the King,  beseeching,  a hundred  gift−steeds  I at once  accepted;   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Of the lord's  cows  a thousand,  I Kaksivan.  His deathless  glory  hath he spread  to heaven.   
3 Horses  of dusky  colour  stood  beside  me, ten chariots,  Svanaya's  gift, with mares  to draw  them.   
Kine  numbering  sixty  thousand  followed  after.  Kaksivan  gained  them  when  the days were  closing.   
4 Forty  bay horses  of the ten cars' master  before  a thousand  lead the long procession.   
Reeling  in joy Kaksivan's  sons and Pajra's  have  grounded  the coursers  decked  with pearly  trappings.   
5 An earlier  gift for you have I accepted  eight  cows,  good  milkers,  and tree harnessed  horses,   
Pajras,  who with your wains  with your great  kinsman,  like troops  of subjects,  have been  fain for glory.   
 
HYMN  CXXVII  Agni.  
1. AGNI  I hold as herald,  the munificent,  the gracious,  Son of Strength,  who knoweth  all that live, as holy 
Singer,  knowing  all,  
Lord  of fair rites,  a God with form  erected  turning  to the Gods,   
He, when  the flame  hath sprung  forth  from  the holy oil, the offered  fatness,  longeth  for it with his glow.   
2 We, sacrificing,  call on thee best worship per, the eldest  of Angirases,  Singer,  with hymns,  thee,  brilliant  
One!  with singers'  hymns;   
Thee,  wandering  round  as 't were  the sky, who art the invoking  Priest  of men,   
Whom,  Bull with hair of flame  the people  must  observe,  the people  that he speed  them  on.  
3 He with his shining  glory  blazing  far and wide,  he verily  it is who slayeth  demon  foes,  slayeth  the demo
ns 
like an axe:  
At whose  close  touch  things  solid  shake,  and what  is stable  yields  like trees.   
Subduing  all, he keeps  his ground  and flinches  not, from  the skilled  archer  flinches  not.  
4 To him, as one who knows,  even  things  solid  yield:  unrough  fire−sticks  heated  hot he gives  his gifts to a
id. 
Men offer  Agni  gifts for aid.  
He deeply  piercing  many  a thing  hews  it like wood  with fervent  glow.   
Even  hard and solid  food he crunches  with his might,  yea, hard and solid  food with might.   
5 Here  near we place  the sacrificial  food for him who shines  forth  fairer  in the night  than in the day, with l
ife 
then stronger  than by day.  
His life gives  sure and firm defence  as that one giveth  to a son.  
The during  fires enjoy  things  given  and things  not given,  the during  fires enjoy  as food.   
6 He, roaring  very loudly  like the Maruts'  host,  in fertile  cultivated  fields  adorable,  in desert  spots  adorabl
e,  
Accept s and eats our offered  gifts,  ensign  of sacrifice  by desert;   
So let all, joying,  love his path when  he is glad,  as men pursue  a path for bliss.   
7 Even  as they who sarig  forth  hymns,  addressed  to heaven,  the Blirgus  with their prayer  and praise  invite
d 
him, the Bhrgus  rubbing,  offering  gifts.   
For radiant  Agni,  Lord  of all these  treasures,  is exceeding  strong.   
May he, the wise,  accept  the grateful  coverings,  the wise accept  the coverings.   
8 Thee  we invoke,  the Lord  of all our settled  homes,  common  to all, the household's  guardian,  to enjoy,  
bearer  of true hymns,  to enjoy.   
Thee  we invoke,  the guest  of men,  by whose  mouth,  even  as a sire's,   
All these  Immortals  come  to gain their food of life, oblations  come  to Gods  as food.   
9 Thou,  Agni,  most  victorious  with thy conquering  strength,  most  Mighty  One,  art born for service  of the Rig Veda – English Translation  
Gods,  like wealth  for service  of the Gods.   
Most  mighty  is thine  ecstasy,  most  splendid  is thy mental  power.   
Therefore  men wait upon  thee,  undecaying  One,  like vassals,  undecaying  One.   
 
10 To him the mighty,  conquering  with victorious  strength,  to Agni  walking  with the dawn,  who sendeth  
kine,  be sung your laud,  to Agni  sung;   
As he who with oblation  comes  calls him aloud  in every  place.   
Before  the brands  of fire he shouteth  singer like, the herald,  kindler  of the brands.   
11 Agni,  beheld  by us in nearest  neighbourhood,  accordant  with the Gods,  bring  us, with gracious  love,  gr
eat 
riches  with thy gracious  love.   
Give  us O Mightiest,  what  is great,  to see and to enjoy  the earth.   
As one of awful  power,  stir up heroic  might  for those  who praise  thee,  Bounteous  Lord!   
 
HYMN  CXXVIII.  Agni.  
1. By Manu's  law was born this Agni,  Priest  most  skilled,  born for the holy work  of those  who yearn  
therefore,  yea, born for his own holy work.   
All ear to him who seeks  his love and wealth  to him who strives  for fame,   
Priest  ne'er  deceived,  he sits in Ila's holy place,  girt round  in Ila's holy place.   
2 We call that perfecter  of worship  by the path or sacrifice;  with reverence  rich in offerings,  with worship  
rich in offerings.   
Through  presentation  of our food he grows  not old in this his from;   
The God whom  Matarisvan  brought  from  far away,  for Manu  brought  from  far away.   
3 In ordered  course  forthwith  he traverses  the earth,  swift−swallowing,  bellowi ng Steer,  bearing  the genia
l 
seed,  bearing  the seed and bellowing.   
Observant  with a hundred  eyes the God is conqueror  in the wood:   
Agni,  who hath his seat in broad  plains  here below,  and in the high lands  far away.   
4 That Agni,  wise High−Priest,  in every house  takes  thought  for sacrifice  and holy service,  yea, takes  
thought,  with mental  power,  for sacrifice.   
Disposer,  he with mental  power  shows  all things  unto him who strives;   
Whence  he was born a guest  enriched  with holy oil, born as Ordainer  and as Priest.   
5 When  through  his power  and in his strong  prevailing  flames  the Maruts'  gladdening  boons  mingle  with 
Agni's  roar, boons  gladdening  for the active  One,   
Then  he accelerates  the gift, and by the greatness  of his wealth,   
Shall  rescue  us from  overwhe lming  misery,  from  curse  and overwhelming  woe.   
6 Vast,  universal,  good  he was made  messenger;  the speeder  with his right  hand  hath not loosed  his hold,  
through  love of fame  not loosed  his hold.   
He bears  oblations  to the Gods  for whosoever  supplicates.   
Agni bestows  a blessing  on each pious  man,  and opens  wide  the doors  for him.  
7 That Agni  hath been  set most  kind in camp  of men,  in sacrifice  like a Lord  victorious,  like a dear Lord  i
n 
sacred  rites.   
His are the oblations  of mankind  when  offered  up at Ili's place.   
He shall  preserve  us from  Varuna's  chastisement,  yea, from  the great  God's  chastisement.   
8 Agni  the Priest  they supplicate  to grant  them  wealth:  him, dear,  most  thoughtful,  have  they made  their Rig Veda – English Translation  
messenger,  him, offering−bearer  have  they made,   
Beloved  of all, who knoweth  all, the Priest,  the Holy  one, the Sage−   
Him,  Friend,  for help,  the Gods  when  they are fain for wealth,  him, Friend,  with hymns,  when  fain for we
alth.  
 
HYMN  CXXIX  Indra.  
1. THE  car which  Indra,  thou,  for service  of the Gods  though  it be far away,  O swift  One,  bringest  near,  
which,  Blameless  One,  thou bringest  near,   
Place  swiftly  nigh us for our help:  be it thy will that it be strong.   
Blameless  and active,  hear this speech  of orderers,  this speech  of us like orderers.   
 
2 Hear, Indra,  thou whom  men in every  fight  must  call to show  thy strength,  for cry of battle  with the men
, 
with men of war for victory.   
He who with heroes  wins  the light,  who with the singers  gains  the prize,   
Him the rich seek to gain even as a swift  strong  steed,  even  as a courser  fleet and strong.   
3 Thou,  Mighty,  pourest  forth  the hide that holds  the rain, thou keepest  far away,  Hero,  the wicked  man,  t
hou 
shuttest  out the wicked  man.   
Indra,  to thee I sing,  to Dyaus,  to Rudra  glorious  in himself,   
To Mitra , Varuna  I sing a far−famed  hymn  to the kind God a far−famed  hymn.   
4 We. wish  our Indra  here that he may further  you, the Friend,  beloved  of all, the very strong  ally, in wars
 the 
very strong  ally  
In all encounters  strengthen  thou our prayer  to be a help to us.  
No enemy−whom  thou smitest  downsubdueth  thee,  no enemy,  whom  thou smitest  down.   
5 Bow  down  the overweening  pride  of every  foe with succour  like to kindling−wood  in fiercest  flame,  wit
h 
mighty  succour,  Mighty  One.   
Guide  us, thou Hero,  as of old, so art thou counted  blameless  still.  
Thou  drivest,  as a Priest,  all sins of man away,  as Priest,  in person,  seeking  us.  
6 This may I utter to the present  Soma−drop,  which,  meet  to be invoked,  with power,  awakes  the prayer,  
awakes  the demon−slaying  prayer .  
May he himself  with darts  of death  drive  far from  us the scorner's  hate.   
Far let him flee away  who speaketh  wickedness  and vanish  like a mote  of dust.   
7 By thoughtful  invocation  this may we obtain,  obtain  great  wealth,  O Wealthy  One,  with Hero  sons,  weal
th 
that is sweet  with hero sons.   
Him who is wroth  we pacify  with sacred  food and eulogies,   
Indra  the Holy  with our calls inspired  and true, the Holy  One with calls inspired.   
8 On, for your good  and ours,  come  Indra  with the aid of his own lordliness  to drive  the wicked  hence,  to 
rend the evilhearted  ones!   
The weapon  which  devouring  fiends  cast at us shall  destroy  themselves.   
Struck  down,  it shall  not reach  the mark;  hurled  forth,  the fire−brand  shall  not strike.   
9 With  riches  in abundance,  Indra,  come to us, come  by an unobstructed  path,  come  by a path from  demo
ns Rig Veda – English Translation  
free.  
Be with us when  we stray  afar, be with us when  our home  is nigh.   
Protect  us with thy help both near and far away:  protect  us ever with thy help.   
10 Thou  art our own,  O Indra,  with victorious  wealth:  let might  accompany  thee,  the Strong,  to give us ai
d, 
like Mitra,  to give mighty  aid.  
O strongest  saviour,  helper  thou,  Immortal!  of each warrior's  car.  
Hurt thou another  and not us, O Thunderarmed,  one who would  hurt, O Thunder−armed !  
11 Save  us from  injury,  thou who art well extolled:  ever the warder−off  art thou of wicked  ones,  even  as a 
God,  of wicked  ones;   
Thou  slayer  of the evil fiend,  saviour  of singer  such as I.  
Good  Lord,  the Father  made  thee slayer  of the fiends,  made  thee, good  Lord,  to slay the fiends.   
 
HYMN  CXXX.  Indra.  
1. Come  to us, Indra,  from  afar, conducting  us even  as a lord of heroes  to the gatherings,  home,  like a Kin
g, 
his heroes'  lord.  
We come  with gifts of pleasant  food,  with juice  poured  forth,  invoking  thee,  
As sons invite  a sire, that thou mayst  get thee strength  thee,  bounteousest,  to get thee strength.   
2 O Indra,  drink  the Soma  juice  pressed  out with stones.  poured  from  the reservoir,  as an ox drinks  the spr
ing, 
a very thirsty  bull the spring.   
For the sweet  draught  that gladdens  thee,  for mightiest  freshening  of thy strength.   
 
Let thy Bay Horses  bring  thee hither  as the Sun, as every  day they bring  the Sun.  
3 He found  the treasure  brought  from  heaven  that lay concealed,  close−hidden,  like the nestl ing of a bird, 
in 
rock,  enclosed  in never−enffing  rock.   
Best Angiras,  bolt−armed,  he strove  to win, as 'twere,  the stall of kine;   
So Indra  hath disclosed  the food concealed,  disclosed  the doors,  the food that lay concealed.   
4 Grasping  his thunderbolt  with both hands,  Indra  made  its edge  most  keen,  for hurling,  like a carving−kn
ife 
for Ahi's  slaughter  made  it keen.   
Endued  with majesty  and strength,  O Indra,  and with lordly  might,   
Thou  crashest  down  the trees,  as when  a craftsman  fells,  crashest  them  down as with an axe.  
5 Thou,  Indra,  without  effort  hast let loose  the floods  to run their free course  down,   
like chariots,  to the sea, like chariots  showing  forth  their strength.   
They,  reaching  hence  away,  have  joined  their strength  for one eternal  end,  
Even as the cows  who poured  forth  every  thing  for man,  Yea, poured  forth  all thing−  for mankind.   
6 Eager  for riches,  men have  formed  for thee this song,  like as a skilful  craftsman  fashioneth  a car, so hav
e 
they wrought  thee to their bliss;   
Adorning  thee,  O Singer,  like a generous  steed  for deeds  of might,   
Yea, like a steed  to show  his strength  and win the prize,  that he may bear each prize  away.   
7 For Puru  thou hast shattered,  Indra  ninety  forts,  for Divodasa  thy boon  servant  with thy bolt, O Dancer,  
for Rig Veda – English Translation  
thy worshipper.   
For Atithigva  he, the Strong,  brought  Sambara.  from  the mountain  down,   
Distributing  the mighty  treasures  with his strength,  parting  all treasures  with his strength.   
8 Indra  in battles  help his Aryan  worshipper,  he who hath hundred  helps at hand  in every  fray, in frays  tha
t 
win the light of heaven.   
Plaguing  the lawless  he gave up to Manu's  seed the dusky  skin;   
Blazing,  'twere,  he burns  each covetous  man away,  he burns,  the tyrannous  away.   
9 Waxed  strong  in might  at dawn  he tore the Sun's wheel  off. Bright  red, he steals  away  their speech,  the 
Lord  of Power,  their speech  he steals  away  from  them,   
As thou with eager  speed,  O Sage,  hast come  from  far away  to hel  
As winning  for thine  own all happiness  of men,  winning  all happiness  each day.  
10 Lauded  with our new hymns,  O vigorous  in deed,  save us with strengthening  help,  thou Shatterer  of th
e 
Forts!   
Thou,  Indra,  praised  by Divodasa's  clansmen,  as heaven  grows  great  with days,  shalt  wax in glory.   
 
HYMN  CXXXI.  Indra.  
1. To Indra  Dyaus  the Asura  hath bowed  him down,  to Indra  mighty  Earth  with wide−extending  tracts,  to 
win 
the light,  with wide−spread  tracts.   
All Gods  of one accord  have  set Indra  in front  preeminent.   
For Indra  all libations  must  be set apart,  all man's  libations  set apart.  
2 In all libations  men with hero spirit  urge the Universal  One,  each seeking  several  light,  each fain to win 
the 
light apart.   
Thee,  furthering  like a ship,  will we set to the chariot−pole  of strength,   
As men who win with sacrifices  Indra's  thought,  men who win Indra  with their lauds.   
3 Couples  desirous  of thine  aid are storming  thee,  pouring  their presents  forth  to win a stall of kine,  pouri
ng 
gifts,  Indra,  seeking  thee.   
When  two men seeking  spoil  or heaven  thou bringest  face to face in war,  
Thou  showest,  Indra,  −then  the bolt thy constant  friend,  the Bull that ever waits  on thee.   
4 This thine  heroic  power  men of old time have  known,  wherewith  thou breakest  down,  Indra,  autumnal  f
orts, 
breakest  them  down  with conquering  might.   
Thou  hast chastised , O Indra,  Lord  of Strength,  the man who worships  not,  
 
And made  thine  own this great  earth  and these  water−floods;  with joyous  heart  these  waterfloods.   
5 And they have  bruited  far this hero−might  when  thou,  O Strong  One,  in thy joy helpest  thy suppliant s, 
who 
sought  to win thee for their Friend.   
Their  battle−cry  thou madest  sound  victorious  in the shocks  of war.  
One stream  after another  have they gained  from  thee,  eager  for glory  have  they gained.   
 
6. Also  this morn  may he be well inclined  to us, mark  at our call our offerings  and our song of praise,  our Rig Veda – English Translation  
call 
that we may win the light.   
As thou,  O Indra  Thunder−armed,  wilt, as the Strong  One,  slay the foe,  
Listen  thou to the prayer  of me a later sage,  hear thou a later sage's  prayer.   
7 O Indra,  waxen  strong  and well−inclined  to us, thou very mighty,  slay the man that is our foe, slay the 
man,  
Hero!  with thy bolt.  
Slay thou the man who injures  us: hear thou,  as readiest,  to hear.   
Far be malignity,  like mischief  on the march,  afar be all malignity.   
 
HYMN  CXXXII.  Indra.  
1. HELPED,  Indra  Maghavan,  by thee in war of old, may we subdue  in fight  the men who strive  with us, 
conquer  the men who war with us.  
This day that now is close  at hand  bless  him who pours  the Soma  juice.   
In this our sacrifice  may we divide  the spoil,  showing  our strength,  the spoil  of war.  
2 In war which  wins  the light,  at the freegiver's  call, at due oblation  of the early−rising  one, oblation  of th
e 
active  one,  
Indra  slew,  even  as we know−whom  each bowed  head must  reverence.   
May all thy bounteous  gifts be gathered  up for us, yea, the good  gifts of thee the Good.   
3 This food glows  for thee as of old at sacrifice,  wherein  they made  thee chooser  of the place  , for thou 
choosest  the place  of sacrifice.   
Speak  thou and make  it known  to us they see within  with beams  of light.   
Indra,  indeed,  is found  a seeker  after spoil,  spoil−seeker  for his own allies.   
4 So now must  thy great  deed be lauded  as of old, when  for the Angirases  thou openedst  the stall,  openeds
t, 
giving  aid, the stall.   
In the same  manner  for us here fight  thou and be victorious:   
To him who pours  the juice  give up the lawless  man,  the lawless  who is wroth  with us.  
5 When  with wise plan the Hero  leads  the people  forth,  they conquer  in the ordered  battle,  seeking  fame,  
press, eager,  onward  seeking  fame.   
To him in time of need  they sing for life with offspring  and with strength.   
Their  hymns  with Indra  find a welcome  place  of rest: the hynins  go forward  to the Gods.   
6 Indra  and Parvata,  our champions  in the fight,  di ive ye away  each man who fain would  war with us, dri
ve 
him far from  us with the bolt.  
Welcome  to him concealed  afar shall  he the lair that he hath found.   
So may the Render  rend our foes on every  side, rend them,  O Hero,  everywhere.   
 
HYMN  CXXXIII.  Indra.  
1. WITH  sacrifice  I purge  both earth  and heaven:  I burn up great  she−fiends  who serve  not Indra,   
Where  throttled  by thy hand  the foes were  slaughtered,  and in the pit of death  lay pierced  and mangled.   
2 O thou who castest  forth  the stones  crushing  the sorceresses'  heads,   
Break  them  with thy wide−spreading  foot, with thy wide−spreading  mighty  foot.  
3 Do thou,  O Maghavan,  beat off these  sorceresses'  daring  strength.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Cast them  within  the narrow  pit. within  the deep  and narrow  pit.  
4 Of whom  thou hast ere now destroyed  thrice−fifty  with thy fierce  attacks.   
 
That deed  they count  a glorious  deed,  though  small  to thee,  a glorious  deed.   
5 O Indra,  crush  and bray to bits the fearful  fiery−weaponed  fiend:   
Strike  every  demon  to the ground.   
6 Tear down  the migh ty ones.  O Indra,  hear thou us. For heaven  hath glowed  like earth  in fear, O 
nunder−armed,  as dreading  fierce  heat,  Thunder−armed!   
Most  Mighty  mid the Mighty  Ones  thou speedest  with strong  bolts  of death,   
Not slaying  men,  unconquered  Hero  with the brave,  O Hero,  with the thrice−seven  brave.   
7 The pourer  of libations  gains  the home  of wealth,  pouring  his gift conciliates  hostilities,  yea, the hostiliti
es 
of Gods.   
Pouring,  he strives,  unchecked  and strong,  to win him riches  thousandfold.   
Indra  gives  lasting wealth  to him who pours  forth  gifts,  yea, wealth  he gives  that long shall  last.  
 
HYMN  CXXXIV.  Vayu.  
1. Vayu,  let fleet−foot  coursers  bring  thee speedily  to this our feast,  to drink  first of the juice  we pour,  to t
he 
first draught  of Soma  juice.   
May our glad hymn,  discerning  well,  uplifted,  gratify  thy mind.   
Come  with thy team−drawn  car, O Vayu,  to the gift, come  to the sacrificer's  gift.  
2 May the joy−giving  drops,  O Vayu  gladden  thee,  effectual,  well prepared,  directed  to the heavens,  stron
g, 
blent with milk and seeking  heaven;   
That aids, effectual  to fulfil,  may wait upon  our skilful  power.   
Associate  teams  come  hitherward  to grant  our prayers  . they shall  address  the hymns  we sing.   
3 Two red steeds  Vayu  yokes,  Vayu  two purple  steeds,  swift−foo ted, to the chariot,  to the pole to draw,  m
ost 
able,  at the pole,  to draw.   
Wake  up intelligence,  as when  a lover  wakes  his sleeping  love.   
Illumine  heaven  and earth,  make  thou the Dawns  to shine,  for glory  make  the Dawns  to shine.   
4 For thee the radiant  Dawns  in the fardistant  sky broaden  their lovely  gannents  forth  in wondrous  beams,  
bright−coloured  in their new−born  beams.   
For thee the nectar−yielding  Cow  pours  all rich treasures  forth  as milk.   
The Marut  host hast thou engendered  from  the womb,  the Maruts from  the womb  of heaven.   
5 For thee the pure bright  quickly−flowing  Soma−drops,  strong  in their heightening  power,  hasten  to 
mixthemselves,  hasten  to the water  to be mixed.   
To thee the weary  coward  prays  for luck that he may speed  away.   
Thou  by thy law protectest  us from  every  world,  yea, from  the world  of highest  Gods.   
6 Thou,  Vayu,  who hast none  before  thee,  first of all hast right  to drink  these  offerings  of Soma  juice,  hast 
right  to drink  the juice  out−poured,   
Yea, poured  by all invoking  tribes who free themselves  from  taint of sin,  
For thee all cows  are milked  to yield  the Soma−milk,  to yield  the butter  and the milk.   
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  CXXXV.  Vayu,  Indra−Vayu.  
1. STREWN  is the sacred  grass;  come  Vayu,  to our feast,  with team  of thousands,  come,  Lord  of the 
harnessed  team,  with hundreds,  Lord  of harnessed  steeds!   
The drops  divine  are lifted  up for thee,  the God,  to drink  them  first.  
The juices  rich in sweets  have raised  thern  for thy joy, have  raised  themselves  to give thee strength.   
2 Purified  by the stones  the Soma  flows  for thee,  clothed  with its lovely  splendours,  to the reservoir,  flows  
clad in its refulgent  light.   
For thee the Soma  is poured  forth,  thy portioned  share  mid. Gods  and men.   
Drive  thou thy horses,  Vayu,  come  to us with love,  come  well−inclined  and loving  us.  
3 Come  thou with hundreds,  come  with thousands  in thy team  to this our solemn  rite, to taste the sacred  f
ood, 
 
Vayu,  to taste the offerings.   
This is thy seasonable  share,  that comes  co−radiant  with the Sun.  
Brought  by attendan t priests  pure juice  is offered  up, Vayu,  pure juice  is offered  up.  
4 The chariot  with its team  of horses  bring  you both,  to guard  us and to taste the well−appointed  food,  Va
yu, 
to taste the offerings!   
Drink  of the pleasant  −flavoured  juice  the first draught is assigned  to you.  
O Vayu,  with your splendid  bounty  come  ye both,  Indra,  with bounty  come  ye both.   
5 May our songs  bring  you hither  to our solemn  rites:  these  drops  of mighty  vigour  have  they beauti  fied, 
like 
a swift  veed  of mighty  strength.   
Drink of them  well−inclined  to us, come  hitherward  to be our help.   
Drink,  Indra−Vayu,  of these  Juices  pressed  with stones,  Strength−givers!  till they gladden  you.  
6 These  Soma  juices  pressed  for you in waters  here,  borne  by attendant  priests,  are oficredup  to you: brigh
t, 
Vayu,  are they offered  up.  
Swift  through  the strainer  have they flowed,  and here are shed for both ofyou,   
Soma−drops,  fain for you, over the wether's  fleece,  Somas  over the wether's  fleece.   
7 O Vayu,  pass thou over all the,slumberers,  and where  the press−stone  rings  enter  ye both that house,  ye
a, 
Indra,  go ye both within.   
The joyous  Maiden  is beheld,  the butter  flows.  With  richly  laden  team  come  to our solemn  rite, yea, Indra
, 
come  ye to the rite.  
8 Ride  hither  to the offering  of the pleasant  juice,  the holy Fig−tree  which  victorious  priests  surround:  
victorious  be they still for us.  
At once  the cows  yield  milk,  the barleymeal  is dressed.  For thee,   
O Vayu,  never  shall  the cows  grow  thin, never  for thee shall  they be dry.  
9 These  Bulls  of thine,  O Vayu  with the arm of strength,  who swiftly  fly within  the current  of thy stream,  
the 
Bulls  increasing  in their might,   
Horseless,  yet even  through  the waste  swift−moving,  whom  no shout  can stay,  
Hard  to be checked  are they,  like sunbeams,  in their course.  hard to be checked  by both the hands.   
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  CXXXVI.  Mitra−Varuna.  
1. BRING  adoration  ample  and most  excellent,  hymn,  offierings,  to the watchful  Twain,  the bountiful,  yo
ur 
sweetest  to the bounteous  Ones.   
Sovrans  adored  with streams  of oil and praised  at every  sacrifice.   
Their  high imperial  might  may nowhere  be assailed,  ne'er  may their Godhead  be assailed.   
2 For the broad  Sun was seen a path more  widely  laid, the path of holy law hath been maintained  with ray
s, 
the eye with Bhaga's  rays of light.   
Firm−set  in heaven  is Mitra's  home,  and Aryaman's  and Varuna's.   
Thence  they give forth  great  vital strength  which  merits  praise,  high power  of life that men shall  praise.   
3 With  Aditi  the luminous,  the celestial,  upholder  of the people,  come  ye day by day, ye who watch  sleepl
ess, 
day by day.  
Resplendent  might  have  ye obtained,  Adityas,  Lords  of liberal  gifts.   
Movers  of men,  mild both,  are Mitra,  Varuna,  mover  of men is Aryaman.   
4 This Soma  be most  sweet  to Mitra,  Varuna:  he in the drinking−f easts,  shall  have  a share  thereof,  sharing
, a 
God,  among  the Gods.   
May all the Gods  of one accord  accept  it joyfully  to−day.   
Therefore  do ye, O Kings,  accomplish  what  we ask, ye Righteous  Ones,  whate'er  we ask.  
5 Whoso,  with worship  serves  Mitra  and VaruiIa, him guard  ye carefully,  uninjured,  from  distress,  guard  
from  distress  the liberal  man.   
Aryaman  guards  him well who acts uprightly  following  his law,  
Who  beautifies  their service  with his lauds,  who makes  it beautiful  with songs  of praise.   
 
6 Worsh ip will I proress  to lofty  Dyaus,  to Heaven  and Earth,  to Mitra  and to bounteous  Varuna,  the 
Bounteous,  the Compassionate.   
Praise  Indra,  praise  thou Agni,  praise  Bhaga  and heavenly  Aryaman.   
Long  may we live and have  attendant  progeny,  have  progeny  with Soma's  help.   
7 With  the Gods'  help,  with Indra  still beside  us, may we be held self−splendid  with the Maruts.   
May Agni,  Mitra,  Varuna  give us shelter  this may we gain,  we and our wealthy  princes.   
 
HYMN  CXXXVII.  Mitra−Varuna.  
1. WITH  stones  have we pressed out: O come;  these  gladdening  drops  are blent  with milk,  these  Soma−dr
ops 
which  gladden  you.  
Come  to us, Kings  who reach  to heaven,  approach  us, coming  hitherward.   
These  milky  drops  are yours,  Mitra  and Varuna,  bright  Soma  juices  blent  with milk.   
2 Here  are the droppings;  come  ye nigh the Soma−droppings  blent  with curd,  juices  expressed  and blent  
with 
curd.   
Now  for the wakening  of your Dawn  together  with the Sun−God's  rays,   
juice  waits  for Mitra  and for Varuna  to drink,  fair juice  for drink,  for sacrihce.   
3 As 'twere  a radiant−coloured  cow,  they milk with stones  the stalk for you, with stones  they milk the 
Soma−plant.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
May ye come  nigh us, may ye turn hither  to drink  the Soma  juice.   
The men pressed  out this juice,  Mitra  and Varuna,  pressed  out this Soma  for your drink.   
 
HYMN  CXXXVIII.  Pusan.  
1. STRONG  Pusan's  majesty  is lauded  evermore,  the glory  of his lordly  might  is never  faint,  his song  of 
praise  is never  faint.   
Seeking  felicity  I laud him nigh to help,  the source,  of bliss,   
Who,  Vigorous  one, hath drawn  to him the hearts  of all, drawn  them,  the Vigorous  One,  the God.   
2 Thee,  then,  O Pusan,  like a swift  one on his way,  I urge with lauds  that thou mayst  make  the foemen  fle
e, 
drive,  camel−like,  our foes afar.  
As I, a man,  call thee,  a God,  giver  of bliss,  to be my Friend,   
So make  our loudly−chanted  praises  glorious,  in battles  make  them  glorious.   
3 Thou,  Pusan,  in whose  friendship  they who sing forth  praise  enjoy  advantage,  even in wisdom,  through  
thy 
grace,  in wisdom  even  they are advance d.  
So, after this most  recent  course,  we come  to thee with prayers  for wealth.   
Not stirred  to anger,  O Wide−Ruler,  come  to us, come  thou to us in every  fight.   
4 Not stirred  to anger,  come,  Free−giver,  nigh to us, to take this gift of ours,  thou who hast goats  for steed
s, 
Goat−borne!  their gift who long for fame.   
So, Wonder−Worker!  may we turn thee hither  with effectual  lauds.   
I slight  thee not, O Pusan,  thou Resplendent  One:  thy friendship  may not be despised.   
 
HYMN  CXXXIX.  Visvedevas.  
1. HEARD  be our prayer!  In thought  I honour  Agni  first:  now straightway  we elect  this heavenly  compan
y, 
Indra  and Vayu  we elect.   
For when  our latest  thought  is raised  and on Vivasvan  centred  well,   
Then  may our holy songs  go forward  on their way,  our songs  as 'twere  unto the Gods.   
2 As there  ye, Mitra,  Varuna,  above  the true have taken  to yourselves  the untrue  with your mind,  with 
wisdom's  mental  energy,   
So in the seats  wherein  ye dwell  have we beheld  the Golden  One,   
 
Not with our thoughts  or spirit,  but with these  our eyes,  yea, with the eyes that Soma  gives.   
3 Asvins,  the pious  call you with their hymns  of praise,  sounding  their loud song  forth  to you, these  living  
men,  to their oblations,  living  men.   
All glories  and all nourishment,  Lords  of all wealth!  depend  on you.  
The fellies  of your golden  chariot  scatter  drops,  Mighty  Ones!  of your golden  car.  
4 Well  is it known,  O Mighty  Ones:  ye open  heaven;  for you the chariotsteeds  are yoked  for morning  rites
, 
unswerving  steeds  for morning  rites,   
We set you on the chariot−scat,  ye Mighty,  on the golden  car.  
Ye seek mid−air  as by a path that leads  aright,  as by a path that leads  direct.   
5 O Rich  in Strength,  through  your great  power  vouchsafe  us blessings  day and night.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
The offerings  which  we bring  to you shall  neve r fail, gifts brought  by us shall  never  fail.  
6 These  Soma−drops,  strong  Indra!  drink  for heroes,  poured,  pressed  out by pressing−stones,  are welling  
forth  for thee,  for thee the drops  are welling  forth.   
They  shall  make  glad thy heart  to give,  to give wealth great  and wonderful.   
Thou  who acceptest  praise  come  glorified  by hymns,  come  thou to us benevolent.   
7 Quickly,  O Agni,  hear us: magnified  by us thou shalt  speck  for us to the Gods  adorable  yea, to the King
s 
adorable:   
When,  O ye Deities,  ye gave  that Milch−cow  to the Angirases,   
They  milked  her: Aryaman,  joined  with them,  did the work:  he knoweth  her as well as I.  
8 Ne'er  may these  manly  deeds  of yours  for us grow  old, never  may your bright  glories  fall into decay,  ne
ver 
before  our time decay.   
What  deed  of yours,  new every  age, wondrous,  surpassing  man,  rings  forth,   
Whatever,  Maruts!  may be difficult  to gain,  grant  us, whate'er  is hard to gain.   
9 Dadhyac  of old, Anigiras,  Priyamedha  these,  and Kanva,  Atri, Manu  knew  my birth,  yea, tbose  of ancie
nt 
days and Manu  knew.   
Their  long line stretcheth  to the Gods,  our birth−connexions  are with them.   
To these,  for their high station,  1 bow down  with song,  to Indra,  Agni,  bow with song.   
10 Let the Invoker  bless:  let offerers  bring  choice  gifts;  Brhaspati  the Friend  doth sacrifice  with Steers,  St
eers 
that have  many  an excellence.   
Now  with our ears we catch  the sound  of the press−stone  that rings  afar.  
The very Strong  hath gained  the waters  by himself,  the strong  gained  many  a resting−place.   
11 O ye Eleve n Gods  whose  home  is heaven,  O ye Eleven  who make  earth  your dwelling,   
Ye who with might,  Eleven,  live in waters,  accept  this sacrifice,  O Gods,  with pleasure.   
 
HYMN  CXL.  Agni.  
1 To splendid  Agni  seated  by the altar,  loving  well his home,  I bring  the food as 'twere  his place  of birth.   
I clothe  the bright  One with my hymn  as with a robe,  him with the car of light,  bright−hued,  dispelling  
gloom.   
2 Child  of a double  birth  he grasps  at triple  food;  in the year's  course  what  he hath swallowed  grows  anew
.  
He, by another's  mouth  and tongue  a noble  Bull,  with other,  as an elephant,  consumes  the trees.   
3 The pair who dwell  together,  moving  in the dark bestir  themselves:  both parents  hasten  to the babe,   
Impetuous−tongued,  destroying,  springing  swiftly  forth,  one to be watched  and cherished,  strengthener  of 
his 
sire.  
4 For man,  thou Friend  of men,  these  steeds  of thine  are yoked,  impatient,  lightly  running,  ploughing  
blackened  lines,   
Discordant−minded,  fleet,  gliding  with easy speed,  urged  onward  by the wind  and rapid  in their course.   
5 Dispelling  on their way the horror  of black  gloom  , making  a glorious  show  these  flames  Of his fly forth
,  
When  o'er the spacious  tract he spreads  himself  abroad,  and rushes  panting  on with thunder  and with roar.
  Rig Veda – English Translation  
6 Amid  brown  plants  he stoops  as if adorning  them,  and rushes  bellowing  like a bull upon  his wives.   
 
Proving  his might,  he decks  the glory  of his form,  and shakes  his horns  like one terrific,  bard to stay.  
7 Now  covered,  now displayed  he grasps  as one who knows  his resting−place  in those  who know  him wel
l.  
A second  time they wax and gather  Godlike  power,  and blending  both together  change  their Parents'  form
.  
8 The maidens  with long,  tresses  hold him in embrace;  dead,  they rise up again  to meet  the Living  One.   
Releasing  them  from  age with a loud roar he comes,  filling  them  with new spirit,  living,  unsubdued.   
9 Licking  the mantle  of the Mother,  far and wide  he wanders  over fields  with beasts  that flee apace.   
Strengthening  all that walk,  licking  up all around,  a blackened  path,  forsooth,  he leaves  where'er  he goes.   
10 O Agni,  shine  resplendent  with our wealthy  chiefs,  like a loud−snorting  bull, accustomed  to the house.   
Thou  casting  off thine  infant  wrappings  blazest  forth  as though  thou hadst  put on a coat of mail for war.  
11 May this our perfect  prayer  be dearer  unto thee than an imperfect  prayer  although  it please  thee well.   
With  the pure brilliancy  that radiates  from  thy form,  mayest  thou grant  to us abundant  store  of wealth.   
12 Grant  to our chariot,  to our house,  O Agni,  a boat with moving  feet and constant  oarage,   
One that may further  well our wealthy  princes  and all the folk, and be our certain  refuge.   
13 Welcome  our laud with thine  approval,  Agni.  May earth  and heaven  and freely  flowing  rivers   
Yield  us long life and food and corn and cattle,  and may the red Dawns  choose  for us their choicest.  
 
HYMN  CXLI.  Agni.  
1. YEA,  verily,  the fair effulgence  of the God for glory  was established,  since  he sprang  from  strength.   
When  he inclines  thereto  successful  is the hymn:  the songs  of sacrifice  have brought  him as they flow  
2 Wonderful,  rich in nourishment,  he dwells  in food;  next,  in the seven  auspicious  Mothers  is his home.   
Thirdly,  that they might  drain  the treasures  of the Bull,  the maidens  brought  forth  him for whom  the ten 
provide.   
3 What  time from  out the deep,  from  the Steer's  wondrous  form,  the Chiefs  who had the power  produced  
him 
with their strength;   
When  Matarisvan  rubbed  forth  him who lay concealed,  for mixture  of the sweet  drink,  in the days of old.  
4 When  from  the Highest  Father  he is brought  to us, amid  the plants  he rises hungry, wondrously.   
As both together  join to expedite  his birth,  most  youthful  he is born resplendent  in his light.   
5 Then  also entered  he the Mothers,  and in them  pure and uninjured  he increased  in magnitude.   
As to the first he rose,  the vigorous  from  of old, so now he runs among  the younger  lowest  ones.   
6 Therefore  they choose  him Herald  at the morning  rites,  pressing  to him as unto Bhaga,  pouring  gifts,   
When,  much−praised,  by the power  and will of Gods,  he goes at all times  to his mortal  worshipper  to drin
k.  
7 What  time the Holy  One,  wind−urged,  hath risen  up, serpent−like  winding  through  the dry grass  
unrestrained,   
Dust  lies upon  the way of him who burneth  all, black−winged  and pure of birth  who follows  sundry  paths.
  
8 Like a swift  chariot  made  by men who know  their art, he with his red limbs  lifts himself  aloft to heaven.
  
Thy worshippers  become  by burning  black  of hue: their strength  flies as before  a hero's  violence.   
9 By thee,  O Agni,  Varuna  who guards  the Law,  Mitra  and Aryaman,  the Bounteous,  are made  strong;   
For, as the felly holds  the spokes,  thou with thy might  pervading  hast been  born encompassing  them  rounRig Veda – English Translation  
d.  
10 Agni,  to him who toils and pours  libations,  thou,  Most  Youthful!  sendest  wealth  and all the host of Go
ds.  
Thee,  therefore,  even  as Bhaga,  will we set anew,  young  Child  of Strength,  most  wealthy!  in our battle−so
ng.  
11 Vouchsafe  us riches  turned  to worthy  ends,  good  luck abiding  in the house,  and strong  capacity,   
Wealth  that directs  both worlds  as they were  guiding−reins,  and, very Wise,  the Gods'  assent  in sacrifice.   
12 May he, the Priest  resplendent,  joyful,  hear us, he with the radiant  car and rapid  horses.   
May Agni,  ever wise,  with best directions  to bliss and highest  happiness  conduct  us.  
13 With  hymns  of might  hath Agni  now been  lauded,  advanced  to height  of universal  kingship.   
Now  may these  wealthy  chiefs  and we together  spread  forth  as spreads  the Sun above  the rain−clouds.   
 
HYMN  CXLII  Apris.  
1. KINDLED,  bring,  Agni,  Gods  to−day  for him who lifts the ladle  up. Spin out the ancient  thread  for hi
m who sheds,  with gifts,  the Soma  juice.   
2 Thou  dealest  forth,  Tanunapat,  sweet  sacrifice  enriched  with oil,  
Brought  by a singer  such as I who offers  gifts and toils for thee.   
3 He wondrous,  sanctifying,  bright,  sprinkles  the sacrifice  with mead,   
Thrice,  Narasamsa  from  the heavens,  a God mid Gods  adorable.   
4 Agni,  besought,  bring  hitherward  Indra  the Friend,  the Wonderful,   
For this my hymn  of praise,  O sweet  of tongue,  is chanted  forth  to thee.   
5 The ladle−holders  strew  trimmed  grass  at this well−ordered  sacrifice;   
A home  for Indra  is adorned,  wide,  fittest  to receive  the Gods.   
6 Thrown  open  be the Doors  Divine,  unfailing,  that assist  the rite,  
High,  purifying,  much−desired,  so that the Gods  may enter  in.  
7 May Night  and Morning,  hymned  with lauds,  united,  fair to look upon,   
Strong  Mothers  of the sacrifice,  seat them  together  on the grass.   
8 May the two Priests  Divine,  the sage,  the sweet−voiced  lovers  of the hymn,   
Complete  this sacrifice  of ours,  effectual,  reaching  heaven  to−day.   
9 Let Hotri  pure,  set amang  Gods,  amid  the Maruts  Bhirati,  Ila, Sarasvati,  Mahi,  rest on the grass,  adorabl
e.  
10 May Tvastar  send us genial  dew abundant,  wondrous,  rich in gifts,   
For increase  and for growth  of wealth,  Tvastar  our kinsman  and our Friend.   
11 Vanaspati,  give forth,  thyself,  and call the Gods  to sacrifice.   
May Agni,  God intelligent,  speed  our oblation  to the Gods.   
12 To Vayu  joined  with Pusan,  with the Maruts,  and the host of Gods,   
To Indra  who inspires  the hymn  cry Glory!  and present  the gift.  
13 Come  hither  to enjoy  the gifts prepared  with cry of Glory!  Come,   
O Indra,  hear their calling;  they invite  thee to the sacrifice.   
 
HYMN  CXLIII.  Agni.  
1. To Agni  I present  a newer  mightier  hymn,  I bring  my words  and song unto the Son of Strength,   
Who,  Offspring  of the Waters,  bearing  precious  things  sits on the earth,  in season,  dear Invoking  Priest.   
2 Soon  as he sprang  to birth  that Agni  was shown  forth  to Matarisvan  in the highest  firmament.   
When  he was kindled,  through  his power  and majesty  his fiery  splendour  made  the heavens  and earth  to Rig Veda – English Translation  
shine.   
3 His flames  that wax not old, beams  fair to look upon  of him whose  face is lovely,  shine  with beauteous  
sheen.   
The rays of Agni,  him whose  active  force  is light,  through  the nights glimmer  sleepless,  ageless,  like the 
floods.   
4 Send  thou with hymns  that Agni  to his own abode,  who rules,  one Sovran  Lord  of wealth,  like Varuna,   
Him,  All−possessor,  whom  the Bhrgus  with their might  brought  to earth's  central  point,  the centre  of the 
world.   
5 He whom  no force  can stay, even  as the Maruts'  roar, like to a dart sent forth,  even  as the bolt from  heav
en,  
Agni  with sharpened  jaws chews  up and cats the trees,  and conquers  them  as when  the warrior  smites  his 
foes.   
6 And will not Agni  find enjoyment  in our praise,  will not the Vasu  grant  our wish with gifts of wealth?   
Will not the Inspirer  speed  our prayers  to gain their end?  Him with the radiant  glance  1 laud with this my 
song.   
7 The kindler  of the flame  wins  Agni  as a Friend,  promoter  of the Law,  whose  face is bright  with oil.  
Inflamed  and keen,  refulgent  in our gatherings,  he lifts our hymn  on high clad in his radiant  hues.   
 
8 Keep  us incessantly  with guards  that cease  not, Agni,  with guards  auspicious,  very mig
hty. With  guards  that never  slumber,  never  heedless,  never  beguiled.  O Helper,  keep our c
hildren.  
 
HYMN  CXLIV.  Agni.  
1. THE  Priest  goes forth  to sacrifice,  with wondrous  power  sending  aloft the hymn  of glorious  brilliancy.   
He moves  to meet  the ladles  turning  to the right,  which are the first to kiss the place  where  he abides.   
2 To him sang forth  the flowing  streams  of Holy  Law,  encompassed  in the home  and birth−place  of the G
od.  
He, when  he dwelt  extended  in the waters'  lap, absorbed  those  Godlike  powers  for which  he is adored.  
3 Seeking  in course  altern  to reach  the selfsame  end the two copartners  strive  to win this beauteous  form.   
Like Bhaga  must  he be duly invoked  by us, as he who drives  the car holds  fast the horse's  reins.   
4 He whom  the two copartners  with observance  tend,  the pair who dwell  together  in the same  abode,   
By night  as in the day the grey one was born young,  passing  untouched  by eld through  many  an age of ma
n.  
5 Him the ten fingers,  the devotions.  animate:  we mortals  call on him a God to give us help.   
He speeds  over the sloping  surface  of the land:  new deeds  hath he performed  with those  who gird him rou
nd.  
6 For, Agni,  like a herdsman,  thou by thine  own might  rulest  o'er all that is in heaven  and on the earth;   
And these  two Mighty  Ones,  bright,  golden  closely  joined,  rolling  them  round  are come  unto thy sacred  
grass.   
7 Agni,  accept  with joy, be glad in this our prayer,  joy−giver,  self−sustained,  strong,  born of Holy  Law!   
For fair to see art thou turning  to every  side, pleasant  to look on as a dwelling  filled  with food.   
 
HYMN  CXLV.  Agni.  
1. Ask ye of him for he is come,  he knoweth  it; he, full of wisdom,  is implored,  is now implored.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
With  him are admonitions  and with him commands:  he is the Lord  of Strength,  the Lord  of Power  and Mi
ght.  
2 They  ask of him: not all learn  by their questioning  what  he, the Sage,  hath grasped,  as 'twere,  with his o
wn 
mind.   
Forgetting  not the former  nor the later word,  he goeth  on, not careless,  in his mental  power.   
3 To him these  ladles  go, to him these  racing  mares:  he only will give ear to all the words  I speak.   
All−speeding,  victor,  perfecter  of sacrifice,  the Babe  with flawless  help hath mustered  vigorous  might.   
4 Whate'er  he meets  he grasps  and then runs farther  on, and straightway,  newly  born,creeps  forward  with 
his 
kin.  
He stirs the wearied  man to pleasure  and great  joy what  time the longing  gifts approach  him as he comes.   
5 He is a wild thing  of the flood  and forest:  he hath been  laid upon  the highest  surface.   
He hath declared  the lore of works  to mortals,  Agni the Wise,  for he knows  Law,  the Truthful.   
 
HYMN  CXLVI.  Agni.  
1. I LAUD  the seven−rayed,  the triple−headed,  Agni  all−perfect  in his Parents'  bosom,   
Sunk  in the lap of all that moves  and moves  not, him who hath filled  all luminous  realms  of heaven.   
2 As a great  Steer  he grew  to these  his Parents;  sublime  lie stands,  untouched  by eld, far−reaching.   
He plants  his footsteps  on the lofty  ridges  of the broad  earth:  his red flames  lick the udder.   
3 Coming  together  to their common  youngling  both Cows,  fairshaped,  spread  forth  in all directions,   
Measuring  out the paths  that must  be travelled,  entrusting  all desires  to him the Mighty.   
4 The prudent  sages  lead him to his dwelling,  guarding  with varied  skill the Ever−Youthful.   
Longing,  they turned  their eyes unto the River:  to these  the Sun of men was manifested.   
5 Born  noble in the regions,  aim of all mens'  eyes to be implored  for life by great  and small  alike,   
Far as the Wealthy  One hath spread  himself  abroad,  he is the Sire all−visible  of this progeny.   
 
HYMN  CXLVII.  Agni.  
1. How,  Agni,  have  the radiant  ones,  aspiring , endued  thee with the vigour  of the living,   
So that on both sides  fostering  seed and offspring,  the Gods  may joy in Holy  Law's  fulfilment?   
2 Mark  this my speech,  Divine  One,  thou,  Most  Youthful!  offered  to thee by him who gives  most  freely.   
One hates  thee, and another  sings  thy praises:  I thine  adorer  laud thy form,  O Agni.   
3 Thy guardian  rays,  O Agni,  when  they saw him, preserved  blind  Mamateya  from  affliction.   
Lord  of all riches,  he preserved  the pious  the foes who fain would  harm  them  did no mischi ef.  
4 The sinful  man who worships  not, O Agni,  who,  offering  not, harms  us with double−dealing,−   
Be this in turn to him a heavy  sentence  may he distress  himself  by his revilings.   
5 Yea, when  a mortal  knowingly,  O Victor,  injures  with double  tongue  a fellow−mortal,   
From  him, praised  Agni!  save thou him that lauds  thee:  bring  us not into trouble  and affliction.   
 
HYMN  CXLVIII.  Agni.  
1. WHAT  Matarisvan,  piercing,  formed  by friction,  Herald  of all the Gods.  in varied  figure,   
Is he whom  they have  set mid human  houses,  gay−hued  as light and shining  forth  for beauty.   
2 They  shall  not harm  the man who brings  thee praises:  such as I am, Agni  my help approves  me.  Rig Veda – English Translation  
All acts of mine  shall  they accept  with pleasure,  laudation  from  the singer  who presents  it.  
3 Him in his constant  seat men skilled  in worship  have  taken  and with praises  have established.   
As, harnessed  to a chariot  fleet−foot  horses,  at his command  let bearers  lead him forward.   
4 Wondrous,  full many  a thing  he chews  and crunches:  he shines  amid  the wood  with spreading  brightnes
s.  
Upon  his glowing  flames  the wind  blows  daily,  driving  them  like the keen  shaft  of an archer.   
5 Him,  whom  while  yet in embryo  the hostile,  both skilled  and fain to harm,  may never  injure,   
Men blind  and sightless  through  his splendour  hurt not: his never−failing  lovers  have preserved  him.  
 
HYMN  CXLIX.  Agni.  
1. HITHER  he hastens  to give,  Lord  of great  riches,  King  of the mighty,  to the place  of treasure.   
lie pressing−stones  shall  serve  him speeding  near us.  
2 As Steer  of men so Steer  of earth  and heaven  by glory,  he whose  streams  all life hath drunken,   
Who  hasting  forward  rests upon  the altar.   
3 He who hath lighted  up the joyous  castle,  wise Courser  like the Steed  of cloudy  heaven,   
Bright  like the Sun, with hundredfo ld existence.   
4 He, doubly  born,  hath spread  in his effulgence  through  the three  luminous  realms,  through  all the region
s,  
Best sacrificing  Priest  where  waters  gather.   
5 Priest  doubly  born,  he through  his love of glory  hath in his keeping  all things  worth the choosing,   
The man who brings  him gifts hath noble  offspring.   
 
HYMN  CL. Agni.  
1. AGNI,  thy faithful  servant  I call upon  thee with many  a gift, As in the keeping  of the great  inciting  God
;  
2 Thou  who ne'er  movest  thee to aid the indolent,  the godless man,   
Him who though  wealthy  never  brings  an offering.   
3 Splendid,  O Singer,  is that man,  mightiest  of the great  in heaven.   
Agni,  may we be foremost,  we thy worshippers.   
 
HYMN  CLI. Mitra  and Varuna  
1. HEAVEN  and earth  trembled  at the might  and voice of him, whom,  loved  and Holy  One,  helper  of all 
mankind,   
The wise who longed  for spoil  in fight  for kine brought  forth  with power,  a Friend,  mid waters,  at the 
sacrifice.   
2 As these,  like friends,  have  done  this work  for you, these  prompt  servants  of Purumilha  Soma−offerer,   
Give  mental  power  to him who sings  the sacred  song,  and hearken,  Strong  Ones,  to the master  ofthe  hous
e.  
3 The folk have  glorified  your birth  from  Earth  and Heaven,  to be extolled,  ye Strong  Ones,  for your migh
ty 
power.   
Ye, when  ye bring  to singer  and the rite, enjoy  the sacrifice  periormed  with holy praise  and strength.   
4 The people  prospers,  Asuras!  whom  ye dearly  love:  ye, Righteous  Ones,  proclaim  aloud  the Holy  Law.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
That efficacious  power  that comes  from  lofty  heaven,  ye bind unto the work,  as to the pole an ox.  
5 On this great  earth  ye send your treasure  down  with might:  unstained  by dust,  the crowding  kine are in t
he 
stalls.   
Here  in the neighbourhood  they cry unto the Sun at morning  and at evening,  like swift  birds  of prey.  
6 The flames  with curling  tresses  serve  your sacrifice,  whereto  ye sing the song,  Mitra  and Varuna.   
Send  down  of your free will, prosper  our holy songs:  ye are sole Masters  of the singer's  hymn  of praise.   
7 Whoso  with sacrifices  toiling  brings  you gifts, and worships,  sage and priest,  fulfilling  your desire,−   
To him do ye draw  nigh and taste his sacrifice.  Come  well−inclined  to us unto our songs  and prayer.   
8 With  sacrifices  and with milk they deck  you first, ye Righteous  Ones,  as if through  stirrings  of the mind
.  
To you they bring  their hymns  with their collected  thought,  while  ye with earnest  soul come  to us glorious
ly.  
9 Rich  strength  of life is yours:  ye, Heroes,  have  obtained  through  your surpassing  powers  rich far−extend
ing 
might.   
Not the past days conjoined  with nights,  not rivers,  not the Papis  have  attained  your Godhead  and your 
wealth.   
 
HYMN  CLII.  Mitra−Varuna.  
1. THE  robes  which  ye put on abound  with fatness:  uninterrupted  courses  are your counsels.   
All falsehood,  Mitra−Varuna!  ye conquer,  and closely  cleave  unto the Law Eternal .  
2 This might  of theirs  hath no one comprehended.  True  is the crushing  word  the sage hath uttered,   
The fearful  four−edged  bolt smites  down  the three−edged,  and those  who hate the Gods  first fall and peris
h.  
3 The Footless  Maid  precedeth  footed  creature s. Who  marketh,  Mitra−Varuna,  this your doing?   
The Babe  Unborn  supporteth  this world's  burthen,  fuIfilleth  Law and overcometh  falsehood.   
4 We look on him the darling  of the Maidens,  always  advancing,  never  falling  downward,   
Wearing  inseparable,  wide−spr ead raiment,  Mitra's  and Varuna's  delightful  glory.   
5 Unbridled  Courser,  horn but not of horses,  neighing  he flieth  on with back  uplifted.   
The youthful  love mystery  thought−surpassing,  praising  in Mitra−Varuna,  its glory.   
6 May the milch−kine  who favour  Mamateya  prosper  in this world  him who loves  devotion.   
May he, well skilled  in rites,  be food,  and calling  Aditi  with his lips give us assistance.   
7 Gods,  Mitra−Varuna,  with love and worship,  let me make  you delight  in this oblation.   
May our prayer  be victorious  in battles,  may we have  rain from  heaven  to make  us prosper.   
 
HYMN  CLIII.  Mitra−Varuna.  
1. WE worship  with our reverence  and oblations  you, Mitra  Varuna,  accordant,  mighty,   
So that with us, ye Twain  whose  backs  are sprinkled  with oil, the priests with oil and hymns  support  you.  
2 Your  praise  is like a mighty  power,  an impulse:  to you, Twain  Gods,  a well−formed  hymn  is offered,   
As the priest  decks  yon, Strong  Ones,  in assemblies,  and the prince  fain to worship  you for blessings.   
 
3 O Mitra− Varuna,  Aditi  the Milch−cow  streams  for the rite, for folk who bring  oblation,  W
hen in the assembly  he who worships  moves  you, like to a human  priest,  with gifts presented.
 4 So may the kine and heavenly  Waters  pour you sweet  drink  in families  that make  you joyfRig Veda – English Translation  
ul. Of this may he, the ancient  House−Lord,  give us. Enjoy,  drink  of the milk the cow provid
eth. 
 
HYMN  CLIV.  Visnu  
1. I WILL  declare  the mighty  deeds  of Visnu,  of him who measured  out the earthly  regions,   
Who  propped  the highest  place  of congregat ion, thrice  setting  down  his footstep,  widely  striding.   
2 For this his mighty  deed  is Visnu  lauded,  like some  wild beast,  dread,  prowling,  mountain−roaming;   
He within  whose  three  wide−extended  paces  all living  creatures  have  their habitation.   
3 Let the hymn  lift itself  as strength  to Visnu,  the Bull far−striding,  dwelling  on the mountains,   
Him who alone  with triple  step hath measured  this common  dwelling−place,  long,  far extended.   
4 Him whose  three  places  that are filled  with sweetness,  imperishable,  joy as it may list them,   
Who  verily  alone  upholds  the threefold,  the earth,  the heaven,  and all living  creatures.   
5 May I attain  to that his well−loved  mansion  where  men devoted  to the Gods  are happy.   
For there  springs,  close  akin to the Wide−Strider,  the well of meath  in Visnu's  highest  footstep.   
6 Fain would  we go unto your dwelling−places  where  there  are many−horned  and nimble  oxen,   
For mightily,  there,  shineth  down  upon  us the widely−striding  Bull's  sublimest  mansion.   
 
HYMN  CLV.  Visnu−Indra.  
1. To the great  Hero,  him who sets his mind  thereon,  and Visnu,  praise  aloud  in song your draught  of juic
e,− Gods  ne'er  beguiled,  who borne  as 'twere  by noble  steed,  have  stood  upon  the lofty  ridges  of the hills.  
2 Your  Soma−drinker  keeps  afar your furious  rush, Indra  and Visnu,  when  ye come  with all your might.  T
hat which  hath been  directed  well at mortal  man,  bow−armed  Krsanu's  arrow,  ye turn far aside.  3 These  of
ferings  increase  his mighty  manly  strength:  he brings  both Parents  down  to share  the genial  flow.  He lowe
rs, though  a son, the Father's  highest  name;  the third  is that which  is high in the light of heaven.  4 We laud
 this manly  power  of him the Mighty  One,  preserver,  inoffensive,  bounteous  and benign;  His who strode,  
widely  pacing,  with three  steppings  forth  over the realms  of earth  for freedom  and for life. 5 A mortal  ma
n, when  he beholds  two steps  of him who looks  upon  the light,  is restless  with amaze.  But his third  step d
oth no one venture  to approach,  no, nor the feathered  birds  of air who fly with wings.  6 He, like a rounded
 wheel,  hath in swift  motion  set his ninety  racing  steeds  together  with the four.  Developed,  vast in form,  w
ith those  who sing forth  praise,  a youth,  no more  a child,  he cometh  to our call. 
 
HYMN  CLVI.  Visnu  
1. FAR−SHINING,  widely famed,  going  thy wonted  way,  fed with the oil, be helpful.  Mitra−like,  to us.  
So, Visnu,  e'en the wise must  swell  thy song  of praise,  and he who hath oblations  pay thee solemn  rites.   
2 He who brings  gifts to him the Ancient  and the Last,  to Visnu  who ordains,  together  with his Spouse,   
Who  tells the lofty  birth  of him the Lofty  One,  shall  verily  surpass  in glory  e'en his peer.   
3 Him have  ye satisfied,  singers,  as well as ye know,  primeval  germ  of Order  even  from  his birth.   
Ye, knowing  e'en his name , have  told it forth:  may we, Visnu,  enjoy  the grace  of thee the Mighty  One.   
4 The Sovran  Varuna  and both the Asvins  wait on this the will of him who guides  the Marut  host.   
Visnu  hath power  supreme  and might  iliat finds  the day, and with his Friend  unbar s the stable  of the kine.   
5 Even  he the Heavenly  One who came  for fellowship,  Visnu  to Indra,  godly  to the godlier,   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Who  Maker,  throned  in three  worlds,  helps  the Aryan  man,  and gives  the worshipper  his share  of Holy  La
w.  
 
HYMN  CLVII.  Asvins.  
1. AGNI  is wakened:  Surya  riseth  from  the earth.  Mighty,  refulgent  Dawn  hath shone  with all her light.   
The Asvins  have  equipped  their chariot  for the course.  God Savitar  hath moved  the folk in sundry  ways.   
2 When,  Asvins,  ye equip  your very mighty  car, bedew,  ye Twain,  our power  with honey  and with oil.  
To our devotion  give victorious  strength  in war: may we win riches  in the heroes'  strife  for spoil.   
3 Nigh  to us come  the Asvins'  lauded  three−wheeled  car, the car laden  with meath  and drawn  by fleet−foo
t 
steeds,   
Three−seated,  opulent,  bestowing  all delight.  may it bring  weal  to us, to cattle  and to men.   
4 Bring  hither  nourishment  for us, ye Asvins  Twain;  sprinkle  us with your whip  that drops  with honey−de
w.  
Prolong  our days of life, wipe  out our trespasses;  destroy  our foes,  be our companions  and our Friends.   
5 Ye store  the germ  of life in female  creatures,  ye lay it up within  all living  beings.   
Ye have  sent forth,  O Asvins  passing  mighty,  the fire, the sovrans  of the wood,  the waters,   
6 Leeches  are ye with medicines  to heal us, and charioteers  are ye with skill in driving.   
Ye Strong,  give sway  to him who brings  oblation  and with his heart  pours  out his gift before  you.  
 
HYMN  CLVIII.  Asvins.  
1. YE Vasus  Twain,  ye Rudras  full of counsel,  grant  us, Strong  Strengtheners,  when  ye stand  beside  us,  
What  wealth  Aucathya  craves  of you, great  Helpers  when  ye come  forward  with no niggard  succour.   
2 Who  may give you aught,  Vasus,  for your favour,  for what,  at the Cow's  place,  ye grant  through  worshi
p?  
Wake  for us understanding  full of riches,  come  with a heart  that will fulfil  our longing.   
3 As erst for Tugra's  son your car, sea−crossing,  strong,  was equipped  and set amid  the waters,   
So may I gain your shelter  and protection  as with winged  course  a hero seeks  his army.   
4 May this my praise  preserve  Ucathya's  offispring:  let not these  Twain  who fly with wings  exhaust  me.  
Let not the wood  ten times  up−piled  consume  me, when  fixed  for you it bites  the ground  it stands  on.  
5 The most  maternal  streams,  wherein  the Dilsas cast me securely  bound,  have not devoured  me.  
When  Traitana  would  cleave  my head  asunder,  the Dasa  wounded  his own breast  and shoulders.   
6 Dirghatamas  the son of Mamati  hath come  to length  of days in the tenth  age of human  kind.   
He is the Brahman  of the waters  as they strive  to reach  their end and aim: their charioteer  is he.  
 
HYMN  CLIX.  Heaven  and Earth.  
1. I PRAISE  with sacrifices  mighty  Heaven  and Earth  at festivals,  the wise,  the Strengtheners  of Law.   
Who,  having  Gods  for progeny,  conjoined  with Gods,  through  wonder−working  wisdom  bring  forth  choic
est 
boons.   
2 With  invocations,  on the gracious  Father's  mind,  and on the Mother's  great  inherent  power  I muse.   
Prolific  Parents,  they have  made  the world  of life, and for their brood  all round  wide immortality.   
3 These  Sons  of yours  well skilled  in work,  of wondrous  power,  brought  forth  to life the two great  MotherRig Veda – English Translation  
s 
first of all.  
To keep  the truth  of all that stands  and all that moves,  ye guard  the station  of your Son who knows  no guil
e.  
4 They  with surpassing  skill,  most  wise,  have  measured  out the Twins  united  in their birth  and in their ho
me.  
They,  the refulgent  Sages,  weave  within  the sky, yea, in the depths  of sea, a web for ever new.   
5 This is to−day  the goodliest  gift of Savitar:  this thought  we have  when  now the God is furthering  us.  
On us with loving−kindness  Heaven  and Earth  bestow  riches  and various  wealth  and treasure  hundredfold
!  
 
HYMN  CLX.  Heaven  and Earth.  
1. THESE,  Heaven  and Earth,  bestow  prosperity  on all, sustainers  of the region,  Holy  Ones  and wise,  Tw
o Bowls  of noble  kind:  between  these  Goddesses  the God,  the fulgent  Sun, travels  by fixed  decree.   
2 Widely−capacious  Pair, mighty,  that never  fail, the Father  and the Mother  keep all creatures  safe:   
The two world−halves,  the spirited,  the beautiful,  because  the Father  hath clothed  them  in goodly  forms.   
3 Son of these  Parents,  he the Priest  with power  to cleanse,  Sage,  sanctifies  the worlds  with his surpassing  
power.   
Thereto  for his bright  milk he milked  through  all the days the party−coloured  Cow and the prolific  Bull.   
4 Among  the skilful  Gods  most  skilled  is he, who made  the two world−halves  which  bring  prosperity  to al
l;  
Who  with great  wisdom  measured  both the regions  out, and stablished  them  with pillars  that shall  ne'er  
decay.   
5 Extolled  in song,  O Heaven  and Earth,  bestow  on us, ye mighty  Pair, great  glory  and high lordly  sway,   
Whereby  we may extend  ourselves  ever over the folk;  and send us strength  that shall  deserve  the praise  of 
men.   
 
HYMN  CLXI.  Rbhus.  
1 WHY  hath the Best,  why hath the Youngest  come  to us? Upon  what  embassy  comes  he? What  have  we 
said?   
We have  not blamed  the chalice  of illustrious  birth.  We, Brother  Agni,  praised  the goodness  of the wood.   
2 The chalice  that is single  make  ye into four:  thus have  the Gods  commanded;  therefore  am I come.   
If, O Sudhanvan's  Children,  ye will do this thing  ye shall  participate  in sacrifice  with Gods.   
3 What  to the envoy  Agni  in reply  ye spake,  A courser  must  be made,  a chariot  fashioned  here,   
A cow must  be created,  and the Twain  made  young.  When  we have  done  these  things,  Brother,  we turn to 
you.  
4 When  thus,  O Rbhus,  ye had done  ye quest ioned  thus,  Whither  went  he who came  to us a messenger?   
Then  Tvastar,  when  he viewed  the four wrought  chalices,  concealed  himself  among  the Consorts  of the G
ods.  
5 As Tvastar  thus had spoken,  Let us slay these  men who have  reviled  the chalice,  drinking−c up of Gods,   
They  gave themselves  new names  when  Soma  juice  was shed,  and under  these  new names  the Maiden  
welcomed  them.   
6 Indra  hath yoked  his Bays,  the Asvins'  car is horsed,  Brhaspati  hath brought  the Cow  of every  hue.  
Ye went  as Rbhus,  Vibhvan,  Vaja  to the Gods,  and skilled  in war, obtained  your share  in sacrifice.   
7 Ye by your wisdom  brought  a cow from  out a hide;  unto that ancient  Pair ye gave again  their youth.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Out of a horse,  Sudhanvan's  Sons,  ye formed  a horse:  a chariot  ye equipped,  and went  unto the Gods.   
8 Drink  ye this water,  were  the words  ye spake  to them;  or drink  ye this, the rinsing  of the Munja−grass.   
If ye approve  not even  this, Sudhanvan's  Sons,  then at the third  libation  gladden  ye yourselves.   
9 Most  excellent  are waters,  thus said one of you; most  excellent  is Agni,  thus another  said.  
Another  praised  to many  a one the lightning  cloud.  Then  did ye shape  the cups,  speaking  the words  of trut
h.  
10 One downward  to the water  drives  the crippled  cow,  another  trims  the flesh  brought  on the carving−bo
ard.  
One carries  off the refuse  at the set of sun. How  did the Parents  aid their children  in their task!   
11 On the high places  ye have made  the grass  for man,  and water  in the valleys,  by your skill,  O Men.   
Rbhus,  ye iterate  not to−day  that act of yours,  your sleeping  in the house  of him whom  naught  can hide.   
12 As, compassing  them  round,  ye glided  through  the worlds,  where  had the venerable  Parents  their abod
e?  
Ye laid a curse  on him who raised  his arm at you: to him who spake  aloud  to you ye spake  again.   
13 When  ye had slept  your fill, ye Rbhus,  thus ye asked,  O thou whom  naught  may hide,  who now hath 
wakened  us?  
The goat declared  the hound  to be your wakener.  That day, in a full year,  ye first unclosed  our eyes.   
14 The Maruts  move  in heaven,  on earth  this Agni;  through  the mid−firmament  the Wind  approaches.   
Varuna  comes  in the sea's gathered  waters,  O Sons  of Strength,  desirous  of your presence.   
 
HYMN  CLXIL  The Horse.  
1. SLIGHT  us not Varuna,  Aryaman,  or Mitra,  Rbhuksan,  Indra,  Ayu,  or the Maruts,   
When  we declare  amid  the congregation  the virtues  of the strong  Steed,  God−descended.   
2 What  time they bear before  the Courser,  covered  with trappings  and with wealth,  the grasped  oblation,   
The dappled  goat goeth  straightforward,  bleating,  to the place  dear to Indra  and to Pusan.   
3 Dear.  to all Gods,  this goat,  the share  of Pusan,  is first led forward  with the vigorous  Courser,   
While  Tvastar  sends  him forward  with the Charger,  acceptable  for sacrifice,  to glory.   
4 When  thrice  the men lead round  the Steed,  in order,  who goeth  to the Gods  as meet  oblation,   
The goat precedeth  him, the share  of Pusan,  and to the Gods  the sacrifice  announceth.   
5 Invoker,  ministering  priest,  atoner,  fire−kindler  Soma−presser,  sage,  reciter,   
With  this well ordered  sacrifice,  well finished,  do ye fill full the channels  of the rivers.   
6 The hewers  of the post and those  who carry  it, and those  who carve  the knob  to deck  the Horse's  stake;   
Those  who prepare  the cooking−vessels  for the Steed,−may  the approving  help of these  promote  our work
.  
7 Forth,  for the regions  of the Gods,  the Charger  with his smooth  back is come  my prayer  attends  him.  
In him rejoice  the singers  and the sages.  A good  friend  have  we won for the Gods'  banquet.   
8 May the fleet Courser's  halter  and his heel−ropes,  the head−stall  and the girths  and cords  about  him.  
And the grass  put within  his mouth  to bait him,−among  the Gods,  too, let all these  be with thee.   
9 What  part of the Steed's  flesh  the fly hath eaten,  or is left sticking  to the post or hatchet,   
Or to the slayer's  hands  and nails  adhereth,−among  the Gods,  too, may all this be with thee.   
10 Food  undigested  steaming  from  his belly,  and any odour  of raw flesh  remaining ,  
This let the immolators  set in order  and dress  the sacrifice  with perfect  cooking.   
11 What  from  thy body  which  with fire is roasted,  when  thou art set upon  the spit, distilleth,   
Let not that lie on earth  or grass  neglected,  but to the longing  Gods  let all be offered.   
12 They  who observing  that the Horse  is ready  call out and say, the smell  is good;  remove  it;  
And,  craving  meat,  await  the distribution,  −may  their approving  help promote  labour.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
13 The trial−fork  of the flesh−cooking  caldron,  the vesse ls out of which  the broth  is sprinkled,   
The warming−pots,  the covers  of the dishes,  hooks,  carving−boards,−all  these  attend  the Charger.   
14 The starting−place,  his place  of rest and rolling,  the ropes  wherewith  the Charger's  feet were  fastened,   
The wate r that he drank,  the food he tasted,  −among  the Gods,  too, may all these  attend  thee.   
15 Let not the fire, smoke−scented,  make  thee crackle,  nor glowing  caldron  smell  and break  to pieces.   
Offered,  beloved,  approved,  and consecrated,−such  Charger  do the Gods accept  with favour.   
16 The robe they spread  upon  the Horse  to clothe  him, the upper  covering  and the golden  trappings,   
The halters  which  restrain  the Steed,  the heel−ropes,−all  these,  as grateful  to the Gods,  they offer.   
17 If one, when  seated,  with excessive  urging  hath with his heel or with his whip  distressed  thee,   
All these  thy woes,  as with the oblations'  ladle  at sacrifices,  with my prayer  I banish.   
18 The four−and−thirty  ribs of the. Swift  Charger,  kin to the Gods,  the slayer's  hatchet  pierc es.  
Cut ye with skill,  so that the parts  be flawless,  and piece  by piece  declaring  them  dissect  them.   
19 Of Tvastar's  Charger  there  is one dissector,−this  is the custom−two  there  are who guide  him.  
Such  of his limbs  as I divide  in order,  these,  amid  the balls,  in fire I offer.   
20 Let not thy dear soul burn thee as thou comest,  let not the hatchet  linger  in thy body.   
Let not a greedy  clumsy  immolator,  missing  the joints,  mangle  thy limbs  unduly.   
21 No, here thou diest  not, thou art not injured:  by easy paths  unto the Gods  thou goest.   
Both  Bays,  both spotted  mares  are now thy fellows,  and to the ass's pole is yoked  the Charger.   
22 May this Steed  bring  us all−sustaining  riches,  wealth  in good  kine,good  horses,  manly  offspring.   
Freedom  from  sin may Aditi vouchsafe  us: the Steed  with our oblations  gain us lordship!   
 
HYMN  CLXIII.  The Horse.  
1. WHAT  time,  first springing  into life, thou neighedst,  proceeding  from  the sea or upper  waters,   
Limbs  of the deer hadst  thou,  and eagle  pinions.  O Steed,  thy birth is nigh and must  be lauded.   
2 This Steed  which  Yama  gave  hath Trita  harnessed,  and him, the first of all, hath Indra  mounted.   
His bridle  the Gandharva  grasped.  O Vasus,  from  out the Sun ye fashioned  forth  the Courser.   
3 Yama  art thou,  O Horse;  thou art Aditya;  Trita  art thou by secret  operation.   
Thou  art divided  thoroughly  from  Soma.  They  say thou hast three  bonds  in heaven   
that hold thee.   
4 Three  bonds,  they say, thou hast in heaven  that bind thee,  three  in the waters,   
three  within  the ocean.   
To me thou seernest  Varuna  , O Courser,  there  where  they say is thy sublimest  birth−place.   
5 Here−,  Courser,  are the places  where  they groomed  thee,  here are the traces  of thy hoofs  as winner.   
Here  have  I seen the auspicious  reins  that guide  thee,  which  those who guard  the holy Law keep  safely.   
6 Thyself  from  far I recognized  in spirit,−a  Bird that from  below  flew through  the heaven.   
I saw thy head  still soaring,  striving  upward  by paths  unsoiled  by dust,  pleasant  to travel.   
7 Here  I beheld  thy form,  matc hless  in glory,  eager  to win thee food at the Cow's  station.   
Whene'er  a man brings  thee to thine  enjoyment,  thou swallowest  the plants  most  greedy  eater.   
8 After  thee,  Courser,  come  the car, the bridegroom,  the kine come  after,  and the charm  of maidens.   
Full companies  have  followed  for thy friendship:  the pattern  of thy vigour  Gods  have copied.   
9 Horns  made  of gold hath he: his feet are iron:  less fleet than he, though  swift  as thought,  is Indra.   
The Gods  have come  that they may taste the oblation  of him who mounted,  first of all, the Courser.   
10 Symmetrical  in flank,  with rounded  haunches,  mettled  like heroes,  the Celestial  Coursers   
Put forth  their strength,  like swans  in lengthened  order,  when  they,  the Steeds,  have  reached  the heavenly  
causeway.   
11 A body  formed  for flight  hast thou,  O Charger;  swift  as the wind  in motion  is thy spirit.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Thy horns  are spread  abroad  in all directions:  they move  with restless  beat in wildernesses.   
12 The strong  Steed  hath come  forward  to the slaughter,  pondering  with a mind  directed  God−ward.   
The goat who is his kin is led before  him the sages  and the singers  follow  after.   
13 The Steed  is come  unto the noblest  mansion,  is come  unto his Father  and his Mother.   
This day shall  he approach  the Gods,  most  welcome:  then he declares  good  gifts to him who offers.   
 
HYMN  CLXIV.  Visvedevas.  
1. OF this benignant  Priest,  with eld grey−coloured,  the brother  midmost  of the three  is lightning.   
The third  is he whose  back with oil is sprinkled.  Here  I behold  the Chief  with seven  male  children.   
2 Seven  to the one−wheeled  chariot  yoke  the Courser;  bearing  seven  names  the single  Courser  draws  it.  
Three−naved  the wheel  is, sound  and undecaying,  whereon  are resting  all these  worlds  of being.   
3 The seven  who on the seven−wheeled  car are mounted  have  horses,  seven  in tale, who draw  them  onwa
rd.  
Seven  Sisters  utter songs  of praise  together,  in whom  the names  of the seven  Cows  are treasured.   
4 Who  hath beheld  him as he sprang  to being,  seen how the boneless  One supports  the bony?   
Wher e is the blood  of earth,  the life, the spirit?  Who  may approach  the man who knows,  to ask it?  
5 Unripe  in mind,  in spirit  undiscerning,  I ask of these  the Gods'  established  places;  For up above  the year
ling 
Calf the sages,  to form  a web,  their own seven  threads  have  woven.   
6 I ask, unknowing,  those  who know,  the sages,  as one all ignorant  for sake of knowledge,   
What  was that ONE  who in the Unborn's  image  hath stablished  and fixed  firm these  worlds'  six regions.   
7 Let him who knoweth  presently  declare  it , this lovely  Bird's  securely  founded  station.   
Forth  from  his head  the Cows  draw  milk,  and, wearing  his vesture,  with their foot have  drunk  the water.   
8 The Mother  gave the Sire his share  of Order:  with thought,  at first, she wedded  him in spirit.   
She, the coy Dame,  was filled  with dew prolific:  with adoration  men approached  to praise  her.  
 
9 Yoked  was the Mother  to the boon  Cow's  car−pole:  in the dank  rows  of cloud  the Infant  rested.   
Then  the Calf lowed,  and looked  upon  the Mother,  the Cow  who wears  all shapes  in three  directions.   
10 Bearing  three  Mothers  and three  Fathers,  single  he stood  erect:  they never  make  him weary.   
There  on the pitch  of heaven  they speak  together  in speech  all−knowing  but not all−impelling.   
11 Formed  with twelve  spokes,  by length  of time,  unweakened,  rolls round  the heaven  this wheel  of durin
g 
Order.   
Herein  established,  joined  in pairs  together,  seven  hundred  Sons  and twenty  stand,  O Agni.   
12 They  call him in the farther  half of heaven  the Sire five−footed,  of twelve  forms , wealthy  in watery  sto
re.  
These  others  say that he, God with far−seeing  eyes,  is mounted  on the lower  seven−wheeled,  six−spoked  
car.  
13 Upon  this five−spoked  wheel  revolving  ever all living  creatures  rest and are dependent.   
Its axle,  heavy−laden,  is not heated:  the nave from  ancient  time remains  unbroken.   
14 The wheel  revolves,  unwasting,  with its felly:  ten draw  it, yoked  to the far−stretching  car−pole.   
The Sun's  eye moves  encompassed  by the region:  on him dependent  rest all living  creatures.   
15 Of the co−born  they call the seventh  single−born;  the six twin pairs  are called  Rsis,  Children  of Gods.   
Their  good  gifts sought  of men are ranged  in order  due, and various  in their form  move  for the Lord  who 
guides.   
16 They  told me these  were  males,  though  truly females:  he who hath eyes sees this, the blind  discerns  noRig Veda – English Translation  
t.  
The son who is a sage hath comprehended:  who knows  this rightly  is his father's  father.   
17 Beneath  the upper  realm,  above  this lower,  bearing  her calf at foot the Cow  hath risen.   
Witherw ard, to what  place  hath she departed?  Where  calves  she? Not amid  this herd of cattle.   
18 Who,  that the father  of this Calf discerneth  beneath  the upper  realm,  above  the lower,   
Showing  himself  a sage,  may here declare  it? Whence  hath the Godlike  spirit  had its rising?   
19 Those  that come  hitherward  they call departing,  those  that depart  they call directed  hither.   
And what  so ye have  made,  Indra  and Soma,  steeds  bear as 'twere  yoked  to the region's  car−pole.   
20 Two Birds  with fair wings,  knit with bonds  of friendship,  in the same  sheltering  tree have  found  a refu
ge.  
One of the twain  eats the sweet  Fig−tree's  fruitage;  the other  eating  not regardeth  only.   
21 Where  those  fine Birds  hymn  ceaselessly  their portion  of life eternal,  and the sacred  synods,   
There is the Universe's  mighty  Keeper,  who,  wise,  hath entered  into me the simple.   
22 The, tree whereon  the fine Birds  eat the sweetness,  where  they all rest and procreate  their offspring,−   
Upon  its top they say the fig is luscious  none  gaineth  it who knowe th not the Father.   
23 How  on the Gayatri.  the Gayatri  was based,  how from  the Tristup  they fashioned  the Tristup  forth,   
How  on the Jagati  was based  the Jagati,−  they who know  this have  won themselves  immortal  life.  
24 With  Gayatri  he measures  out the praise−song,  Sama  with praise−song,  triplet  with the Tristup.   
The triplet  witli the two or four−foot  measure,  and with the syllable  they form  seven  metres.   
25 With  Jagati  the flood  in heaven  he stablished,  and saw the Sun in the Rathantara  Saman.   
Gavatri  hath,  they say, three  brands  for kindling:  hence  it excels  in majesty  and vigour.   
26 I invocate  the milch−cow  good  for milking  so that the milker,  deft of hand,  may drain  her.  
May Savitar  give goodliest  stimulation.  The caldron  is made  hot; I will procla im it.  
27 She, lady of all treasure,  is come  hither  yearning  in spirit  for her calf and lowing.   
May this cow yield  her milk for both the Asvins,  and may she prosper  to our high advantage.   
28 The cow hath lowed  after her blinking  youngling;  she licks  his forehead,  as she lows,  to form  it.  
His mouth  she fondly  calls to her warm  udder,  and suckles  him with milk while  gently  lowing.   
29 He also snorts,  by whom  encompassed  round  the Cow  laws as she clings  unto the shedder  of the rain.  
She with her shrilling  cries  hath humbled  mortal  man,  and, turned  to lightning,  hath stripped  off her cover
ing 
robe.   
30 That which  hath breath  and speed  and life and motion  lies firmly  stablished  in the midst  of houses.   
Living,  by offerings  to the Dead  he moveth  Immortal  One,  the brother  of the mortal.   
31 I saw the Herdsman,  him who never  stumbles,  approaching  by his pathways  and departing.   
He, clothed  with gathered  and diffusive  splendour,  within  the worlds  continually  travels.   
32 He who hath made  him cloth  not comprehend  him: from  him who saw him surely  is he hidden.   
He, yet enveloped  in his Mother's  bosom,  source  of much  life, hath sunk into destruction.   
 
33 Dyaus  is my Father,  my begetter:  kinship  is here.  This great  earth  is my kin and Mother.   
Between  the wide−spread  world−halves  is the birthb−place:  the Father  laid the Daughter's  germ  within  it.  
341ask  thee of the earth's  extremest  limit,  where  is the centre  of the world,  I ask  
thee.   
1ask thee of the Stallion's  seed prolific,  I ask of highest  heaven  where  Speech  abideth.   
35 This altar is the earth's  extremest  limit;  this sacrifice  of ours is the world's  centre.   
The Stallion's  seed prolific  is the Soma;  this Brahman  highest  heaven  where  Speech  abideth.   
36 Seven  germs  unripened  yet are heaven's  prolific,  seed:  their functions  they maintain  by Visnu's  ordinan
ce.  
Endued  with wisdom  through  intelligence  and thought,  they compass  us about  present  on every  side.  Rig Veda – English Translation  
37 What  thing  I truly  am I know  not clearly:  mysterious,  fettered  in my mind  I wander.   
When  the first−born  of holy Law approached  me, then of this speech  I first obtain  a portion.   
38 Back,  forward  goes he, grasped  by strength  inherent,  the Immortal  born the brother  of the mortal   
Ceaseless  they movelnopposite  directions:  men mark  the one, and fail to mark  the other.   
39 Upon  what  syllable  of holy praise−song,  as twere  their highest  heaven,  the Gods  repose  them,−   
Who  knows  not this, what  will he do with praise−song?  But they who know  it well sit here assembled.   
40 Forunate  mayst  thou be with goodly  pasture,  and may we also be exceeding  wealthy.   
Feed  on the grass,  O Cow,  at every  season,  and coming  hitherward  drink  limpid  water.   
41 Forming  the water−floods,  the buffalo  hath lowed,  one−footed  or two−footed  or four−   
footed,  she,  
Who  hath become  eight− footed  or hath got nine feet, the thou sand−syllabled  in the sublimest  heaven.   
42 From  her descend  in streams  the seas of water;  thereby  the world's  four regions  have  their being,   
Thence  flows  the imperishable  flood  and thence  the universe  hath life.  
43 I saw from  far away  the smoke  of fuel with spires  that rose on high o'er that beneath  it.  
The Mighty  Men have  dressed  the spotted  bullock.  These  were  the customs  in the days aforetime,   
44 Three  with long tresses  show  in ordered  season.  One of them  shear eth when  the year is ended.   
One with his powers  the universe  regardeth:  Of one, the sweep  is seen,  but his figure.   
45 Speech  hath been  measured  out in four divisions,  the Brahmans  who have  understanding  know  them.   
Three  kept in close  concealment  cause  no motion;  of speech,  men speak  only the fourth  division.   
46 They  call him Indra,  Mitra,  Varuna,  Agni,  and he is heavenly  nobly−winged  Garutman.   
To what  is One,  sages  give many  a title they call it Agni,  Yama,  Matarisvan.   
47 Dark  the descent:  the birds  are golden−coloured;  up to the heaven  they fly robed  in the waters.   
Again  descend  they from  the seat of Order,  and all the earth  is moistened  with their fatness.   
48 Twelve  are the fellies,  and the wheel  is single;  three  are the naves.  What  man hath unders tood it?  
Therein  are set together  spokes  three  hundred  and sixty,  which  in nowise  can be loosened.   
49 That breast  of thine  exhaustless,  spring  of pleasure,  wherewith  thou feedest  all things  that are choicest,   
Wealth−giver,  treasure.  finder,  free bestowe r,−bring  that, Sarasvati,  that we may drain  it.  
50 By means  of sacrifice  the Gods  accomplished  their sacrifice:  these  were  the earliest  ordinances.   
These  Mighty  Ones  attained  the height  of heaven,  there  where  the Sadhyas,  Gods  of old, are dwelling.   
51 Uniform,  with the passing  days,  this water  mounts  and fails again.   
The tempest−clouds  give life to earth,  and fires re−animate  the heaven.   
52 The Bird Celestial,  vast with noble  pinion,  the lovely  germ  of plants,  the germ  of waters,   
Him who delighteth  us with rain in season,  Sarasvan  I invoke  that he may help us.  
 
HYMN  CLXV.  Indra.  Maruts.  
1. WITH  what  bright  beauty  are the Maruts  jointly  invested,  peers  in age, who dwell  together?   
From  what  place  have  they come?  With  what  intention?  Sing they their strength  through  love of wealth,  t
hese 
Heroes?   
2 Whose  prayers  have they,  the Youthful  Ones,  accepted?  Who  to his sacrifice  hath turned  the Maruts?   
We will delay  them  on their journey  sweeping−with  what  high spirit!−through  the air like eagles.   
 
3 Whence  comest  thou alone,  thou who art mighty,  Indra,  Lord  of the Brave?  What  is thy purpose?   
Thou  greetest  us when  meeting  us the Bright  Ones.  Lord  of Bay Steeds,  say what  thou hast against  us.  
4 Mine  are devotions,  hymns;  sweet  are libations.  Strength  stirs,  and hurled  forth  is my bolt of thunder.   
They  call for me, their lauds  are longing  for me. These  my Bay Steeds  bear me to these  oblations.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
5 Therefore  together  with our strong  companions,  having  adorned  our bodies,  now we harness,   
Our spotted  deer with might,  for thou,  O Indra,  hast learnt  and understood  our Godlike  nature.   
6 Where  was that nature  then of yours,  O Maruts,  that ye charged  me alone  to slay the Dragon?   
For I in truth  am fierce  and strong  and mighty.  I bent away  from  every  foeman's  weapons .  
7 Yea, much  hast thou achieved  with us for comrades,  with manly  valour  like thine  own,  thou Hero.   
Much  may we too achieve,  O mightiest  Indra,  with our great  power,  we Maruts,  when  we will it.  
8 Vrtra  I slew by mine  own strength,  O Maruts,  having  waxed  mighty  in mine  indignation.   
I with the thunder  in my hand  created  for man these  lucid  softly  flowing  waters.   
9 Nothing,  O Maghavan,  stands  firm before  thee;  among  the Gods  not one is found   
thine  equal.   
None  born or springing  into life comes  nigh thee.  Do what  thou hast to do, exceeding  mighty?   
10 Mine  only be transcendent  power,  whatever  I, daring  in my spirit,  may accomplish.   
For I am known  as terrible,  O Maruts  I, Indra,  am the Lord  of what  I ruined.   
11 Now,  O ye Maruts,  hath your praise  rejoiced  me, the glorious  hymn  which  ye have  made  me, Heroes!   
For me, for Indra,  champion  strong  in battle,  for me, yourselves,  as lovers  for a lover.   
12 Here,  truly,  they send forth  their sheen  to meet  me, wearing  their blameless  glory  and their vigour.   
When  I have  seen you, Matuts,  in gay splendour,  ye have delighted  me, so now delight  me.  
13 Who  here hath magnified  you, O ye Maruts?  speed  forward,  O ye lovers,  to your lovers.   
Ye Radiant  Ones,  assisting  their devotions,  of these  my holy rites he ye regardful.   
14 To this hath Minya's  wisdom  brought  us, so as to aid, as aids the poet him who worships.   
Bring  hither  quick!  On to the sage,  ye Maruts!  These  prayers  for you the singer  hath recited.   
15 May this your praise,  may this your song,  O Maruts,  sung  by the poet,  Mana's  son, Mandarya,   
Bring  offspring  for ourselves  with food to feed us. May we find strengthening  food in full abundance!   
 
HYMN  CLXVI.  Maruts.  
1. Now  let us publish,  for the vigorous  company  the herald  of the Strong  One,  their primeval  might.   
With  fire upon  your way,  O Maruts  loud of voice,  with battle,  Mighty  Ones,  achieve  your deeds  of strengt
h.  
2 Bringing  the pleasant  mcath  as 'twere  their own dear son, they sport  in sportive  wise gay at their gatheri
ngs.  
The Rudras  come  with succour  to the worshipper;  self−strong  they fail not him who offers  sacrifice.   
3 To whomsoever,  bringer  of oblations,  they immortal  guardians,  have  given  plenteous  wealth,   
For him, like loving  friends,  the Maruts  bringing  bliss bedew  the regions  round  with milk abun dantly.   
4 Ye who with mighty  powers  have stirred  the regions  up, your coursers  have sped forth  directed  by 
themselves.   
All creatures  of the earth,  all dwellings  are afraid,  for brilliant  is your coming  with your spears  advanced.   
5 When  they in dazzling  rush have  made  the mountains  roar, and shaken  heaven's  high back  in their heroi
c 
strength,   
Each  sovran  of the forest  fears  as ye drive  near,  aid the shrubs  fly before  you swift  as whirling  wheels.   
6 Terrible  Maruts,  ye with ne'er−diminished  host,  with grcat benevolence  fulfil  our heart's  desire.   
Where'er  your lightning  bites  armed  with its gory teeth  it crunches  up the cattle  like a well−aimed  dart.  
7 Givers  of during  gifts whose  bounties  never  fail, free from  ill−will,  at sacrifices  glorified,   
They  sing their song aloud  that they may drink  sweet  juice:  well do they know  the Hero's  first heroic  deed
s.  
8 With  castles  hundredfold,  O Maruts,  guard  ye well the man whom  ye have  loved  from  ruin and from  sinRig Veda – English Translation  
,−  
The man whom  ye the fierce,  the Mighty  ones who roar, preserve  from  calumny  by cherishing  his seed.   
9 O Maruts,  in your cars are all things  that are good:  great  powers  are set as 'twere  in rivalry  therein.   
Rings  are upon  your shoulders  when  ye journey  forth:  your axle turns  together  both the chariot  wheels.   
 
10 Held  in your manly  arms  are many  goodly  things,  gold chains  are on your chests,  and glistering  
ornaments,   
Deer−skins  are on their shoulders,  on their fellies  knives:  they spread  their glory  out as birds  spread  out th
eir 
wings.   
11 Mighty  in mightiness,  pervading,  passing  strong,  visible  from  afar as 'twere  with stars of heaven,   
Lovely  with pleasant  tongues,  sweet  singers  with their mouths,  the Maruts,  joined  with Indra,  shout  forth  
all 
around.   
12 This is your majesty,  ye Maruts  nobly  born,  far as the sway  of Adid  your bounty  spreads.   
Even  Indra  by desertion  never  disannuls  the boon  bestowed  by you upon  the pious  man.   
13 This is your kinship,  Maruts,  that, Immortals,  ye were  oft in olden  time regardful  of our call,  
Having  vouchsafed  to man a hearing  through  this prayer,  by wondrous  deeds  the Heroes  have  displayed  t
heir 
might.   
14 That,  O ye Maruts,  we may long time flourish  through  your abundant  riches,  O swift  movers,   
And that our men may spread  in the encampment,  let me complete  the rite with these  oblations.   
15 May this your laud,  may this your song,  O Maruts,  sung by the poet,  Mana's  son, Mandarya,   
Bring  offspring  for ourselves  with food to feed us. May we find strengthening  food in full abundance.   
 
HYMN  CLXVII.  Indra.  Maruts.  
1. A THOUSAND  are thy helps  for us, O Indra:  a thousand,  Lord  of Bays,  thy choice  refreshments.   
Wealth  of a thousand  sorts  hast thou to cheer  us: may precious  goods  come  nigh to us in thousands.   
2 May the most  sapient  Maruts,  with protection,  with best boons  brought  from lofty heaven,  approach  us,  
Now  when  their team  of the most  noble  horses  speeds  even  on the sea's extremest  limit.   
3 Close  to them  clings  one moving  in seclusion,  like a man's  wife,  like a spear  carried  rearward,   
Well  grasped,  bright,  decked  with gold there  is Vak also, like to a courtly,  eloquent  dame,  among  them.   
4 Far off the brilliant,  never−weary  Maruts  cling  to the young  Maid  as a joint possession.   
The fierce  Gods  drave  not Rodasi  before  them,  but wished  for her to grow  their friend  and fellow.   
5 When  chose  immortal  Rodasi  to follow−  she with loose  tresses  and heroic  spirit−   
She climbed  her servant's  chariot,  she like Surya  with cloud−like  motion  and refulgent  aspect.   
6 Upon  their car the young  men set the Maiden  wedded  to glory,  mighty  in assemblies,   
When  your song,  Maruts,  rose,  and, with oblation,  the Soma−pourer  sang his hymn  in worship.   
7 I will declare  the greatness  of these  Maruts,  their real greatness,  worthy  to be lauded,   
How,  with them,  she though  firm,  strong−minded,  haughty,  travels to women  happy  in their fortune.   
8 Mitra  and Varuna  they guard  from  censure:  Aryaman  too, discovers  worthless  sinners  Firm  things  are 
overthrown  that ne'er  were  shaken:  he prospers,  Maruts,  who gives  choice  oblations.   
9 None  of us, Maruts,  near or at a distance,  hath ever reached  the limit  of your vigour.   
They  in courageous  might  still waxing  boldly  have  compassed  round  their foemen  like an ocean.   
10 May we this day be dearest  friends  of Indra,  and let us call on him in fight  to−morrow.   
So were  we erst. New  might  attend  us daily!  So be with us! Rbhuksan  of the Heroes!   