Rig Veda – English Translation  
3 They  stablished  order,  made  his service  fruitful;  then parting  them  among  the longing  faithful,   
Not thirsti ng after aught,  they come,  most  active,  while  with sweet  food the race of Gods  they strengthen.   
4 Since  Matarisvan,  far−diffused,  bath stirred  him, and he in every  house  grown  bright  and noble,   
He, Bhrgu−like  I hath gone  as his companion,  as on commissio n to a greater  Sovran.   
5 When  man poured  juice  to Heaven,  the mighty  Father,  he knew  and freed  himself  from  close  embracem
ent.  
The archer  boldly  shot at him his arrow,  and the God threw  his splendour  on his Daughter.   
6 Whoso,  bath flames  for thee within  his dwelling,  or brings  the worship  which  thou lovest  daily,   
Do thou of double  might  increase  his substance:  may he whom  thou incitest  meet  with riches.   
7 All sacrificial  viands  wait on Agni  as the Seven  mighty  Rivers  seek the ocean.   
Not by our brethre n was our food discovered:  find with the Gods  care for us, thou who knowest.   
8 When  light bath filled  the Lord  of men for increase,  straight  from  the heaven  descends  the limpid  moist
ure.  
Agni  bath brought  to light and filled  with spirit  the youthful  host blameless  and well providing.   
9 He who like thought  goes swiftly  on his journey,  the Sun, alone  is ever Lord  of riches.   
The Kings  with fair hands,  Varuna  and Mitra,  protect  the precious  nectar  in our cattle.   
10 O Agni,  break  not our ancestral  friendshi p, Sage  as thou art, endowed  with deepest  knowledge.   
Old age, like gathering  cloud,  impairs  the body:  before  that evil be come  nigh protect  me.  
 
HYMN  LXXII.  Agni.  
1. THOUGH  holding  many  gifts for men,  he humbleth  the higher  powers  of each wise ordainer .  
Agni  is now the treasure−lord  of treasures,  for ever granting  all immortal  bounties.   
2 The Gods  infallible  all searching  found  not him, the dear Babe  who still is round  about  us.  
Worn  weary,  following  his track,  devoted,  they reached  the lovely  highes t home  of Agni.   
3 Because  with holy oil the pure Ones,  Agni,  served  thee the very pure three  autumn  seasons,   
Therefore  they won them  holy names  for worship,  and nobly  born they dignified  their bodies.   
4 Making  them  known  to spacious  earth  and heaven,  the holy Ones  revealed  the powers  of Rudra.   
The mortal  band,  discerning  in the distance,  found  Agni  standing  in the loftiest  station.   
5 Nigh  they approached,  one−minded,  with their spouses,  kneeling  to him adorable  paid worship.   
Friend  finding  in his own friend's  eye protection,  they made  their own the bodies  which  they chastened.   
6 Soon  as the holy beings  had discovered  the thrice−seven  mystic  things  contained  within  thee,   
With  these,  one−minded.,  they preserve  the Amrta:  guard  thou the life of all their plants  and cattle.   
7 Thou,  Agni,  knower  of men's  works,  hast sent us good  food in constant  course  for our subsistence:   
Thou  deeply  skilled  in paths  of Gods  becamest  an envoy  never  wearied,  offeringbearer.   
8 Knowing  the Law,  the seven  strong  floods  from  heaven,  full of good  thought,  discerned  the doors  of ric
hes.  
Sarama  found  the cattle's  firm−built  prison  whereby  the race of man is still supp orted.   
9 They  who approached  all noble  operations  making  a path that leads  to life immortal,   
To be the Bird's  support,  the spacious  mother,  Aditi,  and her great  Sons  stood  in power.   
 
10 When  Gods  immortal  made  both eyes of heaven,  they gave  to him the gift of beauteous  glory.  No
w they flow forth  like rivers  set in motion:  they knew  the Red Steeds  coming  down,  O Agni.  
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  LXXIII.  Agni.  
I. HE who gives  food,  like patrimonial  riches  and guides  aright  like some  wise man's  instruction,   
Loved  like a guest  who lies in pleasant  lodging,−may  he, as Priest,  prosper  his servant's  dwelling.   
2 He who like Savitar  the God,  true−minded  protecteth  with his power.  all acts of vigour,   
Truthful,  like splendourr,  glorified  by many,  like breath  joy−giving,−all  must  strive to win him.  
3 He who on earth  dwells  like a king surrounded  by faithful  friends,  like a God all−sustaining,   
Like heroes  who preside,  who sit in safety:  like as a blameless  dame  dear to her husband.   
4 Thee,  such,  in settlements  secure,  O Agni,  our men serve  ever kindled  in each dwelling.   
On him have  they laid splendour  in abundance:  dear to all men,  bearer  be he of riches.   
5 May thy rich worshippers  win food,  O Agni,  and princes  gain long life who bring  oblation.   
May we get booty  from  jur foe in battle, presenting  to the Gods  their share  for glory.   
6 The cows  of holy law, sent us by Heaven,  have  swelled  with laden  udders,  loudly  lowing;   
Soliciting  his favour,  from  a distance  the rivers  to the rock have  flowed  together.   
7 Agni,  with thee,  soliciti ng thy favour,  the holy Ones  have  gained  glory  in heaven.   
They  made  the Night  and Dawn  of different  colours,  and set the black  and purple  hues together.   
8 May we and those  who worship  be the mortals  whom  thou,  O Agni,  leadest  on to riches.   
Thou  hast filled earth  and heaven  and air's mid−region,  and followest  the whole  world  like a shadow.   
9 Aided  by thee,  O Agni,  may we conquer  steeds  with steeds,  men with men,  heroes  with heroes,   
Lords  of the wealth  transmitted  by our fathers:  and may our princes  live a hundred  winters.   
10 May these  our hymns  of praise,  Agni,  Ordainer,  be pleasant  to thee in thy heart  and spirit.   
May we have  power  to hold thy steeds  of riches,  laying  on thee the God−sent  gift of glory.   
 
HYMN  LXXIV.  Agni.  
1. As forth  to sacrifice  we go, a hymn  to a hymn  let us say, Who  hears  us even  when  afar;  
2 Who,  from  of old, in carnage,  when  the people  gathered,  hath preserved   
His household  for the worshipper.   
3 And let men say, Agni  is born,  e'en he who slayeth  Vrtra,  he  
Who  winneth  wealth  in every  fight.   
4 Him in whose  house  an envoy  thou lovest  to taste his offered  gifts,   
And strengthenest  his sacrifice,   
5 Him,  Angiras,  thou Son of Strength,  all men call happy  in his God,   
His offerings,  and his sacred  grass.   
6 Hitherward  shalt  thou bring these  Gods  to our laudation  and to taste.   
These  offered  gifts,  fair−shining  One.   
7 When,  Agni,  on thine  embassage  thou goest  not a sound  is heard  of steed  or straining  of thy car.  
8 Aided  by thee uninjured,  strong,  one after other,  goes he forth:   
Agni,  the ofterer  forward  steps.   
9 And splendid  strength,  heroic,  high,  Agni,  thou grantest  from  the Gods,   
Thou  God,  to him who offers  gifts.   
 
HYMN  LXXV.  Agni.  
1. ACCEPT  our loudest−sounding  hymn,  food most  delightful  to the Gods,  Po
uring  our offering s in thy mouth.   
2 Now,  Agni,  will we say to thee,  O wisest  and best Afigiras,   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Our precious,  much−availing  prayer.   
3 Who,  Agni,  is thy kin, of men?  who is thy worthy  worshipper?   
On whom  dependent?  who art thou?   
4 The kinsman,  Agni,  of mankind,  their well beloved  Friend  art thou,   
A Friend  whom  friends  may supplicate.   
5 Bring  to us Mitra,  Varuna,  bring  the Gods  to mighty  sacrifice.   
Bring  them,  O Agni,  to thine  home.   
 
HYMN  LXXVI.  Agni.  
1. How  may the mind  draw  nigh to please  thee,  Agni?  What  hymn  of praise  shall  bring  us greatest  blessin
g?  
Or who hath gained  thy power  by sacrifices?  or with what  mind  shall  we bring  thee oblations?   
2 Come  hither,  Agni;  sit thee down  as Hotar;  be thou who never  wast deceived  our leader.   
May Heaven  and Earth,  the all−pervading,  love thee:  worship  the Gods  to win for us their favour.   
3 Burn  thou up all the Riksasas,  O Agni;  ward  thou off curses  from  our sacrifices.   
Bring  hither  with his Bays  the Lord  of Soma:  here is glad welcome  for the Bounteous  Giver.   
4 Thou  Pries t with lip and voice  that bring  us children  hast been  invoked.  Here  with the Gods  be seated.   
Thine  is the task of Cleanser  and Presenter:  waken  us, Wealth−bestower  and Producer.   
5 As with oblations  of the priestly  Manus  thou worshippedst  the Gods,  a Sage  with sages,   
So now,  O truthfullest  Invoker  Agni,  worship  this day with joy−bestowing  ladle.   
 
HYMN  LXXVII.  Agni.  
1. How  shall  we pay oblation  unto Agni?  What  hymn,  Godloved,  is said to him refulgent?   
Who,  deathless,  true to Law,  mid men a herald,  bringeth the Gods  as best of sacrificers?   
2 Bring  him with reverence  hither,  most  propitious  in sacrifices,  true to Law,  the herald;   
For Agni,  when  he seeks  the Gods  for mortals,  knows  them  full well and worships  them  in spirit.   
3 For he is mental  power,  a man,  and perfect;  he is the bringer,  friend−,like,  of the wondrous.   
The pious  Aryan  tribes  at sacrifices  address  them  first to him who doeth  marvels.   
4 May Agni,  foe−destroyer,  manliest  Hero,  accept  with love our hymns  and our devotion.   
So may the liberal lords  whose  strength  is strongest,  urged  by their riches,  stir our thoughts  with vigour.   
5 Thus  Agni  Jatavedas,  true to Order,  hath by the priestly  Gotamas  been  lauded.   
May he augment  in them  splendour  and vigour:  observant,  as he lists, he gathers  increase.   
 
HYMN  LXXVIII.  Agni.  
1. O JATAVEDAS,  keen  and swift,  we Gotamas  with sacred  song exalt  thee for thy glories'  sake.   
2 Thee,  as thou art, desiring  wealth  Gotama  worships  with his song:   
We laud thee for thy glories'  sake.   
3 As such,  like Angiras  we call on thee best winner  of the spoil:   
We laud thee for thy glories'  sake.   
4 Thee,  best of Vrtra−slayers,  thee who shakest  off our Dasyu  foes:   
We laud thee for thy glories'  sake.   
5 A pleasant  song  to Agni  we, sons of Rahugana,  have sung:   
We laud thee for thy glories'  sake.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
 
HYMN  LXXIX.  Agni.  
1. HE in mid−air's  expanse  hath golden  tresses;  a raging  serpent,  like the rushing  tempest:   
Purely  refulgent,  knowing  well the morn.  ing; like honourable  dames,  true, active  workers.   
2 Thy well−winged  flashes strengthen  in their manner,  when  the black  Bull hath bellowed  round  about  us.
  
With  drops  that bless  and seem  to smile  he cometh:  the waters  fall, the clouds  utter their thunder.   
3 When  he comes  streaming  with the milk of worship,  conducting  by direct est paths  of Order   
Aryaman,  Mitra,  Varuna,  Parijman  fill the hide full where  lies the nether  press−stone.   
4 O Agni,  thou who art the lord of wealth  in kine,  thou Son of Strength,   
Vouchsafe  to us, O Jatavetlas,  high renown.   
5 He, Agni,  kindled,  good  and wise,  must  be exalted  in our song:   
Shine,  thou of many  forms,  shine  radiantly  on us.  
6 O Agni,  shining  of thyself  by night  and when  the morning  breaks,   
Burn,  thou whose  teeth  are sharp,  against  the Raksasas.   
7 Adorable  in all our rites,  favour  us, Agni, with thine.aid,   
When  the great  hymn  is chanted  forth.   
8 Bring  to us ever−conquering  wealth,  wealth,  Agni,  worthy  of our choice,   
In all our frays  invincible.   
9 Give  us, O Agni,  through  thy grace  wealth  that supporteth  all our life,  
Thy favour  so that we may live.  
10 O Gotama,  desiring  bliss present  thy songs  composed  with care  
To Agni  of the pointed  flames.   
11 May the man fall, O Agni,  who near or afar assaileth  us:  
Do thou increase  and prosper  us.  
12 Keen  and swift  Agni,  thousand−eyed,  chaseth  the Raksasas  afar:  
He singeth,  herald  meet  for lauds.   
 
HYMN  LXXX.  Indra.  
1. THUS  in the Soma,  in wild joy the Brahman  hath exalted  thee:  Thou,  mightiest  It thunder−armed,  hast 
driven  by force  he Dragon  from  the earth,  lauding  thine  own imperial  
sway.   
2 The mighty  flowing  Soma−draught,  brought  by the Hawk,  hath gladdened  thee,   
That in thy strength,  O Thunderer,  thou hast struck  down  Vrtra  from  the floods,  lauding  thine  own imperi
al 
sway.   
3 Go forward,  meet  the foe, be bold;  thy bolt of thunder  is not checked.   
Manliness,  Indra,  is thy might:  stay Vrtra,  make  the waters  thine,  lauding  thine  own imperial  sway.   
4 Thou  smotest  Vrtra  from  the earth,  smotest  him, Indra,  from  the sky.  
Let these  life−fostering  waters  flow attended  by the Marut  host,  lauding  thine  own imperial  sway.   
5 The wrathful  Indra  with his bolt of thunder  rushing  on the foe,  
Smote  fierce  on trembling  Vrtra's  back,  and loosed  the waters  free to run, lauding  his own imperial  sway.   
6 With  hundred−jointed  thunderbolt  Indra  hath struck  him on the back,   
And,  while  rejoicing  in the juice,  seeketh  prosperity  for friends,  lauding  his own imperial  sway.   
7 Indra,  unconquered  might  is thine,  Thunderer,  Caster  of the Stone;   Rig Veda – English Translation  
For thou with thy surpassing  power  smotest  to death  the guileful  beast,  lauding  thine  own imperial  sway.   
8 Far over ninety  spacious  floods  thy thunderbolts  were  cast abroad:   
Great,  Indra,  is thy hero might,  and strength  is seated  in thine  arms,  lauding  thine  own imperial  sway.   
9 Laud  him a thousand  all at once,  shout  twenty  forth  the hymn  of praise.   
Hundreds  have  sung  aloud  to him, to Indra  hath the prayer  been  raised,  lauding  his own imperial  sway.   
10 Indra  hath smitten  down  the power  of Vrtra,−might  with stronger  might.   
 
This was his manly  exploit,  he slew Vrtra  and let loose  the floods,  lauding  his own imperial  sway.   
11 Yea, even  this great  Pair of Worlds  trembled  in terror  at thy wrath,   
When,  Indra,  Thunderer,  Marut−girt,  thou slewest  Vrtra  in thy strength,  lauding  thine  own imperial  sway.   
12 But Vrtra  scared  not Indra with his shaking  or his thunder  roar.  
On him that iron thunderbolt  fell fiercely  with its thousand  points,  lauding  his own imperial  sway.   
13 Whenwith  the thunder  thou didst  make  thy dart and Vrtra  meet  in war,  
Thy might,  O Indra,  fain to slay the Dragon,  was set firm in heaven,  lauding  thine  own imperial  sway.   
14 When  at thy shout,  O Thunder−armed,  each thing  both fixed  and moving  shook,   
E'en Tvastar  trembled  at thy wrath  and quaked  with fear because  of thee,  lauding  thine  own imperial  sway
.  
15 There is not, in our knowledge,  one who passeth  Indra  in his strength:   
In him the Deities  have  stored  manliness,  insight,  power  and might,  lauding  his own imperial  sway.   
16 Still as of old, whatever  rite Atharvan,  Manus  sire of all,  
Dadhyach  performed,  their prayer  and praise  united  in that Indra  meet,  lauding  his own imperial  sway.   
 
HYMN  LXXXI.  Indra.  
1. THE  men have  lifted  Indra  up, the Vrtra  slayer,  to joy and strength:  Him,  verily,  we invocate  in battles  
whether  great  or small:  be he our aid in deeds of might.   
2 Thou,  Hero,  art a warrior,  thou art giver  of abundant  spoil.   
Strengthening  e'en the feeble,  thou aidest  the sacrificer,  thou givest  the offerer  ample  wealth.   
3 When  war and battles  are on foot, booty  is laid before  the bold.   
Yoke  thou thy wildly−rushing  Bays.  Whom  wilt thou slay and whom  enrich?  Do thou,  O Indra,  make  us r
ich.  
4 Mighty  through  wisdom,  as he lists, terrible,  he hath waxed  in strength.   
Lord  of Bay Steeds,  strong−jawed,  sublime,  he in joined  hands  for glory's  sake hath grasped his iron 
thunderbolt.   
5 He filled  the earthly  atmosphere  and pressed  against  the lights  in heaven.   
None  like thee ever hath been born,  none,  Indra,  will be born like thee.  Thou  hast waxed  mighty  over all.  
6 May he who to the offerer  gives  the foeman 's man−sustaining  food,   
May Indra  lend his aid to us. Deal  forth  −abundant  is thy wealth−that  in thy bounty  1 may share.   
7 He, righteous−hearted,  at each time of rapture  gives  us herds  of kine.   
Gather  in both thy hands  for us treasures  of many  hundred  sorts. Sharpen  thou us, and bring  us wealth.   
8 Refresh  thee,  Hero,  with the juice  outpoured  for bounty  and for strength.   
We know  thee Lord  of ample  store,  to thee have sent our hearts'  desires:  be therefore  our Protector  thou.   
9 These  people,  Indra,  keep for thee all that is worthy  of thy choice.   
Discover  thou,  as Lord,  the wealth  of men who offer  up no gifts:  bring  thou to us this wealth  of theirs.   
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  LXXXII.  Indra.  
1. GRACIOUSLY  listen  to our songs,  Maghavan,  be not negligent.  As thou hast made  us full of joy and l
ettest  us solicit  thee,  now,  Indra,  yoke  thy two Bay Steeds.   
2 Well  have they eaten  and rejoiced;  the friends  have  risen  and passed  away.   
The sages  luminous  in themselves  have.  praised  thee with their latest  hymn.  Now,  Indra,  yoke  thy two Ba
y 
Steeds.   
3 Maghavan,  we will reverence  thee who art so fair to look upon.   
Thus  praised,  according  to our wish  come  now with richly  laden  car. Now,  Indra,  yoke  thy two Bay Steed
s.  
4 He will in very truth  ascend  the powerful  car that finds  the kine,  
Who  thinks  upon  the well−filled  bowl,  the Tawny  Coursers'  harnesser.  Now,  Indra,  yoke  thy two Bay Ste
eds.  
5 Let, Lord  of Hundred  Powers,  thy Steeds  be harnessed  on the right  and left.  
Therewith  in rapture  of the juice,  draw  near to thy beloved  Spouse.  Now,  Indra,  yoke  thy two Bay Steeds.   
6 With  holy prayer  I yoke  thy long−maned  pair of Bays:  come  hitherward;  thou holdest  them  in both thy 
 
hands.   
The stirring  draughts  of juice  outpoured  have made  thee glad:  thou,  Thunderer,  hast rejoiced  with Pusan  a
nd 
thy Spouse.   
 
HYMN  LXXXIII.  Indra.  
1. INDRA,  the mortal  man well guarded  by thine  aid goes foremost  in the wealth  of horses  and of kine.   
With  amplest  wealth  thou fillest  him, as round  about  the waters  clearly  seen afar fill Sindhu  full.  
2 The heavenl y Waters  come  not nigh the priestly  bowl:  they but look down  and see how far mid−air  is 
spread:   
The Deities  conduct  the pious  man to them:  like suitors  they delight  in him who loveth  prayer.   
3 Praiseworthy  blessing  hast thou laid upon  the pair who with uplifted  ladle  serve  thee,  man and wife.   
Unchecked  he dwells  and prospers  in thy law: thy power  brings  blessing  to the sacrificer  pouring  gifts.   
4 First the Angirases  won themselves  vital power,  whose  fires were  kindled  through  good  deeds  and sacri
fice.  
The men together  found  the Pani's  hoarded  wealth,  the cattle,  and the wealth  in horses  and in kine.   
5 Atharvan  first by sacrifices  laid the paths  then,  guardian  of the Law,  sprang  up the loving  Sun.  
Usana  Kavya  straightway  hither  drove  the kine.  Let us with offerings  honour  Yama's  deathless  birth.   
6 When  sacred  grass  is trimmed  to aid the auspicious  work,  or the hymn  makes  its voice  of praise  sound  t
o 
the sky.  
Where  the stone  rings  as'twere  a singer  skilled  in laud,  −−Indra  in truth  delights  when  these  come  near to 
him.  
 
HYMN  LXXXIV.  Indra.  
1. The Soma  hath been  pressed  for thee,  O Indra;  mightiest,  bold One,  come.   
May Indra−vigour  fill thee full, as the Sun fills mid−air  with rays.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
2 His pair of Tawny  Coursers  bring  Indra  of unresisted  might   
Hithe r to Rsis'  songs  of praise  and sacrifice  performed  by men.   
3 Slayer  of Vrtra,  mount  thy car; thy Bay Steeds  have been  yoked  by prayer.   
May,  with its voice,  the pressing−stone  draw  thine  attention  hitherward.   
4 This poured  libation,  Indra,  drink,  immorta l, gladdening,  excellent.   
Streams  of the bright  have  flowed  to thee here at the seat of holy Law.   
5 Sing glory  now to Indra,  say to him your solemn  eulogies.   
The drops  poured  forth  have made  him glad:  pay reverence  to his might  supreme.   
6 When,  Indra,  thou dost yoke  thy Steeds,  there  is no better  charioteer:   
None  hath surpassed  thee in thy might,  none  with good  steeds  o'ertaken  thee.   
7 He who alone  bestoweth  on mortal  man who offereth  gifts,   
The ruler  of resistless  power,  is Indra,  sure.   
8 When  will he trample,  like a weed,  the man who hath no gift for him?   
When,  verily,  will Indra  hear our songs  of praise?   
9 He who with Soma  juice  prepared  amid  the many  honours  thee,−   
Verily  Indra  gains  thereby  tremendous  might.   
10 The juice  of Soma  thus diffuse d, sweet  to the taste,  the bright  cows  drink,   
Who  for the sake of splendour  close  to mighty  Indra's  side rejoice,  good  in their own supremacy.   
11 Craving  his touch  the dappled  kine mingle  the Soma  with their milk.   
The milch−kine  dear to Indra  send forth  his death−dealing  thunderbolt,  good  in their own supremacy.   
12 With  veneration,  passing  wise,  honouring  his victorious  might,   
They  follow  close  his many  laws to win them  due preeminence,  good  in their  
own supremacy.   
13 With  bones  of Dadhyac  for his arms, Indra,  resistless  in attack,   
 
Struck  nine−and−ninety  Vrtras  dead.   
14 He, searching  for the horse's  head,  removed  among  the mountains,  found   
At Suryanavan  what  he sought.   
15 Then  verily  they recognized  the essential  form  of Tvastar's  Bull,   
Here  in the mansion  of the Moon.   
16 Who  yokes  to−day  unto the pole of Order  the strong  and passionate  steers  of checkless  spirit,   
With  shaft−armed  mouths,  heart−piercing,  health−bestowing?   
Long  shall  he live who richly  pays their service.   
17 Who  fleeth  forth?  who suffereth?  who feareth?  Who  knoweth  Indra  present,  Indra  near us?  
Who  sendeth  benediction  on his offspring,  his household,  wealth  and person,  and the People?   
18 Who  with poured  oil and offering  honours  Agni,  with ladle  worships  at appointed  seasons?   
To whom  to the Gods  bring  oblation  quickly?  What  offerer,  God−favoured,  knows  him thoroughly?   
19 Thou  as a God,  O Mightiest,  verily  blessest  mortal  man.   
O Maghavan,  there  is no comforter  but thou:  Indra,  I speak  my words  to thee.   
20 Let not thy bounteo us gifts,  let not thy saving  help fail us, good  Lord,  at any time;   
And measure  out to us, thou lover  of mankind,  all riches  hitherward  from  men.   
 
HYMN  LXXXV.  Maruts.  
1. THEY  who are glancing  forth,  like women,  on their way,  doers  of mighty  deeds,  swift  racers,  Rudra's  
Sons,   
The Maruts  have  made  heaven  and earth  increase  and grow:  in sacrifices  they delight,  the strong  and wild.Rig Veda – English Translation  
  
2 Grown  to their perfect  strength  greatness  have  they attained;  the Rudras  have  established  their abode  in 
heaven.   
Singing  their song of praise  and generating  might,  they have  put glory  on, the Sons  whom  Prani  bare.   
3 When,  Children  of the Cow,  they shine  in bright  attire,  and on their fair limbs  lay their golden  ornament
s,  
They  drive  away  each adversary  from  their path,  and, following  their traces,  fatness  floweth  down,   
4 When,  mighty  Warriors,  ye who glitter  with your spears,  o'erthrowing  with your strength  e'en what  is ne
'er 
o'erthrown,   
When,  O ye Maruts,  ye the host that send the rain, had harnessed  to your cars the thought−fleet  spotted  de
er.  
5 When  ye have  harnessed  to your cars the spotted  deer,  urging  the thunderbolt,  O Maruts,  to the fray,  
Forth  rush the torrents  of the dark red stormy  cloud,  and moisten,  like a skin,  the earth  with water−floods.   
6 Let your swift− gliding  coursers  bear you hitherward  with their fleet pinions.  Come  ye forward  with you
r 
arms.   
Sit on the grass;  a wide  scat hath been  made  for you: delight  yourselves,  O Maruts,  in the pleasant  food.   
7 Strong  in their native  strength  to greatness  have  they grown,  stepped  to the firmament  and made  their 
dwelling  wide.   
When  Visnu  saved  the Soma  bringing  wild delight,  the Maruts  sate like birds  on their dear holy grass.   
8 In sooth  like heroes  fain for fight  they rush about,  like combatants  fame−seeking  have they striven  in w
ar.  
Before  the Maruts  every  creature  is afraid:  the men are like to Kings,  terrible  to behold.   
9 When  Tyastar  deft of hand  had turned  the thunderbolt,  golden,  with thousand  edges,  fashioned  more  
skilfully,   
Indra  received  it to perfor m heroic  deeds.  Vrtra  he slew,  and forced  the flood  of water  forth.   
10 They  with their vigorous  strength  pushed  the well up on high,  and clove  the cloud  in twain  though  it w
as 
passing  strong.   
The Maruts,  bounteous  Givers,  sending  forth  their voice,  in the wild joy of Soma  wrought  their glorious  
deeds.   
11 They  drave  the cloud  transverse  directed  hitherward,  and poured  the fountain  forth  for thirsting  Gotam
a.  
Shining  with varied  light they come  to him with help:  they with their might  fulfilled  the longing  of the sag
e.  
12 The shelters  which  ye have for him who lauds  you, bestow  them  threefold  on the man who offers.   
 
Extend  the same  boons  unto us, ye Maruts.  Give  us, O Heroes,  wealth  with noble  offipring.  
 
HYMN  LXXXVI.  Maruts.  
1. THE  best of guardians  hath that man within  whose  dwelling  place  ye drink,   
O Maruts,  giants  of the sky.  
2 Honoured  with sacrifice  or with the worship  of the sages'  hymns,   
O Maruts,  listen  to the call.  Rig Veda – English Translation  
3 Yea, the strong  man to whom  ye have  vouchsafed  to give a sage,  shall  move   
Into a stable  rich in kine.   
4 Upon  this hero's  sacred  grass  Soma  is poured  in daily  rites:   
Praise  and delight  are sung  aloud.   
5 Let the strong  Maruts  hear him, him surpassing  all men:  strength  be his  
That reaches  even  to the Sun.  
6 For, through  the swift Gods'  loving  help,  in many  an autumn,  Maruts,  we  
Have  offered  up our sacrifice.   
7 Fortunate  shall  that mortal  be, O Maruts  most  adorable,   
Whose  offerings  ye bear away.   
8 O Heroes  truly  strong,  ye know  the toil of him who sings  your praise,   
The heart's desire  of him who loves.   
9 O ye of true strength,  make  this thing  manifest  by your greatness  − strike   
The demon  with your thunderbolt.   
10 Conceal  the horrid  darkness,  drive  far from  us each devouring  fiend.   
Create  the light for which  we long.   
 
HYMN  LXXXVII  Maruts.  
1. LOUD  Singers,  never  humbled,  active,  full of strength,  immovable,  impetuous,  manliest,  best−beloved,
  
They  have  displayed  themselves  with glittering  ornaments,  a few in number  only,  like the heavens  with st
ars.  
2 When,  Maruts,  on the steeps  ye pile the moving  cloud,  ye are like birds  on whatsoever  path it be.  
Clouds  everywhere  shed forth  the rain upon  your cars. Drop  fatness,  honey−hued,  for him who sings  your 
praise.   
3 Earth  at their racings  trembles  as if weak  and worn,  when  on their ways  they yoke  their cars for victory.   
They,  sportive,  loudly  roaring,  armed  with glittering  spears,  shakers  of all, themselves  admire  their 
mightiness.   
4 Self−moving  is that youthful  band,  with spotted  steeds;  thus it hath lordly  sway,  endued  with power  and 
might.   
Truthful  art thou,  and blameless,  searcher  out of sin: so thou,  Strong  Host,  wilt be protector  of this prayer.
  
5 We speak  by our descent  from  our primeval  Sire;  our tongue,  when  we behold  the Soma,  stirs itself.   
When,  shouting,  they had joined  Indra  in toil of fight,  then only they obtained  their sacrificial  names.   
6 Splendours  they gained  for glory,  they who wear  bright  rings;  rays they obtained,  and men to celebrate  t
heir 
praise.   
Armed  with their swords,  impetuous  and fearing  naugh t, they have  possessed  the Maruts'  own beloved  ho
me.  
 
HYMN  LXXXVIII.  Maruts.  
1. COME  hither,  Maruts,  on your lightning  laden  cars, sounding  with sweet  songs,  armed  with lances,  wi
nged  
with steeds.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Fly unto us with noblest  food,  like birds,  O ye of might y power.   
2 With  their red−hued  or, haply,  tawny  coursers  which  speed  their chariots  on, they come  for glory.   
 
Brilliant  like gold is he who holds  the thunder.  Earth  have they smitten  with the chariot's  felly.   
3 For beauty  ye have  swords  upon  your bodies . As they stir woods  so may they stir our spirits.   
For your sake,  O ye Maruts  very mighty  and well−born,  have  they set the stone,  in motion.   
4 The days went  round  you and came  back  O yearners,  back,  to this prayer  and to this solemn  worship.   
The Gotamas  making  their prayer  with singing  have  pushed  the well's  lid up to drink  the water.   
5 No hymn  way ever known  like this aforetime  which  Gotama  sang forth  for you, O Maruts,   
What  time upon  your golden  wheels  he saw you, wild boars  rushing  about  with tusks  of iron.  
6 To you this freshening  draught  of Soma  rusheth,  O Maruts,  like the voice  of one who prayeth.   
It rusheth  freely  from  our hands  as these.  libations  wont  to flow.   
 
HYMN  LXXXIX.  Visvedevas.  
1. MAY  powers  auspicious  come  to us from  every  side, never deceived,  unhindered,  and victorious,   
That the Gods  ever may be with us for our gain,  our guardians  day by day unceasing  in their care.   
2 May the auspicious  favour  of the Gods  be ours,  on us descend  the bounty  of the righteous  Gods.   
The friendship  of the Gods  have  we devoutly  sought:  so may the Gods  extend  our life that we may live.  
3 We call them  hither  with a hymn  of olden  time,  Bhaga,  the friendly  Daksa,  Mitra,  Aditi,   
Aryaman,  Varuna,  Soma,  the Asvins.  May Sarasvati,  auspicious,  grant  felicity.   
4 May the Wind  waft to us that pleasant  medicine,  may Earth  our Mother  give it, and our Father  Heaven,   
And the joy−giving  stones  that press  the Soma's  juice.  Asvins,  may ye, for whom  our spirits  long,  hear thi
s.  
5 Him we invoke  for aid who reigns  supre me, the Lord  of all that stands  or moves,  inspirer  of the soul,   
That Pusan  may promote  the increase  of our wealth,  our keeper  and our guard  infallible  for our good.   
6 Illustrious  far and wide,  may Indra  prosper  us: may Pusan  prosper  us, the Master  of all wealth.   
May Tarksya  with uninjured  fellies  prosper  us: Brhaspati  vouchsafe  to us prosperity.   
7 The Maruts,  Sons  of Prani, borne  by spotted  steeds,  moving  in glory,  oft visiting  holy rites,   
Sages  whose  tongue  is Agni,  brilliant  as the Sun,−hither  let all the Gods  for our protection  come.   
8 Gods,  may we with our ears listen  to what  is good,  and with our eyes see what  is good,  ye Holy  Ones.   
With  limbs  and bodies  firm may we extolling  you attain  the term of life appointed  by the Gods.   
9 A hundred  autumns  stand  before  us, O ye Gods,  within  whose  space  ye bring  our bodies  to decay;   
Within  whose  space  our sons become  fathe rs in turn. Break  ye not in the midst  our course  of fleeting  life.  
10 Aditi  is the heaven,  Aditi  is mid−air,  Aditi  is the Mother  and the Sire and Son.  
Aditi  is all Gods,  Aditi  five−classed  men,  Aditi  all that hath been  bom and shall  be born.   
 
HYMN  XC. Visvedevas.  
1. MAY  Varuna  with guidance  straight,  and Mitra  lead us, he who knows,  And Aryaman  in accord  with 
Gods.   
2 For they are dealers  forth  of wealth,  and, not deluded,  with their might   
Guard  evermore  the holy laws.   
3 Shelter  may they vouchsafe  to us, Immortal  Gods  to mortal  men,   
Chasing  our enemies  away.   
4 May they mark  out our paths  to bliss,  Indra,  the Maruts,  Pusan,   
and Bhaga,  the Gods  to be adored.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
5 Yea, Pusan,  Visnu,  ye who run your course,  enrich  our hymns  with kine;   
Bless  us with all prosperity.   
6 The winds  waft sweets,  the rivers  pour sweets  for the man who keeps  the Law  
So may the plants  be sweet  for us.  
7 Sweet  be the night  and sweet  the dawns,  sweet  the terrestrial  atmosphere;   
Sweet  be our Father  Heaven  to us.  
8 May the tall tree be full of sweets  for us, and full of sweets  the Sun:  
 
May our milch−kine  be sweet  for us.  
9 Be Mitra  gracious  unto us, and Varuna  and Aryaman:   
Indra,  Brhaspati  be kind,  and Visnu  of the mighty  stride.   
 
HYMN  XCI Soma.  
1. Thou,  Soma,  art preeminent  for wisdom;  along  the straightest  path thou art our leader .  
Our wise forefathers  by thy guidance,  Indu,  dealt  out among  the Gods  their share  of treasure.   
2 Thou  by thine  insight  art most  wise,  O Soma,  strong  by thine  energies  and all possessing,   
Mighty  art thou by all thy powers  and greatness,  by glories  art thou glorious,  guide  of mortals.   
3 Thine  are King  Varuna's  eternal  statutes,  lofty and deep,  O Soma,  is thy glory.   
All−pure  art thou like Mitra  the beloved,  adorable,  like Aryaman,  O Soma.   
4 With  all thy glories  on the earth,  in heaven,  on mountains,  in the plants,  and in the waters,−   
With  all of these,  well−pleased  and not in anger,  accept,  O royal  Soma,  our oblations.   
5 Thou,  Soma,  art the Lord  of heroes,  King,  yea, Vrtra−slayer  thou:   
Thou  art auspicious  energy.   
6 And,  Soma,  let it be thy wish  that we may  
live and may not die:  
Praise−loving  Lord  of plants  art thou.   
7 To him who keeps  the law, both old and young,  thou givest  happiness,   
And energy  that he may live.  
8 Guard  us, King  Soma,  on all sides  from  him who threatens  us: never  let  
The frien d of one like thee be harmed.   
9 With  those  delightful  aids which  thou hast, Soma,  for the worshipper,−   
Even  with those  protect  thou us.  
10 Accepting  this our sacrifice  and this our praise,  O Soma,  come,   
And be thou nigh to prosper  us.  
11 Well−skilled  in speech  we magnify  thee,  Soma,  with our sacred  songs:   
Come  thou to us, most  gracious  One.   
12 Enricher,  healer  of disease,  wealth−finder,  prospering  our store,   
Be, Soma,  a good  Friend  to us.  
13 Soma,  be happy  in our heart,  as milch−kine  in the grassy  meads,   
As a young  man in his own house.   
14 O Soma,  God,  the mortal  man who in thy friendship  hath delight,   
Him doth the mighty  Sage  befriend.   
15 Save  us from  slanderous  reproach,  keep  us., O Soma,  from  distress:   
Be unto us a gracious  Friend.   
16 Soma,  wax great.  From  every  side may vigorous  powers  unite  in thee:   
Be in the gathering−place  of strength.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
17 Wax,  O most  gladdening  Soma,  great  through  all thy rays of light,  and be  
A Friend  of most  illustrious  fame  t6 prosper  us.  
16 In thee be juicy  nutri ments  united,  and powers  and mighty  foe−subduing  vigour,   
Waxing  to immortality,  O Soma:  win highest  glories  for thyself  in heaven.   
19 Such  of thy glories  as with poured  oblations  men honour,  may they all invest  our worship.   
Wealth−giver,  furtherer  with troops  of heroes,  sparing  the brave,  come,  Soma,  to our houses.   
20 To him who worships  Soma  gives  the milchcow,  a fleet steed  and a man of active  knowledge,   
Skilled  in home  duties,  meet  for holy synod,  for council  meet,  a glory  to his father.   
21 Invinci ble in fight,  saver  in battles,  guard  of our camp,  winner  of light and water,   
Born  amid  hymns,  well−housed,  exceeding  famous,  victor,  in thee will we rejoice,  O Soma.   
22 These  herbs,  these  milch−kine,  and these  running  waters,  all these,  O Soma,  thou hast generated.   
 
The spacious  firmament  bast thou expanded,  and with the light thou hast dispelled  the darkne
ss. 23 Do thou,  God Soma,  with thy Godlike  spirit,  victorious,  win for us a share  of riches.  L
et none  prevent  thee:  thou art Lord  of valour.  Provide  for both sides  in the fray for booty.  
 
HYMN  XCII.  Dawn.  
1. THESE  Dawns  have  raised  their banner;  in the eastern  half of the mid−air  they spread  abroad  their shin
ine 
light.   
Like heroes  who prepare  their weapons  for the war, onward  they come  bright  red in hue, the Mother  Cow
s.  
2 Readily  have  the purple  beams  of light shot up; the Red Cows  have  they harnessed,  easy to be yoked.   
The Dawns  have brought  distinct  perception  as before:  red−hued,  they have  attained  their fulgent  brillianc
y.  
3 They  sing their song  like women  active  in their tasks,  along  their common  path hither  from  far away,   
Bringing  refreshment  to the liberal  devotee,  yea, all things  to the worshipper  who pours  the juice.   
4 She, like a dancer,  puts her broidered  garments  on: as a cow yields  her udder  so she bares  her breast.   
Creating  light for all the world  of life, the Dawn  hath laid the darkness  open  as the cows  their stall.   
5 We have beheld  the brightness  of her shining;  it spreads  and drives  away  the darkiorne  monster.   
Like tints that deck the Post at sacrifices,  Heaven's  Daughter  hath attain ed her wondrous  splendour.   
6 We have o'erpast  the limit  of this darkness;  Dawn  breaking  forth  again  brings  clear  perception.   
She like a flatterer  smiles  in light for glory,  and fair of face hath wakened  to rejoice   
us.  
7 The Gotamas  have  praised  Heaven' s radiant  Daughter,  the leader  of the charm  of pleasant  voices.   
Dawn,  thou conferrest  on us strength  with offspring  and men,  conspicuous  with kine and horses.   
8 O thou who shinest  forth  in wondrous  glory,  urged  onward  by thy strength,  auspicious  Lady,   
Dawn,  may I gain that wealth,  renowned  and ample,  in brave  sons,  troops  of slaves,  far−famed  for horses.
  
9 Bending  her looks  on all the world,  the Goddess  shines,  widely  spreading  with her bright  eye westward.
  
Waking  to motion  every  living  creature,  she understands  the voice  of each adorer.   
10 Ancient  of days,  again  again  born newly,  decking  her beauty  with the self−same  raiment.   
The Goddess  wastes  away  the life of mortals,  like a skilled  hunter  cutting  birds  in pieces.   
11 She hath appeared  discovering  heaven's  borders:  to the far distance  she drives  off her Sister.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Diminishing  the days of human  creatures,  the Lady  shines  with all her lover's  splendour.   
12 The bright,  the blessed  One shines  forth  extending  her rays like kine,  as a flood  rolls his water s.  
Never  transgressing  the divine  commandments,  she is beheld  visible  with the sunbeams.   
13 O Dawn  enriched  with ample  wealth,  bestow  on us the wondrous  gift  
Wherewith  we may support  children  and children's  sons.   
14 Thou  radiant  mover  of sweet  sounds,  with wealth  of horses  and of kine  
Shine  thou on us this day, O Dawn  auspiciously.   
15 O Dawn  enriched  with holy rites,  yoke  to thy car thy purple  steeds,   
And then bring  thou unto us all felicities.   
16 O Asvins  wonderful  in act, do ye unanimous  direct   
Your chariot  to our home  wealthy  in kine and gold.   
17 Ye who brought  down  the hymn  from  heaven,  a light that giveth  light to man,   
Do ye, O Asvius,  bring  strength  bither  unto us.  
18 Hither  may they who wake  at dawn  bring,  to drink  Soma  both the Gods   
Heal th−givers  Wonder−Workers,  borne  on paths  of gold.   
 
HYMN  XCIII.  Agni−Sona.  
1 AGNI  and Soma,  mighty  Pair, graciously  hearken  to my call, A
ccept  in friendly  wise my hymn,  and prosper  him who offers  gifts.
 2 The man who honours  you to−day,  Agni  and Soma,  with this h
ymn,   
Bestow  on him heroic  strength,  increase  of kine,  and noble  steeds.   
3 The man who offers  holy oil and burnt  oblations  unto you,  
Agni  and Soma,  shall  enjoy  great  strength,  with offspring,  all his life.  
4 Agni  and Soma,  famed  is that your.  prowess  wherewith  ye stole  the kine,  his food,  from  Pani.   
Ye caused  the brood  of Brsaya  to perish;  ye found  the light,  the single  light for many.   
5 Agni  and Soma,  joined  in operation  ye have  set up the shining  lights  in heaven.   
From  curse  and from  reproa ch, Agni  and Soma,  ye freed  the rivers  that were  bound  in fetters.   
6 One of you Mitarisvan  brought  from  heaven,  the Falcon  rent the other  from  the mountain.   
Strengthened  by holy prayer  Agni  and Soma  have  made  us ample  room  for sacrificing.   
7 Taste,  Agni , Soma,  this prepared  oblation;  accept  it, Mighty  Ones,  and let it please  you.  
Vouchsafe  us good  protection  and kind favour:  grant  to the sacrificer  health  and riches.   
8 Whoso  with oil and poured  oblation  honours,  with God−devoted  heart,  Agni  and Soma,−   
Protect  his sacrifice,  preserve  him from  distress,  grant  to the sacrificer  great  felicity.   
9 Invoked  together,  mates  in wealth,  AgniSoma,  accept  our hymns:   
Together  be among  the Gods.   
10 Agni  and Soma,  unto him who worships  you with holy oil  
Shine  forth an ample  recompense.   
11 Agni  and Sonia,  be ye pleased  with these  oblations  brought  to you,  
And come,  together,  nigh to us.  
12 Agni  and Soma,  cherish  well our horses,  and let our cows  be fat who yield  oblations.   
Grant  power  to us and to our wealthy  patrons,  and cause  our holy rites to be successful.   
 
HYMN  XCIV.  Agni  
1 FOR  Jatavedas  worthy  of our praise  will we frame  with our mind  this eulogy  as 'twere  a car.  Rig Veda – English Translation  
For good,  in his assembly,  is this care of ours.  Let us not, in thy friendship,  Agni,  suffer harm.   
2 The man for whom  thou sacrificest  prospereth,  dwelleth  without  a foe, gaineth  heroic  might.   
He waxeth  strong,  distress  never  approacheth  him. Let us riot, in thy friendship,  Agni,  suffer  harm.   
3 May we have  power  to kindle  thee.  Fulfil  our thoughts.  In thee the Gods  eat the presented  offering,   
Bring  hither  the Adityas,  for we long for them.  Let us not in thy friendship,  Agni,  suffer  harm.   
4 We will bring  fuel and prepare  burnt  offerings,  reminding  thee at each successive  festival.   
Fulfil  our thought  that so we may prolong  our lives.  Let us not in thy friendship,  Agni,  suffer  harm.   
5 His ministers  move  forth,  the guardians  of the folk, protecting  quadruped  and biped  with their rays.   
Mighty  art thou,  the wondrous  herald  of the Dawn.  Let us not in thy friend.  ship,  Agni,  suffer  harm.   
6 Thou  art Presenter  and the chief  Invoker,  thou Director,  Purifier,  great  High  Priest  by birth.   
Knowing  all priestly  work  thou perfectest  it, Sage.  Let us not in thy friendship,  Agni,  suffer  harm.   
7 Lovely  of form  art thou,  alike  on every  side;  though  far, thou shinest  brightly   
as if close  at hand.   
O God,  thou seest  through  even  the dark of night.  Let us not in thy friendship,  Agni,  suffer  harm.   
8 Gods,  foremost  he his car who pours  libations  out, and let our hymn  prevail  o'er evil−hearted  men.   
Attend  to this our speech  and make  it prosper  well.  Let us not in thy friendship,  Agni,  suffer  harm.   
9 Smite  with thy weapons  those  of evil speech  and thought,  devouring  demons,  whether  near or tar away.   
Then  to the singer  give free way for sacrifice.  Let us not in thy friendship,  Agni,  suffer  harm.   
10 When  to thy chariot  thou hadst  yoked  two red steeds  and two ruddy  steeds,  wind−sped,  thy roar was li
ke a 
bull's.   
Thou  with smoke−bannered  flame  attackest  forest  trees. Let us not in thy friendship,  Agni,  suffer  harm.   
11 Then  at thy roar the very birds  are terrified,  when,  eating−up  the grass,  thy sparks  fly forth  abroad.   
Then  is it easy for thee and thy car to pass.  Let us not in thy friendship,  Agni,  suffer  harm.   
12 He hath the Power  to soothe  Mitra  and Varuna:  wonderful  is the Maruts'  wrath  when  they descend.   
Be gracious;  let their hearts  he turned  to us again.  Let us not in thy friendship,  Agni,  suffer  harm.   
 
13 Thou  art a God,  thou art the wondrous  Friend  of Gods, the Vasu  of the Vasus,  fair in sacrifice.  Under,  t
hine own most  wide  protection  may we dwell.  Let us not in thy friendship,  Agni,  suffer  harm.  14 This is t
hy grace  that, kindled  in thine  own abode,  invoked  with Soma  thou soundest  forth  most  benign,  Thou giv
est wealth  and treasure  to the worshipper.  Let us not in thy friendship,  Agni,  suffer  harm.  15 To whom  tho
u, Lord  of goodly  riches,  grantest  freedom  from  every  sin with perfect  wholeness,  Whom  with good  stren
gth thou quikenest,  with children  and wealth−may  we be they,  Eternal  Being.  16 Such,  Agni,  thou who kn
owest  all good  fortune,  God,  lengthen  here the days of our existence.  This prayer  of ours may Varuna  gra
nt, and Mitra,  and Aditi  and Sindhu,  Earth  and Heaven.  
 
HYMN  XCV.  Agni  
1. 1. To fair goals  travel Two unlike  in semblance:  each in succession  nourishes  an infant.   
One bears  a Godlike  Babe  of golden  colour;  bright  and fair−shining,  is he with the other.   
2 Tvastar's  ten daughters,  vigilant  and youthful,  produced  this Infant  borne  to sundry  quarter s.  
They  bear around  him whose  long flames  are pointed,  fulgent  among  mankind  with native  splendour.   
 
2. 3. Three  several  places  of his birth  they honour,  in mid−air,  in the heaven,  and in the waters.   
Governing  in the cast of earthly  regions,  the seasons  hath he stablished  in their order.   
4 Who  of you knows  this secret  One?  The Infant  by his own nature  hath brought  forth  his Mothers.   
The germ  of many,  from  the waters'  bosom  he goes forth,  wise and great,  of Godlike  nature.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
5 Visible,  fair, he grows  in native brightness  uplifted  in the lap of waving  waters.   
When  he was born both Tvastar's  worlds  were  frightened:  they turn to him and reverence  the Lion.   
6 The Two auspicious  Ones,  like women,  tend him: like lowing  cows  they seek him in their manner.   
He is the Lord  of Might  among  the mighty;  him, on the right,  they balm  with their oblations.   
7 Like Savitar  his arms  with might  he stretches;  awful,  he strives  grasping  the world's  two borders.   
He forces  out from  all a brilliant  vesture,  yea, from  his Mothers  draws  he forth  new raiment.   
8 He makes  him a most  noble  form  of splendour,  decking  him in his home  with milk and waters.   
The Sage  adorns  the depths  of air with wisdom  . this is the meeting  where  the Gods  are worshipped.   
9 Wide  through  the firmament  spreads forth  triumphant  the far−resplendent  strength  of' thee the Mighty.   
Kindled  by us do thou preserve  us, Agni,  with all thy self−bright  undiminished  succours.   
10 In dry spots  he makes  stream,  and course,  and torrent,  and inundates  the earth  with floods  that glisten.   
All ancient  things  within  his maw  he gathers,  and moves  among  the new fresh−sprouting  grasses.   
11 Fed with our fuel, purifying  Agni,  so blaze  to us auspiciously  for glory.   
This prayer  of ours may Varuna  grant,  and Mitra,  and Aditi  and Sindhu, Earth  and Heaven.   
 
 
HYMN  XCVI.  Agni.  
1. HE in the ancient  way by strength  engendered,  lo! straight  hath taken  to himself  all wisdom.   
The waters  and the bowl  have made  him friendly.  The Gods  possessed  the wealth  bestowing  Agni.   
2 At Ayu's  ancient  call he by his wisdom  gave all this progeny  of men their being,   
And,  by refulgent  light,  heaven  and the waters.  The Gods  possessed  the wealth.  bestowing  Agni.   
3 Praise  him, ye Aryan  folk, as chief  performer  of sacrifice  adored  and ever toiling ,  
Well−tended,  Son of Strength,  the Constant  Giver.  The Gods  possessed  the wealth  bestowing  Agni.   
4 That Matarisvan  rich in wealth  and treasure,  light−winner,  finds  a pathway  for his offispring.   
Guard  of our folk, Father  of earth  and heaven.  The Gods  possessed  the wealth  bestowing  Agni.   
5 Night  and Dawn,  changing  each the other's  colour,  meeting  together  suckle  one same  Infant:   
Golden  between  the heaven  and earth  he shineth.  The Gods  possessed  the wealth  bestowing  Agni.   
6 Root  of wealth,  gathering−pla ce of treasures,  banner  of sacrifice,  who grants  the suppliant's  wishes:   
Preserving  him as their own life immortal,  the Gods  possessed  the wealth−bestowing  Agni.   
7 Now  and of old the home  of wealth,  the mansion  of what  is born and what  was born aforetime ,  
Guard  of what  is and what  will be hereafter,−the  Gods  possessed  the wealth  bestowing  Agni.   
 
8 May the Wealth−Giver  grant  us conquering  riches;  may the Wealth−Giver  grant  us wealth  with heroes.   
May the Wealth−Giver  grant  us food with offspring,  and length of days may the Wealth−Giver  send us.  
9 Fed with our fuel, purifying  Agni,  so blaze  to us auspiciously  for glory.   
This prayer  of ours may Varuna  grant,  and Mitra,  and Aditi  and Sindhu,  Earth  and Heaven.   
 
HYMN  XCVII.  Agni.  
1. CHASING  with light our sin away,  O Agni,  shine  thou wealth  on us. May his light chase  our sin away.   
2 For goodly  fields,  for pleasant  homes,  for wealth  we sacrifice  to thee.   
May his light chase  our sin away.   
3 Best praiser  of all these  be he; foremost,  our chiefs  who sacrifi ce.  
May his light chase  our sin away.   
4 So that thy worshippers  and we, thine,  Agni,  in our sons may live.  
May his light chase  our sin away.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
5 As ever−  conquering  Agni's  beams  of splendour  go to every  side,  
May his light chase  our sin away.   
6 To every side thy face is turned,  thou art triumphant  everywhere.   
May his light chase  our sin away.   
7 O thou whose  face looks  every  way,  bear us past foes as in a ship.   
May his light chase  our sin away.   
8 As in a ship,  convey  thou us for our advantage  o'er the flood.   
May his light chase  our sin away.   
 
HYMN  XCVIII  Agni.  
1. STILL  in Vaisvanara's  grace  may we continue:  yea, he is King  supreme  o'er all things  living.   
Sprung  hence  to life upon  this All he looketh.  Vaisvanara  hath rivalry  with Surya.   
2 Present  in heaven,  in earth,  all−present  Agni,−all  plants  that grow  on ground  hath he pervaded.   
May Agni,  may Vaisvanara  with vigour,  present,  preserve  us day and night  from  foemen.   
3 Be this thy truth,  Vaisvanara,  to us−ward:  let wealth  in rich abundance  gathe r round  us.  
This prayer  of ours may Varuna  grant,  and Mitra,  and Aditi  and Sindhu,  Earth  and Heaven.   
 
HYMN  XCIX.  Agni.  
1. FOR  Jatavedas  let us press  the Soma:  may he consume  the wealth  of the malignant.
 May Agni  carry  us through  all our troubles,  throu gh grief  as in a boat across  the river
. 
 
HYMN  C. Indra.  
1. MAY  he who hath his home  with strength,  the Mighty,  the King  supreme  of earth  and spacious  heaven,
  
Lord  of true power,  to he invoked  in battles,−may  Indra,  girt by Maruts,  be our succour.   
2 Whose  way is unattainable  like Surya's:  he in each fight  is the strong  Vrtra−slayer,   
Mightiest  with his Friends  in his own courses.  May Indra,  girt by Maruts,  be our succour.   
3 Whose  paths  go forth  in their great  might  resistless,  forthmilking,  as it were,  heaven's  genial  moisture.   
With  manly  strength  triumphant,  foe−subduer,−may  Indra,  girt by Maruts,  be our succour.   
4 Among  Angirases  he was the chiefest,  a Friend  with friends,  mighty  amid  the mighty.   
Praiser  mid praisers,  honoured  most  of singers.  May Indra,  girt by Maruts,  be our succour.   
5 Strong  with the Rudras  as with his own children,  in manly  battle  conquering  his foemen  '  
With  his close  comrades  doing  deeds  of glory,−may  Indra,  girt by Maruts,  be our succour.   
 
6 Humbler  of pride,  exciter  of the conflict,  the Lord  of heroes,  God invoked  of many,   
May he this day gain with our men the sunlight.  May Indra,  girt by Maruts, be oursuccour.   
7 His help hath made  him cheerer  in the battle,  the folk have  made  him guardian  of their comfort.   
Sole Lord  is he of every  holy service.  May Indra,  girt by Maruts,  be our succour.   
8 To him the Hero,  on high days of prowess,  heroes  for help and booty  shall  betake  them.   
He hath found  light even  in the blinding  darkness.  May Indra,  girt by Maruts,  be our succour.   
9 He with his left hand  checketh  even  the mighty,  and with his righthand  gathereth  up the booty.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Even  with the humble  he acquireth  riches.  May Indra,  girt by Maruts,  be our succour.   
10 With  hosts  on foot and cars he winneth  treasures:  well is he known  this day by all the people.   
With  manly  might  he conquereth  those  who hate him. May Indra,  girt by Maruts,  be our succour.   
11 When  in his ways  with kinsmen  or with strangers  he speedeth  to the fight,  invoked  of many,   
For gain of waters,  and of sons and grandsons,  may Indra,  girt by Maruts,  be our succour.   
12 Awful  and fierce,  fiend−slayer,  thunder−wielder,  with boundless  knowl edge,  hymned  by hundreds,  
mighty,   
In strength  like Soma,  guard  of the Five Peoples,  may Indra,  girt by Maruts,  be our succour.   
13 Winning  the light,  hitherward  roars  his thunder  like the terrific  mighty  voice  of Heaven.   
Rich  gifts and treasures  evermore  attend  him. May Indra,  girt by Maruts,  be our succour.   
14 Whose  home  eternal  through  his strength  surrounds  him on every  side, his laud,  the earth  and heaven,   
May he, delighted  with our service,  save us. May Indra,  girt by Maruts,  be our succour.   
15 The limit  of whose  power  not Gods  by Godhead,  nor mortal  men have  reached,  nor yet the Waters.   
Both  Earth  and Heaven  in vigour  he surpasseth.  May Indra,  girt by Maruts,  he our succour.   
16 The red and tawny  mare,  blaze−marked,  high standing,  celestial  who,  to bring  Rjrasva  riches,   
Drew  at the pole the chariot  yoked  with stallions,  joyous,  among  the hosts  of men was noted.   
17 The Varsagiras  unto thee,  O Indra,  the Mighty  One,  sing forth  this laud to please  thee,   
Rjrasva  with his fellows,  Ambarisa,  Suradhas , Sahadeva,  Bhayamana.   
18 He, much  invoked,  hath slain  Dasyus  and Simyus,  after his wont,  and laid them  low with arrows.   
The mighty  Thunderer  with his fair−complexioned  friends  won the land,  the sunlight,  and the waters.   
19 May Indra  evermore  be our protector,  and unimperilled  may we win the booty.   
This prayer  of ours may Varuna  grant,  and Mitra,  and Aditi  and Sindhu,  Earth  and Heaven.   
 
HYMN  CI. Indra.  
1. SING,  with oblation,  praise  to him who maketh  glad,  who with Rjisvan  drove  the dusky  brood  away.   
Fain for help,  him the strong  whose  right  hand  wields  the bolt, him girt by Maruts  we invoke  to be our 
Friend.   
2 Indra,  who with triumphant  wrath  smote  Vyamsa  down,  and Sambara,  and Pipru  the unrighteous  one;  
Who  extirpated  Susna  the insatiate,  him girt by Maruts  we invoke  to be our Friend.   
3 He whose  great  work  of manly  might  is heaven  and earth,  and Varuna  and Surya  keep  his holy law;  
Indra,  whose  law the rivers  follow  as they flow,−him  girt by Maruts  we invoke  to be our Friend.   
4 He who is Lord  and Master  of the steeds  and kine,  honoured  −the firm and sure−  at every  holy act;  
Stayer  even  of the strong  who pours  no offering  out, −him  girt by Maruts  we invoke  to be our Friend.   
5 He who is Lord  of all the world  that moves  and breathes,  who for the Brahman  first before  all found  the 
Cows;   
Indra  who cast the Dasyus  down  beneath  his feet,−him  girt by Maruts  we invoke  to be our Friend.   
6 Whom  cowards  must  invoke  and valiant  men of war, invoked  by those  who conquer  and by those  who f
lee;  
Indra,  to whom  all beings  turn their constant  thought,−him  girt by Maruts  we invoke  to be our Friend.   
7 Refulgent  in the Rudras'  region  he proceeds,  and with the Rudras  through  the wide  space  speeds  the Da
me.  
The hymn  of praise  extols  Indra  the far−renowned:  him girt by Maruts  we invoke  to be our Friend.   
8 O girt by Maruts,  whether  thou delight  thee in loftiest  gathering−place  or lowly  dwelling,   
Come  thence  unto our rite, true boon−best−ower:  through  love of thee have  we prepared  oblations.   
 
9 We, fain for thee,  strong Indra,  have pressed  Soma,  and, O thou sought  with prayer,  have  made  oblationRig Veda – English Translation  
s.  
Now  at this sacrifice,  with all thy Maruts,  on sacred  grass,  O team−borne  God,  rejoice  thee.   
10 Rejoice  thee with thine  own Bay Steeds,  O Indra,  unclose  thy jaws and let thy lips be open.   
Thou  with the fair cheek,  let thy Bay Steeds  bring  thee:  gracious  to us, he pleased  with our oblation.   
11 Guards  of the camp  whose  praisers  are the Maruts,  may we through  Indra,  get ourselves  the booty.   
This prayer  of ours may Varuna  grant, and Mitra,  and Aditi  and Sindhu,  Earth  and Heaven.   
 
HYMN  CII. Indra.  
1. To thee the Mighty  One I bring  this mighty  hymn,  for thy desire  hath been  gratified  by my laud.   
In Indra,  yea in him victorious  through  his strength,  the Gods  have  joyed  at feast and when  the Soma  flow
ed.  
2 The Seven  Rivers  bear his glory  far and wide,  and heaven  and sky and earth  display  his comely  form.   
The Sun and Moon  in change  alternate  run their course,  that we, O Indra,  may behold  and may have  faith.
  
3 Maghavan,  grant  us that same  car to bring  us spoil,  thy conquering  car in which  we joy in shock  of fight
.  
Thou,  Indra,  whom  our hearts  praise  highly  in the war, grant  shelter,  Maghavan,  to us who love thee well.
  
4 Encourage  thou our side in every  fight:  may we, with thee for our ally, conquer  the foeman's  host.   
Indra,  bestow  on us joy and felicity  break  down,  O Maghavan,  the vigour  of our foes.   
5 For here in divers  ways  these  men invoking  thee,  holder  of treasures,  sing hymns  to win thine  aid.  
Ascend  the car that thou mayest  bring  spoil  to us, for, Indra,  thy fixt winneth  the victory.   
6 His arms  win kine,  his power  is boundless  in each act best, with a hundred  helps  waker  of battle's  din  
Is Indra:  none  may rival him in mighty  strength.  Hence,  eager  for the spoil  the people  call on him.  
7 Thy glory,  Maghavan,  exceeds  a hundred  yea, more  than a hundred,  than a thousand  mid the folk,  
The great  bowl  hath inspirited  thee boundlessly:  so mayst  thou slay the Vrtras  breaker−down  of forts!   
8 Of thy great  might  there  is a three counterpart,  the three  earths,  Lord  men and the three  realms  of light.   
Above  this whole  world,  Indra,  thou hast waxen  great:  without  a foe art thou,  nature,  from  of old.  
9 We invocate  thee first among  the Deities:  thou hast become  a mighty  Conquer  in fight.   
May Indra  fill with spirit  this our singer's  heart,  and make  our car impetuous,  foremost  in attack.   
10 Thou  hast prevailed,  and hast not kept the booty  back,  in trifling  battles  in those  of great  account.   
We make  thee keen,  the Mighty  One,  succour us: inspire  us, Maghavan,  when  we defy the foe.  
11 May Indra  evermore  be our Protector,  and unimperilled  may we win the booty.   
This prayer  of ours may Vartuna  grant  and Mitra,  and Aditi  and Sindhu,  Earth  and Heaven.   
 
HYMN  CIII. Indra.  
1. THAT  highest Indra−power  of thine  is distant:  that which  is here sages  possessed  aforetime.   
This one is on the earth,  in heaven  the other,  and both unite  as flag with flag in battle.   
2 He spread  the wide  earth  out and firmly  fixed  it, smote  with his thunderbolt  and loosed  the waters.   
Maghavan  with his puissance  struck  down  Ahi, rent Rauhipa  to death  and slaughtered  Vyarnsa.   
3 Armed  with his bolt and trusting  in his prowess  he wandered  shattering  the forts of Dasas.   
Cast thy dart, knowing,  Thunderer,  at the Dasy u; increase  the Arya's  might  and glory,  Indra.   
4 For him who thus hath taught  these  human  races,  Maghavan,  bearing  a fame−worthy  title,  
Thunderer,  drawing  nigh to slay the Dasyus,  hath given  himself  the name  of Son for glory.   
5 See this abundant  wealth  that he possesses,  and put your trust in Indra's  hero vigour.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
He found  the cattle,  and he found  the horses,  he found  the plants,  the forests  and the waters.   
6 To him the truly  strong,  whose  deeds  are many,  to him the strong  Bull let us pour the Soma.   
The Hero,  watching  like a thief in ambush,  goes parting  the possessions  of the godless.   
7 Well  didst  thou do that hero deed,  O Indra,  in waking  with thy bolt the slumbering  Ahi.  
in thee,  delighted,  Dames  divine  rejoiced  them,  the flying  Maruts  and all Gods  were  joyful.   
8 As thou hast smitten  Susna,  Pipru,  Vrtra  and Kuyava,  and Sambara's  forts O Indra.   
This prayer  of ours may Varuna  grant,  and Mitra,  and Aditi  and Sindhu,  Earth  and Heaven.   
 
HYMN  CIV. Indra.  
1. THE  altar hath been  made  for thee to rest on: come  like a panting  courser  and be seated.   
Loosen  thy flying  Steeds,  set free thy Horses  who bear thee swiftly  nigh at eve and morning.   
2 These  men have  come  to Indra  for assistance:  shall  he not quickly  come  upon  these  pathways?   
May the Gods  quell  the fury of the Dasa,  and may they lead our folk to happy  fortune.   
3 He who hath only wish  as his possession  casts  on himself,  casts  foam  amid  the waters.   
Both  wives  of Kuyava  in milk have  bathed  them:  may they be drowned  within  the depth  of Sipha.   
4 This hath his kinship  checked  who lives  beside  us: with ancient  streams  forth  speeds  and rules  the Hero,  
Anjasi,  Kulisi,  and Virapatni,  delighting  him, bear milk upon  their waters.   
5 Soon  as this Dasyu's  traces  were  discovered,  as she who knows  her home,  he sought  the dwelling.   
Now  think  thou of us, Maghavan,  nor cast us away  as doth a profligate  his treasure.   
6 Indra,  as such,  give us a share  of sunlight,  of waters,  sinlessness,  and reputation.   
Do thou no harm  to our yet unborn  offspring:  our trust is in thy mighty  Indra−power.   
7 Now  we, I think,  in thee as such have  trusted:  lead us on, Mighty  One,  to ample  riches.   
In no unready  house  give us, O Indra  invoked  of many,  food and drink  when  hungry.   
8 Slay us not, Indra;  do not thou forsake  us: steal not away the joys which  we delight  in.  
Rend  not our unborn  brood,  strong  Lord  of Bounty!  our vessels  with the life that is within  them.   
9 Come  to us; they have  called  thee Soma−lover:  here is the pressed  juice.  Drink  thereof  for rapture.   
Widely−capacious,  pour it down  within  thee,  and, invocated,  hear us like a Father.   
 
HYMN  CV. Visvedevas.  
1. WITHIN  the waters  runs the Moon,  he with the beauteous  wings  in heaven.   
Ye lightnings  with your golden  wheels,  men find not your abiding−place.  Mark  this my woe,  ye Earth  and 
Heaven.   
2 Surely  men crave  and gain their wish.  Close  to her husband  clings  the wife.   
And,  in embraces  intertwined,  both give and take the bliss of love.  Mark  this my woe,  ye Earth  and Heave
n.  
3 O never  may that light , ye Gods,  fall from  its station  in the sky.  
Ne'er  fail us one like Soma  sweet,  the spring  of our felicity.  Mark  this my woe ye Earth  and Heaven.   
4 I ask the last of sacrifice.  As envoy  he shall  tell it forth.   
Where  is the ancient  law divine?  Who  is its new diffuser  now?  Mark  this my woe,  ye Earth  and Heaven.   
5 Ye Gods  who yonder  have  your home  in the three  lucid  realms  of heaven,   
What  count  ye truth  and what  untruth?  Where  is mine  ancient  call on you?  Mark  this my woe,  ye Earth  an
d 
Heaven.   
6 What  is your firm support  of Law? What  Varuna's  observant  eye?  
How  may we pass the wicked  on the path of mighty  Aryaman?  Mark  this my woe,  ye Earth  and Heaven.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
7 1 am the man who sang of old full many  a laud when  Soma  flowed.   
Yet torturing  cares  consume  me as the wolf assails  the thirsty deer.  Mark  this my woe,  ye Earth  and Heav
en.  
8 Like rival wives  on every  side enclosing  ribs oppress  me sore.   
O Satakratu,  biting  cares  devour  me, singer  of thy praise,  as rats devour  the weaver's  threads.  Mark  this m
y 
woe,  ye Earth  and Heaven.   
9 Where those  seven  rays are shining,  thence  my home  and family  extend.   
This Trta Aptya  knoweth  well,  and speaketh  out for brotherhood.  Mark  this my woe,  ye Earth  and Heaven
.  
10 May those  five Bulls  which  stand  on high full in the midst  of mighty  heaven,   
Having together  swiftly  borne  my praises  to the Gods,  return.  Mark  this my woe,  ye Earth  and Heaven.   
11 High  in the mid ascent  of heaven  those  Birds  of beauteous  pinion  sit.  
Back  from  his path they drive  the wolf as he would  cross  the restless  floods.  Mark  this my woe,  ye Earth  
and 
Heaven.   
12 Firm  is this new−wrought  hymn  of praise,  and meet  to be told forth,  O Gods.   
 
The flowing  of the floods  is Law,  Truth  is the Sun's  extended  light.  Mark  this my woe,  ye Earth  and Heav
en.  
13 Worthy  of laud,  O Agni,  is that kinship  which  thou hast with Gods.   
Here  seat thee like a man:  most  wise,  bring  thou the Gods  for sacrifice.  Mark  this my woe,  ye Earth  and 
Heaven.   
14 Here  seated,  man−like  as a priest  shall  wisest  Agni  to the Gods   
Speed  onward  our oblations,  God among the Gods,  intelligent.  Mark  this my woe,  ye Earth  and Heaven.   
15 Varuna  makes  the holy prayer.  To him who finds  the path we pray.   
He in the heart  reveals  his thought.  Let sacred  worship  rise anew.  Mark  this my woe,  ye Earth  and Heaven
.  
16 That pathw ay of the Sun in heaven,  made  to be highly  glorified,   
Is not to be transgressed,  O Gods.  O mortals,  ye behold  it not. Mark  this my woe,  ye Earth  and Heaven.   
17 Trta,  when  buried  in the well,  calls on the Gods  to succour  him.  
That call of his Brhaspati  heard and released  him from  distress.  Mark  this my woe,  ye Earth  and Heaven.   
18 A ruddy  wolf beheld  me once,  as I was faring  on my path.   
He, like a carpenter  whose  back  is aching  crouched  and slunk  away.  Mark  this my woe,  ye Earth  and Hea
ven.  
19 Through  this our song  may we, allied  with Indra,  with all our heroes  conquer  in the battle.   
This prayer  of ours may Varuna  grant,  and Mitra,  and Aditi  and Sindhu,  Earth  and Heaven.   
 
HYMN  CVI. Visvedevas.  
1. CALL  we for aid on Indra,  Mitra,  Varuna  and Agni  and the Marut  host and Aditi.   
Even  as a chariot  from  a difficult  ravine,  bountiful  Vasus,  rescue  us from  all distress.   
2 Come  ye Adityas  for our full prosperity,  in conquests  of the foe, ye Gods,  bring  joy to us.  
Even  as a chariot  from  a difficult  ravine,  bountiful  Vasus,  rescue  us from  all distress.   
3 May the most  glorious  Fathers  aid us, and the two Goddesses,  Mothers  of the Gods,  who strengthen  La
w.  
Even  as a chariot  from  a difficult  ravine,  bountiful  Vasus,  rescue  us from  all distress.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
4 To mighty  Narasamsa,  strengthening  his might,  to Pusan,  ruler  over men,  we pray with hymns.   
Even  as a chariot  from  a difficult  ravine,  bountiful  Vasus,  rescue  us from  all distress.   
5 Brhaspati,  make  us evermore  an easy path:  we crave  what  boon  thou hast for men in rest and stir.  
Like as a chariot  from  a difficult  ravine,  bountiful  Vasus,  rescue  us from  all distress.   
6 Sunk  in the pit the Rsi Kutsa  called,  to aid, Indra  the Vrtra−slayer,  Lord  of power  and might.   
Even  as a chariot  from  a difficult  ravine,  bountiful  Vasus,  rescue  us from  all distress.   
7 May Aditi  the Goddess  guard  us with the Gods:  may the protecting  God keep  us with ceaseless  care.   
This prayer  of ours may Varuna  grant,  and Mitra,  and Aditi  and Sindhu,  Earth  and Heaven.   
 
HYMN  CVII.  Visvedevas.  
1. THE  sacrifice  obtains  the Gods'  acceptance:  be graciously  inclined  to us, Adityas.  Hit
herward  let your favour  be directed,  and be our best deliverer  from  trouble.  2 By praise
−songs  of Angirases  exalted,  may!he  Gods  come  to us with their protection.  May Indra 
with his powers,  Maruts  with Maruts,  Aditi  with Adityas  grant  us shelter.  3 This laud of
 ours may Varuna  and Indra,  Aryaman  Agni,  Savitar  find pleasant.  This prayer'  of ours 
may Varuna  grant,  and Mitra,  and Aditi  and Sindhu,  Earth  and Heaven.  
 
HYMN  CVIII. Indra−Agni.  
1. ON that most  wondrous  car of yours,  O Indra  and Agni,  which  looks  round  on all things  living,   
Take  ye your stand  and come  to us together,  and drink  libations  of the flowing  Soma.   
2 As vast as all this world  is in its compass,  deep  as it is, with its far−stretching  surface,   
So let this Soma  be, Indra  and Agni,  made  for your drinking  till your soul be sated.   
3 For ye have  won a blessed  name  together:  yea, with one aim ye strove,  O Vrtra−slayers.   
 
So Indra−Agni,  seated  here together,  pour in, ye Mighty  Ones,  the mighty  Soma.   
4 Both  stand  adorned,  when  fires are duly kindled,  spreading  the sacred  grass,  with lifted  ladles.   
Drawn  by strong  Soma  juice  poured  forth  around  us, come,  Indra−Agni,  and display  your favour.   
5 The brave  deeds  ye have  done,  Indra  and Agni,  the forms  ye have  displayed  and mighty  exploits,   
The ancient  and auspicious  bonds  of friendship,−for  sake of these  drink  of the flowing  Soma.   
6 As first I said when  choosing  you, in battle  we must  contend  with Asuras  for this Soma.   
So came  ye unto this my true conviction,  and drank  libations  of the flowing  Soma.   
7 If in your dwelling,  or with prince  or Brahman,  ye, Indra−Agni,  Holy  Ones,  rejoice  you,  
Even  frorn  thence,  ye mighty  Lords,  come  hither,  and drink  libation  of the flowing  Soma.   
8 If with,  the Yadus,  Turvasas,  ye sojourn,  with Druhyus,  Anus,  Purus,  Indra−Agni!   
Even  from  thence,  ye mighty  Lords,  come  hither,  and drink  libations  of the flowing  Soma.   
9 Whether,  O Indra−Agni,  ye be dwelling  in lowest  earth,  in centra l, or in highest.   
Even  from  thence,  ye mighty  Lords,  come  hither,  and drink  libations  of the flowing  Soma.   
10 Whether,  O Indra−Agni,  ye be dwelling  in highest  earth,  in central,  or in lowest,   
Even  from  thence,  ye mighty  Lords,  come  hither,  and drink  libations  of the flowing  Soma.   
11 Whether  ye be in heaven,  O Indra−Agni,  on earth,  on mountains,  in the herbs,  or waters,   
Even  from  thence,  ye mighty  Lords,  come  hither,  and drink  libations  of the flowing  Soma.   
12 If, when  the Sun to the mid−heaven  hath mounted,  ye take delight  in food,  O Indra−Agni,   
Even  from  thence,  ye mighty  Lords,  come  hither,  and drink  libations  of the flowing  Soma.   
13 Thus  having  drunk  your fill of our libation,  win us all kinds  of wealth,  Indra  and Agni.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
This prayer  of ours may Varuna grant,  and Mitra,  and Aditi  and Sindhu,  Earth  and Heaven.   
 
HYMN  CIX. Indra−Agni.  
1. LONGING  for weal  I looked  around,  in spirit,  for kinsmen,  Indra−Agni,  or for brothers.   
No providence  but yours  alone  is with me so have  I wrought  for you this hymn  for succour.   
2 For I have  heard  that ye give wealth  more  freely  than worthless  son−in−law  or spouse's  brother.   
So offering  to you this draught  of Soma,  I make  you this new hymn,  Indra  and Agni,   
3 Let us not break  the cords:  with this petition  we strive  to gain the powers  of our forefathers.   
For Indra−Agni  the strong  drops  are joyful−,  for here in the bowl's  lap are both the press−stones.   
4 For you the bowl  divine,  Indra  and Agni,  presses  the Soma  gladly  to delight  you.  
With  hands  auspicious  and fair arms,  ye Asvins,  haste,  sprinkle  it with sweetness  in the waters.   
5 You,  I have  heard,  were  mightiest,  Indra−Agni,  when  Vrtra  fell and when  the spoil  was parted.   
Sit at this sacrifice,  ye ever active,  on the strewn  grass,  and with the juice  delight  you.  
6 Surpassing  all men where  they shout  for battle,  ye Twain  exceed  the earth  and heaven  in greatness.   
Greater  are ye than rivers  and than mountains,  O Indra−Agni,  and all things  beside  them.   
7 Bring  wealth  and give it, ye whose  arms  wield  thunder:  Indra  and Agni,  with your powers  protect  us.  
Now  of a truth  these  be the very sunbeams  wherewith  our fathers  were  of old united.   
8 Give,  ye who shatter  forts,  whose  hands  wield  thunder:  Indra  and Agni,  save us in our battles.   
This prayer  of ours may Varuna  grant, and Mitra,  and Aditi  and Sindhu,  Earth  and Heaven.   
 
HYMN  CX. Rbhus.  
1. THE  holy work  I wrought  before  is wrought  again:  my sweetest  hymn  is sung  to celebrate  your praise.   
Here,  O ye Rbhus,  is this sea for all the Gods:  sate you with Soma  offered  with the hallowing  word.   
2 When,  seeking  your enjoyment  onward  from  afar, ye, certain  of my kinsmen,  wandered  on your way,   
Sons  of Sudhanvan,  after your long journeying,  ye came  unto the home  of liberal  Savitar.   
3 Savitar  therefore  gave you immortality,  because  ye came  proclaiming  him whom  naught  can hide;   
And this the drinking−chalice  of the Asura,  which  till that time was one, ye made  to be fourfold.   
4 When  they had served  with zeal at sacrifice  as priests,  they,  mortal  as they were,  gained  immortalit y.  
 
The Rbhus,  children  of Sudhanvan,  bright  as suns,  were  in a year's  course  made  associate  with prayers.   
5 The Rbhus,  with a rod measured,  as 'twere  a field,  the single  sacrificial  chalice.  wide  of mouth,   
Lauded  of all who saw, praying  for what  is best, desiring  glorious  fame  among  Immortal  Gods.   
6 As oil in ladles,  we through  knowledge  will present  unto the Heroes  of the firmament  our hymn,−   
The Rbhus  who came  near with this great  Father's  speed,  and rose to heaven's  high sphere  to cat the 
strengthe ning food.   
7 Rbhu  to us is Indra  freshest  in his might,  Rbhu  with powers  and wealth  is giver  of rich gifts.   
Gods,  through  your favour  may we on the happy  day quell  the attacks  of those  who pour no offerings  fort
h.  
8 Out of a skin,  O Rbhus,  once  ye forme d a cow,  and brought  the mother  close  unto her calf again.   
Sons  of Sudhanvan,  Heroes,  with surpassing  skill ye made  your aged  Parents  youthful  as before.   
9 Help  us with strength  where  spoil  is won,  O Indra:  joined  with the gbhus  give us varied  bounty.   
This prayer  of ours may Varuna  grant,  and Mitra,  and Aditi  and Sindhu,  Earth  and Heaven.   
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  CXI. Rbhus.  
1. WORKING  with skill they wrought  the lightly  rolling  car: they wrought  the Bays  who bear Indra  and 
bring  great  gifts.   
The Rbhus  for their Parent s made  life young  again;  and fashioned  for the calf a mother  by its side.  
2 For sacrifice  make  for us active  vital power  for skill and wisdom  food with noble  progeny.   
Grant  to our company  this power  most  excellent,  that with a family  all−heroic  we may dwell.   
3 Do ye, O Rbhus,  make  prosperity  for us, prosperity  for car, ye Heroes,  and for steed.   
Grant  us prosperity  victorious  evermore,   
conquering  foes in battle,  strangers  or akin.   
4 Indra,  the Rbhus'  Lord,  I invocate  for aid, the Rbhus, Vajas,  Maruts  to the Soma  draught.   
Varuna,  Mitra,  both,  yea, and the Asvins  Twain:  let them  speed  us to wealth,  wisdom,  and victory.   
5 May Rbhu  send prosperity  for battle,  may Vaja  conquering  in the fight  protect  us.  
This prayer  of ours may Varuna  grant, and Mitra,  and Aditi  and Sindhu,  Earth  and Heaven.   
 
HYMN  CXII.  Asvins.  
1 To give first thought  to them,  I worship  Heaven  and Earth,  and Agni,  fair bright  glow,  to hasten  their 
approach.   
Come  hither  unto us, O Asvins,  with those  aids wherewith  in fight  ye speed  the war−cry  to the spoil.   
2 Ample,  unfailing,  they have mounted  as it were  an eloquent  car that ye may think  of us and give.   
Come  hither  unto us, O Asvins,  with those  aids wherewith  ye help our thoughts  to further  holy acts.  
3 Ye by the might which  heavenly  nectar  giveth  you are in supreme  dominion  Lords  of all these  folk.  
Come  hither  unto us, O Asvins,  with those  aids wherewith  ye, Heroes,  made  the barren  cow give milk.   
4 The aids wherewith  the Wanderer  through  his offipring's  might,  or the Two−Mothered  Son shows  swift
est 
mid the swift;   
Wherewith  the sapient  one acquired  his triple  lore,−Come  hither  unto us, O Asvins,  with those  aids.  
5 Wherewith  ye raised  from  waters,  prisoned  and fast bound,  Rebha,  and Vandana  to look upon  the light;   
Wherewith  ye succoured  Kapva  as he strove  to win,−Come  hither  unto us, O Asvins,  with those  aids.  
6 Wherewith  ye rescued  Antaka  when  languishing  deep  in the pit, and Bhujyu  with unfailing  help.   
And comforted  Karkandhu,  Vayya,  in their woe,−Come  hither  unto us, O Asvins,  with those  aids.  
7 Wherewith  ye gave gucanti  wealth  and happy  home,  and made  the fiery  pit friendly  for Atri's  sake;   
Wherewith  ye guarded  Purukutsa,  Prsnigu,  −Come  hither  unto us, O Agvin;,  with those  aids.  
8 Mighty  Ones,  with what  powers  ye gave Paravrj  aid what  time ye made  the blind  and lame  to see and w
alk;  
Wherewith  ye set at liberty  the swallowed  quail,−Come  hither  unto us, O Asvins,  with those  aids.  
9 Wherewith  ye quickened  the most  sweet  exhaustless  flood,  and comforted  Vasis tha, ye who ne'er  decay;
  
And to Srutarya,  Kutsa,  Narya  gave your help,−Come  hither  unto us, O Asvins,  with those  aids.  
 
10 Wherewith  ye helped,  in battle  of a thousand  spoils,  Vispala  seeking  booty,  powerless  to move.   
Wherewith  ye guarded  friendly  Vaga,  Asva's  son,−Come  hither  unto us, O Asvins,  with those  aids.  
11 Whereby  the cloud,  ye Bounteous  Givers,  shed sweet  rain for Dirghasravas,  for the merchant  Ausija,   
Wherewith  ye helped  Kaksivan,  singer  of your praise,−Come  hither  unto us, O Asvins,  with those aids.  
12 Wherewith  ye made  Rasa  swell  full with water−floods,  and urged  to victory  the car without  a horse;   
Wherewith  Trisoka  drove  forth  his recovered  cows,−Come  hither  unto us, O Asvins,  with those  aids.  
13 Wherewith  ye, compass  round  the Sun when  far away,  strengthened  Manddatar  in his tasks  as lord of Rig Veda – English Translation  
lands,   
And to sage Bharadvija  gave protecting  help,−Come  hither  unto us, O Asvins,  with those  aids.  
14 Wherewith,  when  Sambara  was slain,  ye guarded  well great  Atithigva,  Divodisa,  Kasoju,   
And Trasadasyu  when  the forts were  shattered  down,−Come  hither  unto us, O Asvins,  with those  aids.  
15 Wherewith  ye honoured  the great  drinker  Vamra,  and Upastuta  and Kali when  he gained  his wife,   
And lent to Vyasva.  and to Prthi  favouring  help,−Come  hither  unto us, O Asvins,  with those  aids.  
16 Wherewith,  O Heroes,  ye vouchsafed  deliverance  to Sayu,  Atri, and to Manu  long ago;  
Wherewith  ye shot your shafts  in Syumarasmi's  cause.−Come  hither  unto us, O Asvins,  with those  aids.  
17 Wherewith  Patharva,  in his majesty  of form,  shone  in his course  like to a gathered  kindled  fire;  
Wherewith  ye helped  Suryata  in the mighty  fray,−Come  hither  unto us, O Asvins,  with those  aids.  
18 Wherewith,  Angirases!  ye triumphed  in your heart,  and onward  went  to liberate  the flood  of milk;   
Wherewith  ye helped  the hero Manu  with new strength,−Come  hither  unto us, O Asvins,  with those  aids.  
19 Wherewith  ye brought  awife  for Vimada  to wed,  wherewith  ye freely  gave the ruddy  cows  away;   
Wherewith  ye brought  the host of kind Gods  to Sudas−Come  hither  unto us, O Asvins,  with those  aids.  
20 Wherewith  ye bring  great  bliss to him who offers  gifts,  wherewith  ye have  protected  Bhujyu,  Adhrigu,   
And good  and gracious  Subhara  and Rtastup,−Come  hither  unto us, O Asvins,  with those  aids.  
21 Wherewith  ye served  Krsanu  where  the shafts  were  shot,  and helped  the young  man's  horse  to swiftnes
s in 
the race;   
Wherewith  ye bring  delicious  honey  to the bees,−Come  hither  unto us, O Asvins,  with those  aids.  
22 Wherewith  ye speed  the hero as he fights  for kine in hero battle,  in the strife  for land and sons,   
Wherewith  ye safely  guard  his horses  and his car,−Come  hither  unto us, O Asvins  with those  aids.  
23 Wherewith  ye, Lords  of Hundred  Powers,  helped  Kutsa,  son of Aduni,  gave Turviti  and Dabhiti  streng
th,  
Favoured  Dhvasanti  and lent Purusanti  help,−Come  hither  unto us, O Asvins,  with those  aids.  
24 Make  ye our speech  effectual,  O ye Asvins,  and this our hymn,  ye mighty  Wonder−Workers.   
In luckless  game  I call on you for succour  . strengthen  us also on the field of battle.   
25 With,  undiminished  blessings,  O ye Asvins,  for evermore  both night  and day protect  us.  
This prayer  of ours may Varuna  grant,  and Mitra,  and Aditi  and Sindhu,  Earth  and Heaven.   
 
HYMN  CXIII.  Dawn.  
1. This light is come,  amid  all lights  the fairest;  born is the brilliant,  far−extending  brightness.   
Night,  sent away  for Savitar's  uprising,  hath yielded  up a birth−place  for the Morning.   
2 The Fair, the Bright  is come  with her white  offspring;  to her the Dark  One hath resigned  her dwelling.   
Akin,  immortal,  following  each other,  changing  their colours  both the heavens  move  onward.   
3 Common,  unending  is the Sisters'  pathway;  taught  by the Gods,  alternately  they travel.   
Fair−formed,  of different  hues and yet one−minded,  Night  and Daw n clash  not, neither  do they travel.   
4 Bright  leader  of glad sounds,  our eyes behold  her; splendid  in hue she hath unclosed  the portals.   
She, stirring  up the world,  hath shown  us riches:  Dawn  hath awakened  every  living  creature.   
5 Rich  Dawn,  she sets afoot the coiled−up  sleeper,  one for enjoyment,  one for wealth  or worship,   
Those  who saw little for extended  vision.  All living  creatures  hath the Dawn  awakened.   
6 One to high sway,  one to exalted  glory,  one to pursue  his gain,  and one his labour:   
All to regard  their different  vocations,  all moving  creatures  hath the Dawn  awakened.   
7 We see her there,  the Child  of Heaven  apparent,  the young  Maid,  flushing  in her shining  raiment.   
 
Thou  soyran  Lady  of all earthly  treasure,  flush  on us here,  auspicious  Dawn , this morning.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
8 She first of endless  morns  to come  hereafter,  follows  the path of morns  that have  departed.   
Dawn,  at her rising,  urges  forth  the living  him who is dead  she wakes  not from  his slumber.   
9 As thou,  Dawn,  hast caused  Agni  to be kindled,  and with the Sun's  eye hast revealed  creation.   
And hast awakened  men to offer  worship,  thou hast performed,  for Gods,  a noble  service.   
10 How  long a time,  and they shall  be together,−Dawns  that have  shone  and Dawns  to shine  hereafter?   
She yearns  for forme r Dawns  with eager  longing,  and goes forth  gladly  shining  with the others.   
11 Gone  are the men who in the days before  us looked  on the rising  of the earlier  Morning.   
We, we the living,  now behold  her brightness  and they come  nigh who shall  hereafter  see her.  
12 Foe−chaser,  born of Law,  the Law's  protectress,  joy−giver  waker  of all pleasant  voices,   
Auspicious,  bringing  food for Gods'  enjoyment,  shine  on us here,  most  bright,  O Dawn,  this morning.   
13 From  days eternal  hath Dawn  shone,  the Goddess,  and shows this light to−day,  endowed  with riches.   
So will she shine  on days to come  immortal  she moves  on in her own strength,  undecaying.   
14 In the sky's  borders  hath she shone  in splendour:  the Goddess  hath thrown  off the veil of darkness.   
Awakening  the world with purple  horses,  on her well−harnessed  chariot  Dawn  approaches.   
15 Bringing  all life−sustaining  blessings  with her, showing  herself  she sends  forth  brilliant  lustre.   
Last of the countless  mornings  that have  vanished,  first of bright  morns  to come  hath Dawn  arisen.   
16 Arise!  the breath,  the life, again  hath reached  us: darkness  hath passed  away  and light approacheth.   
She for the Sun hath left a path to travel  we have  arrived  where  men prolong  existence.   
17 Singing  the praises  of refulgent  Mornings  with his hymn's  web the priest,  the poet rises.   
Shine  then to−day,  rich Maid,  on him who lauds  thee,  shine  down  on us the gift of life and offipring.   
18 Dawns  giving  sons all heroes,  kine and horses,  shining  upon  the man who brings  oblations,−   
These  let the Soma−presser  gain when  ending  his glad songs  louder  than the voice  of Vayu.   
19 Mother  of Gods,  Aditi's  forui  of glory,  ensign  of sacrifice,  shine  forth  exalted.   
Rise up, bestowing  praise  on our devotion  all−bounteous,  niake  us chief  among  the peopl e.  
20 Whatever  splendid  wealth  the Dawns  bring  with them  to bless  the man who offers  praise  and worship,   
Even  that may Mitra,  Varuna  vouchsafe  us, and Aditi  and Sindhu,  Earth  and Heaven.   
 
HYMN  CXIV.  Rudra.  
1. To the strong  Rudra  bring  we these  our songs of praise,  to him the Lord  of Heros  with the braided  hair,  
That it be well with all our cattle  and our men,  that in this village  all he healthy  and well−fed.   
2 Be gracious  unto us, O Rudra,  bring  us joy: thee,  Lord  of Heroes,  thee with reverence  will we serve.   
Whatever  health  and strength  our father  Manu  won by sacrifice  may we, under  thy guidance,  gain.   
3 By worship  of the Gods  may we, O Bounteous  One,  O Rudra,  gain thy grace,  Ruler  of valiant  men.   
Come  to our families,  bringing  them  bliss:  may we, whose  heroes  are uninjured,  bring  thee sacred  gifts,   
4 Hither  we call for aid the wise,  the wanderer,  impetuous  Rudra,  perfecter  of sacri  fice.  
May he repel  from  us the anger  of the Gods:  verily  we desire  his favourable  grace.   
5 Him with the braided  hair we call with reverence  down,  the wild−boar  of the sky, the red, the dazzling  
shape.   
May he, his hand  filled  full of sovran  medicines,  grant  us protection,  shelter,  and a home  secure.   
6 To him the Maruts'  Father  is this hymn  addressed,  to strengthen  Rudra's might,  a song  more  sweet  than 
sweet.   
Grant  us, Immortal  One,  the food which  mortals  eat: be gracious  unto me, my seed,  my progeny.   
7 O Rudra,  harm  not either  great  or small  of us, harm  not the growing  boy, harm  not the full−grown  man.   
Slay not a sire among  us, slay no mother  here,  and to our own dear bodies,  Rudra,  do not harm.   
8 Harm  us not, Rudra,  in our seed and progeny,  harm  us not in the living,  nor in cows  or steeds,   
Slay not our heroes  in the fury of thy wrath.  Bringing  oblations  evermore  we call to thee.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
9 Even  as a herdsman  I have  brought  thee hymns  of praise:  O Father  of the Maruts,  give us happiness,   
Blessed  is thy most  favouring  benevolence,  so, verily,  do we desire  thy saving  help.   
 
10 Far be thy dart that killeth  men or cattle:  thy bliss be with us, O thou Lord  of Heroes.  Be graci
ous unto us, O God,  and bless  us, and then vouchsafe  us doubly−strong  protection.  11 We, seekin
g help,  have  spoken  and adored  him: may Rudra,  girt by Maruts,  hear our calling.  This prayer  of 
ours may Varun a grant,  and Mitra,  and Aditi  and Sindhu,  Earth  and Heaven.  
 
HYMN  CXV.  Surya.  
1. THE  brilliant  presence  of the Gods  hath risen,  the eye of Mitra,  Varuna  and Agni.   
The soul of all that moveth  not or moveth,  the Sun hath filled  the air and earth  and heave n.  
2 Like as a young  man followeth  a maiden,  so doth the Sun the Dawn,  refulgent  Goddess:   
Where  pious  men extend  their generations,  before  the Auspicious  One for happy  fortune.   
3 Auspicious  are the Sun's Bay−coloured  Horses,  bright,  changing  hues,  meet  for our shouts  of triumph.   
Bearing  our prayers,  die sky's  ridge  have  they mounted,  and in a moment  speed  round  earth  and heaven.   
4 This is the Godhead,  this might  of Surya:  he hath withdrawn  what  sprea d o'er work  unfinished.   
When  he hath loosed  his Horses  from  their station,  straight  over all Night  spreadeth  out her garment.   
5 In the sky's  lap the Sun this form  assumeth  that Varuna  and Mitra  may behold  it.  
His Bay Steeds  well maintain  his power  etern al, at one time bright  and darksome  at another.   
6 This day, O Gods,  while  Surya  is ascending,  deliver  us from  trouble  and dishonour.   
This prayer  of ours may Varuna  grant,  and Mitra,  and Aditi  and Sindhu,  Earth  and Heaven.   
 
HYMN  CXVI.  Asvins.  
1. I TRIM  like grass  my song  for the Nasatyas  and send their lauds  forth  as the wind  drives  rain−clouds,   
Who,  in a chariot  rapid  as an arrow,  brought  to the youthful  Vimada  a consort.   
2 Borne  on by rapid  steeds  of mighty  pinion,  or proudly  trusting  in the Gods'  incitements.   
That stallion  ass of yours  won,  O Nasatyas,  that thousand  in the race,  in Yama's  contest.   
3 Yea, Asvins,  as a dead  man leaves  his riches,  Tugra  left Bhujyu  in the cloud  of waters.   
Ye brought  him back  in animated  vessels,  traversing  air, unwe tted by the billows.   
4 Bhujyu  ye bore with winged  things,  Nasatyas,  which  for three  nights,  three  days full swiftly  travelled,   
To the sea's farther  shore,  the strand  of ocean,  in three  cars, hundred−footed,  with six horses.   
5 Ye wrought  that hero exploi t in the ocean  which  giveth  no support,  or hold or station,   
What  time ye carried  Bhujyu  to his dwelling,  borne  in a ship with hundred  oars,  O Asvins.   
6 The white  horse  which  of old ye gave Aghasva,  Asvins,  a gift to be his wealth  for ever,−   
Still to be praised  is that your glorious  present,  still to be famed  is the braye  horse  of Pedu.   
7 O Heroes,  ye gave wisdom  to Kaksivan  who sprang  from  Pajra's  line, who sang your praises.   
Ye poured  forth  from  the hoof of your strong  charger  a hundred  jars of wine  as from  a strainer.   
8 Ye warded  off with cold the fire's  fierce  burning;  food very rich in nouripliment  ye furnished.   
Atri, cast downward  in the cavern,  Asvins  ye brought,  with all his people,  forth  to comfort.   
9 Ye lifted  up the well,  O ye Nasatyas,  and set the base on high to open  downward.   
Streams  flowed  for folk of Gotama  who thirsted,  like rain to bring  forth  thousandfold  abundance.   
10 Ye from  the old Cyavana,  O Nasatyas,  stripped,  as 'twere  mail,  the skin upon   
his body,   
Lengthened  his life when  all had left him helpless,  Dasras!  and made  him lord of youthful  maidens.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
11 Worthy  of praise  and worth  the winning,  Heroes,  is that your favouring  succour  O Nasatyas,   
What  time ye, knowing  well his case,  delivered  Vandana  trom the pit like hidden  treasu re.  
12 That mighty  deed  of yours,  for gain,  O Heroes,  as thunder  heraldeth  the rain, I publish,   
When,  by the horse's  head,  Atharvan's  offspring  Dadhyac  made  known  to you the Soma's  sweetness.   
13 In the great  rite the wise dame  called,  Nasatyas,  you, Lords of many  treasures,  to assist  her.  
Ye heard  the weakling's  wife,  as 'twere  an order,  and gave to her a son Hiranyahasta.   
14 Ye from  the wolf's  jaws,  as ye stood  together,  set free the quail,  O Heroes,  O Nasatyas.   
 
Ye, Lords  of many  treasures,  gave the poet his perfect  vision  as he mourned  his trouble.   
15 When  in the time of night,  in Khela's  battle,  a leg was severed  like a wild bird's  pinion,   
Straight  ye gave Vispali  a leg of iron that she might  move  what  time the conflict  opened.   
16 His father  robbed Rjrasva  of his eyesight  who for the she−wolf  slew a hundred  wethers.   
Ye gave him eyes,  Nasatyas,  Wonder−Workers,  Physicians,  that he saw with sight  uninjured.   
17 The Daughter  of the Sun your car ascended,  first reaching  as it were  the goal with cours ers.  
All Deities  within  their hearts  assented,  and ye, Nasatyas,  are close  linked  with glory.   
18 When  to his house  ye came,  to Divodasa,  hasting  to Bharadvaja,  O ye Asvins,   
The car that came  with you brought  splendid  riches:  a porpoise  and a bull were  yoked  together.   
19 Ye, bringing  wealth  with rule, and life with offspring,  life rich in noble  heroes;  O Nasatyas,   
Accordant  came  with strength  to Jahnu's  children  who offered  you thrice  every  day your portion.   
20 Ye bore away  at night  by easy pathways  Jahusa compassed  round  on every  quarter,   
And,  with your car that cleaves  the toe asunder,  Nasatyas  never  decaying!  rent the mountains.   
21 One morn  ye strengthened  Vaga  for the battle,  to gather  spoils  that might  be told in thousands.   
With  Indra  joined  ye drove  away  misfortunes,  yea foes of Prthusravas,  O ye mighty.   
22 From  the deep  well ye raised  on high the water,  so that Rcatka's  son, Sara,  should  drink  it;  
And with your might,  to help the weary  Sayu,  ye made  the barren  cow yield  milk,  Nasatyas.   
23 To Visvaka,  Nasatyas!  son of Krsna,  the righteous  man who sought  your aid and praised  you,  
Ye with your powers  restored,  like some  lost creature,  his son Visnapu  for his eyes to look on.  
24 Asvins,  ye raised,  like Soma  in a ladle  Rebha,  who for ten days and ten nights,  fettered.   
Had lain in cruel  bonds,  immersed  and wounded,  suffering  sore affliction,  in the waters.   
25 1 have  declared  your wondrous  deeds,  O Asvins:  may this be mine,  and many  kine and heroes.   
May I, enjoying  lengthened  life, still seeing,  enter  old age as 'twere  the house  I live in.  
 
HYMN  CXVII.  Asvins.  
1. ASVINS,  your ancient  priest  invites  you hither  to gladden  you with draughts  of meath  of Soma.   
Our gift is on the grass,  our song  apportioned:  with food and strength  come  hither,  O Nasatyas.   
2 That car of yours,  swifter  than thought,  O Asvins,  which  drawn  by brave  steeds  cometh  to the people,   
Whereon  ye seek the dwelling  of the pious,−come  ye thereon  to our abode,  O Heroes.   
3 Ye freed  sage Atri, whom  the Five Tribes  honoured,  from  the strait  pit, ye Heroes  with his people,   
Baffling  the guiles  of the malignant  Dasyu,  repelling  them,  ye Mighty  in succession.   
4 Rebha  the sage,  ye mighty  Heroes,  Asvins!  whom,  like a horse,  vile men had sunk in water,−   
Him,  wounded,  with your wondrous  power  ye rescued:  your exploits  of old time endure  for ever.   
5 Ye brought  forth  Vandana,  ye Wonder−Workers,  for triumph,  like fair gold that hath been  buried,   
Like one who slumbered  in destruction's  bosom,  or like the Sun when  dwelling  in the darkness.   
6 Kaksivan,  Pajra's  son, must  laud that exploit  of yours,  Nasatyas,  Heroes,  ye who wander!   
When  from  the hoof of your strong  horse  ye showered  a hundred  jars of honey  for the people.   
7 To Krsna's  son, to Visvaka  who praised  you, O Heroes,  ye restored  his son Visnapu.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
To Ghosa,  living  in her father's  dwelling,  stricken  in years,  ye gave a husband,  Asvins.   
8 Rusati,  of the mighty  people,  Asvins,  ye gave to Syava  of the line of Kanva.   
This deed  of yours,  ye Strong  Ones  should  be published,  that ye gave glory to the son of Nrsad.   
9 O Asvins,  wearing  many  forms  at pleasure,  on Pedu  ye bestowed  a fleet−foot  courser,   
Strong,  winner  of a thousand  spoils,  resistless  the serpent  slayer,  glorious,  triumphant.   
10 These  glorious  things  are yours,  ye Bounteous  Givers; prayer,  praise  in both worlds  are your habitation
.  
O Asvins,  when  the sons of Paira  call you, send strength  with nourishment  to him who knoweth.   
11 Hymned  with the reverence  of a son, O Asvins  ye Swift  Ones  giving  booty  to the singer,   
Glorified  by Agastya  with devotion,  established  Vispala  again,  Nasatyas.   
12 Ye Sons  of Heaven,  ye Mighty,  whither  went  ye, sought  ye, for his fair praise  the home  of Kdvya.   
When,  like a pitcher  full of gold,  O Asvins,  on the tenth  day ye lifted  up the buried?   
 
13 Ye with the aid of your great  powers,  O Asvins,  restored  to youth  the ancient  man Cyavana.   
The Daughter  of the Sun with all her glory,  O ye Nasatyas,  chose  your car to bear her.  
14 Ye, ever−youthful  Ones,  again  remembered  Tugra,  according  to your ancient  manner:   
With  horses  brown  of hue that flew with swift  wings  ye brought  back Bhujyu  from  the sea of billows.   
15 The son of Tugra  had invoked  you, Asvins;  borne  on he went  uninjured  through  the ocean.   
Ye with your chariot  swift  as thought,  well−harnessed,  carried  him off, O Mighty  Ones,  to safety.   
16 The quail  had invocated  you, O Asvins,  when  from  the wolf's  devouring  jaws ye freed  her.  
With  conquering  car ye cleft the mountain's  ridges:  the offspring  of Visvac  ye killed  with poison.   
17 He whom  for furnishing  a hundred  wethers  to the she−wolf,  his wicked  father  blinded,   
To him, Rjrasva,  gave ye eyes,  O Asvins;  light to the blind  ye sent for perfect  vision.   
18 To bring  the blind  man joy thus cried  the she−wolf:  O Asvins,  O ye Mighty  Ones,  O Heroes,   
For me Rjrasva,  like a youthful  lover,  hath.  cut piecemeal  one and a hundred  wethers.   
19 Great  and weal−giving  is your aid, O Asvins,  ye, objects  of all thought,  made  whole  the cripple.   
Purandhi  also for this cause  invoked  you, and ye, O mighty,  came  to her with succours.   
20 Ye, Wonder−Workers,  filled  with milk for Sayu  the milkless  cow,  emaciated,  barren;   
And by your powers  the child  of Purumitra  ye brought  to Vimada  to be his consort.   
21 Ploughing  and sowing  barley,  O ye Asvins,  milking  out food for men, ye Wonder−Workers,   
Blasting  away  the Dasyu  with your trumpet,  ye gave far−spreading  light unto the Arya.   
22 Ye brought  the horse's  head,  Asvins,  and gave it unto Dadhyac  the offspring  of Atharvan.   
True,  he revealed  to you, O WonderWorkers,  sweet  Soma,  Tvastar's  secret,  as your girdle.   
23 O Sages,  evermore  I crave  your favour:  be gracious  unto all my prayers,  O Asvins.   
Grant  me, Nasatyas,  riches  in abundance,  wealth  famous  and accompanied  with children.   
24 With  liberal  bounty  to the weakling's  consor ts ye, Heroes,  gave a son Hiranyahasta;   
And Syava,  cut into three  several  pieces,  ye brougnt  to life again,  O bounteous  Asvins.   
25 These  your heroic  exploits,  O ye Asvins,  done  in the days.  of old, have men related.   
May we, addressing  prayer  to you, ye Mighty,  speak  with brave  sons about  us to. the synod.   
 
HYMN  CXVIII.  Asvins.  
1. FLYING,  with falcons,  may your chariot,  Asvins,  most  gracious,  bringing  friendly   
help,  come  hither,−   
Your  chariot,  swifter  than the mind  of mortal,  fleet as the wind,  three −seated  O ye Mighty.   
2 Come  to us with your chariot  triple  seated,  three−wheeled,  of triple  form,  that rolleth  lightly.   
Fill full our cows,  give mettle  to our horses,  and make  each hero son grow  strong,  O Asvins.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
3 With  your well−rolling  car, descending  swiftly,  hear this the press−stone's  song,  ye Wonder−Workers.   
How  then have ancient  sages  said, O Asvins,  that ye most  swiftly  come  to stay affliction?   
4 O Asvins,  let your falcons  bear you hither,  yoked  to your chariot,  swift,  with flying  pinions,   
Which, ever active,  like the airy eagles,  carry  you, O Nasatyas,  to the banquet.   
5 The youthful  Daughter  of the Sun, delighting  in you, ascended  there  your chariot,  Heroes.   
Borne  on their swift  wings  let your beauteous  horses,  your birds  of ruddy  hue, conve y you near us.  
6 Ye raised  up Vandana,  strong  WonderWorkers!  with great  might,  and with power  ye rescued  Rebha.   
From  out the sea ye saved  the son of Tugra,  and gave his youth  again  unto Cyavana.   
7 To Atri, cast down  to the fire that scorched  him, ye gave, O Asvins,  strengthening  tbod and favour.   
Accepting  his fair praises  with approval,  ye gave his eyes again  to blinded  Kanva.   
8 For ancient  Sayti  in his sore affliction  ye caused  his cow to swell  with milk,  O Asvins.   
The quail  from  her great  misery  ye delivered,  and a new leg for Vispala  provided.   
9 A white  horse,  Asvins,  ye bestowed  on Pedu,  a serpent−slaying  steed  sent down  by Indra,   
Loud−neighing,  conquering  the foe, highmettled,  firm−limbed  and vigorous,  winning  thousand  treasures.   
10 Such  as ye are, O nobly  horn,  O Heroes,  we in our trouble  call on you for succour.   
Accepting  these  our songs,  for our wellbeing  come  to us on your chariot  treasure−laden.   
 
11 Come  unto us combined  in love,  Nasatyas  come  with the fresh  swift  vigour  of the fal
con. Bearing  oblations  I invoke  you, Asvins,  at the first break  of everlasting  morning.  
 
HYMN  CXIX.  Asvins.  
1. HITHER,  that I may live, I call unto the feast  your wondrous  car, thought−swift,  borne  on by rapid  stee
ds.  
With  thousand  banners,  hundred  treasures,  pouring  gifts,  promptly  obedient,  bestowing  ample  room.   
2 Even  as it moveth  near my hymn  is lifted  up, and all the regions  come  together  to sing praise.   
I sweeten  the oblations;  now the helpers  come.  Urjani  hath,  O Asvins,  mounted  on your car.  
3 When  striving  man with man for glory  they have  met, brisk,  measurcIess,  eager  for victory  in fight,   
Then  verily  your car is seen upon  the slope  when  ye, O Asvins,  bring  some  choice  boon  to the prince.   
4 Ye came  to Bhujyu  while  he struggled  in the flood,  with flying birds,  self−yoked,  ye bore him to his sire
s.  
Ye went  to the far−distant  home,  O Mighty  Ones;  and famed  is your great  aid to Divodisa  given.   
5 Asvins,  the car which  you had yoked  for glorious  show  your own two voices  urged  directed  to its goal.   
Then  she who came  for friendship,  Maid  of noble  birth,  elected  you as Husbands,  you to be her Lords.   
6 Rebha  ye saved  from  tyranny;  for Atri's  sake ye quenched  with cold the fiery  pit that compassed  him.  
Ye made  the cow of Sayu  stream  refreshing  milk,  and Vandana  was holpen  to extended  life.  
7 Doers  of marvels,  skilful  workers,  ye restored  Vandana,  like a car, worn  out with length  of days.   
From  earth  ye brought  the sage to life in wondrous  mode;  be your great  deeds  done  here for him who hon
ours 
you.  
8 Ye went to him who mourned  in a far distant  place,  him who was left forlorn  by treachery  of his sire.  
Rich  with the light ofheaven  was then the help ye gave,  and marvellous  your succour  when  ye stood  by hi
m.  
9 To you in praise  of sweetness  sang the honey−bee : Ausija  calleth  you in Soma's  rapturous  joy.  
Ye drew  unto yourselves  the spirit  of Dadhyac,  and then the horse's  head  uttered  his words  to you.  
10 A horse  did ye provide  for Pedu,  excellent,  white,  O ye Asvins,  conqueror  of combatants,   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Invincible  in war by arrows,  seeking  heaven  worthy  of fame,  like Indra,  vanquisher  of men.   
 
HYMN  CXX.  Asvins.  
1. ASVINS,  what  praise  may win your grace?  Who  may be pleasing  to you both?   
How  shall  the ignorant  worship  you?   
2 Here  let the ignorant  ask the means  of you who know−for  none  beside  you knoweth  aught  −  
Not of a spiritless  mortal  man.   
3 Such  as ye: are, all−wise,  we call you. Ye wise,  declare  to us this day accepted  prayer.   
Loving  you well your servant  lauds  you.  
4 Simply,  ye Mighty  Ones,  I ask the Gods  of that wondrous  oblation  hallowed  by the mystic  word.   
Save  us from  what  is stronger,  fiercer  than ourselves.   
5 Forth  go the hymn  that shone  in Ghosa  Bhrgu's  like, the song  wherewith  the son of Pajra  worships  you,  
Like some  wise minister.   
6 Hear  ye the song of him who hastens  speedily.  O Asvins,  I am he who sang your praise.   
Hither,  ye Lords  of Splendour,  hither  turn your eyes.   
7 For ye were  ever nigh to deal forth  ample  wealth,  to give the wealth  that ye had gathered  up.  
As such,  ye Vasus,  guard  us well, and keep  us safely  from  the wicked  wolf.   
8 Give  us not up to any man who hateth  us, nor let our milch−cows  stray,  whose  udders  give us food,   
Far from  our homes  without  their calves.   
9 May they who love you gain you for their Friends.  Prepare  ye us for opulence  with strengthening  food,   
Prepare  us for the food that floweth  from  our cows   
10 1 have  obtained  the horseless  car of Asvins  rich in sacrifice,   
And I am well content  therewith.   
11 May it convey  me evermore:  may the light chariot  pass from  men  
 
To men unto the Soma  draught.   
12 It holdeth  slumber  in contempt.  and the rich who enjoyeth  not:  
Both  vanish  quickly  and are lost.  
 
HYMN  CXXI,  Indra.  
1. WHEN  Will men's  guardians  hasting  hear with favour  the song  of Angiras's  pious   
childern?   
When  to the people  of the home  he cometh  he strideth  to the sacrifice,  the Holy.   
2 He stablished  heaven;  he poured  forth,  skilful  worker,  the wealth  of kine,  for strength,  that nurtures  hero
es.  
The Mighty  One his self−born  host regarded,  the horse's  mate,  the mother  of the heifer.   
3 Lord  of red dawns,  he came  victorious,  daily  to the Angirases'  former  invocation.   
His bolt and team  hath he prepared,  and stablished  the heaven  for quadrupeds  and men two−footed.   
4 In joy of this thou didst  restore,  for worship,  the lowing  company  of hidden  cattle.   
When  the three−pointed  one descends  with onslaught  he opens  wide  the doors  that cause  man trouble.   
5 Thine  is that milk which  thy swift−moving  Parents  brought  down,  a strengthening  genial  gift for conque
st;  
When  the pure treasure  unto thee they offered,  the milk shed from  the cow who streameth  nectar.   
6 There  is he born.  May the Swift  give us rapture,  and like the Sun shine  forth  from  yonder  dawning,   
Indu,  even  us who drank,  whose  toils are offerings,  poured  from  the spoon,  with praise,  upon  the altar.   