Rig Veda – English Translation  
4 For then the net of Law,  Dyaus,  and the wide  expanse,  Earth,  Worship,  and Devotion  meet for highest  
praise,   
Varuna,  Indra,  Mitra  were  of one accord,  and Savitar  and Bhaga,  Lords  of holy might.   
5 Onward,  with ever−roaming  Rudra,  speed  the floods:  over Aramati  the Mighty  have  they run.  
With  them  Parijman,  moving  round  his vast domain,  loud bellowing,  bedews  all things  that are within.   
6 Straightway  the Rudras,  Maruts  visiting  all men,  Falcons  of Dyaus,  home−dwellers  with the Asura,−   
Varuna,  Mitra,  Aryaman  look on with these,  and the swift−moving  Indra  with swift−moving  Gods.   
7 With  Indra have  they found  enjoyment,  they who toil, in the light's  beauty,  in the very Strong  One's  
strength;   
The singers  who in men's  assemblies  forged  for him, according  to his due, his friend  the thunderbolt.   
8 Even  the Sun's  Bay Coursers  hath lie held in check: each one fears  Indra  as the mightiest  of all.  
Unhindered,  from  the air's vault  thunders  day by day the loud triumphant  breathing  of the fearful  Bull.   
9 With  humble  adoration  show  this day your song  of praise  to mighty  Rudra,  Ruler  of the brave:   
With  whom,  the Eager  Ones,  going  their ordered  course,  he comes  from  heaven  Self−bright,  auspicious,  
strong  to guard.   
10 For these  have  spread  abroad  the fame  of human  kind,  the Bull Brhaspati  and Soma's  brotherhood.   
Atharvan  first by sacrifices  made  men sure: through  skill the Bhrgus  were  esteemed  of all as Gods.   
11 For these,  the Earth  and Heaven  with their abundant  seed,  four−bodied  Narasmsa,  Yama,  Aditi,   
God Tvastar  Wealth−bestower,  the Rbhuksanas,  Rodasi,  Maruts,  Visnu,  claim  and merit  praise.   
12 And may he too give car, the Sage,  from  far away,  the Dragon  of the Deep,  to this our yearning  call.  
Ye Sun and Moon  who dwell  in heaven  and move  in turn, and with your thought,  O Earth  and Sky, obser
ve 
this well.   
13 Dear  to all Gods,  may Pasan  guard  the ways we go, the Waters'  child  and Vayu  help us to success.   
Sing lauds  for your great  bliss to Wind,  the breath  of all: ye Asvins  prompt  to hear,  hear this upon  your w
ay.  
14 With  hymns  of praise  we sing him who is throned  as Lord  over these  fearless  tribes,  the Self−resplend
ent 
One.   
We praise  Night's  youthful  Lord  benevolent  to men,  the foeless  One,  the free, with all celestial  Dames.   
15 By reason  of his birth  here Angiras  first sang:  the pressing−stones  upraised  bebeld  the sacrifice−   
The stones  through  which the Sage  became  exceeding  vast, and the sharp  axe obtains  in fight  the beauteo
us 
place.   
 
HYMN  XCIII.  Visvedevas.  
1. MIGHTY  are ye, and far−extended,  Heaven  and Earth:  both Worlds  are evermore  to us like two young  
Dames.   
Guard  us thereby  from  strong er foe; guard  us hereby  to give us strength.   
2 In each succeeding  sacrifice  that mortal  honoureth  the Gods,   
He who,  most  widely  known  and famed  for happiness,  invitetb  them.   
3 Ye who are Rulers  over all, great  is your sovran  power  as Gods.   
Ye all posse ss all majesty:  all must  be served  in sacrifice.   
4 These  are the joyous  Kings  of Immortality,  Parijman,  Mitra,  Aryaman,  and Varuna.   
What  else is Rudra,  praised  of men?  the Maruts,  Bhaga,  Pusana?   
5 Come  also to our dwelling,  Lords  of ample  wealth,  common  partakers  of our waters,  Sun and Moon,   Rig Veda – English Translation  
When  the great  Dragon  of the Deep  hath settled  down  upon  their floors.   
6 And let the Asvins,  Lords  of splendour,  set us free,−  both Gods,  and, with their Laws,  Mitra  and Varuna
.  
Through  woes,  as over desert  lands,  he speeds  to ample  opulence.   
7 Yea, let the Asvins  Twain  he gracious  unto us, even  Rudras,  and all Gods,  Bhaga,  Rathaspati;   
Parijman,  Rbhu,  Vaja,  O Lords  of all wealth  Rbhuksanas.   
8 Prompt  is Rbhuksan,  prompt  the worshipper's  strong  drink:  may thy fleet Bay Steeds,  thine  who sperdes
t 
on, approach.   
Not mans  but God's  is sacrifice  whose  psalm  is unassailable.   
9 O God Savitar,  harmed  by none,  lauded,  give us a place  among  wealthy  princes.   
With his Car−steeds  at once  'hath  our Indra  guided  the reins  and the car of these  men.   
10 To these  men present  here,  O Heaven  and Earth,  to us grant  lofty  fame  extending  over all mankind.   
Give  us a steed  to win us strength,  a steed  with wealth  for victory .  
11 This speaker,  Indra−for  thou art our Friend−wherever  he may be, guard  thou,  Victor!  for help,  ever for 
help  
Thy wisdom,  Vasu!  prosper  him.  
12 So have  they strengthened  this mine  hymn  which  seems  to take its bright  path to the Sun, and reconcil
es 
the men:   
Thus  forms  a carpenter  the yoke  of horses,  not to be displaced.   
13 Whose  chariot−seat  hath come  again  laden  with wealth  and bright  with gold,   
Lightly,  with piercing  ends,  as 'twere  two ranks  of heroes  ranged  for fight.   
14 This to Duhsima  Prthava na have  I sung,  to Vena,  Rama,  to the nobles,  and the King.   
They  yoked  five hundred,  and their love of us was famed  upon  their way.   
15 Besides,  they showed  us seven  −and−seventy  horses  here.   
Tanva  at once  displayed  his gift, Parthya  at once  displayed  his gift; and straightway  Mayava  showed  his.  
 
HYMN  XCIV.  Press−stones.  
1. LET these  speak  loudly  forth;  let us speak  out aloud:  to the loud speaking  Pressing−stones  address  the 
speech;   
When,  rich with Soma  juice,  Stones  of the mountain,  ye, united,  swift  to Indra  bring  the sound  of praise.   
2 They  speak  out like a hundred,  like a thousand  men:  they cry aloud  to us with their green−tinted  mouths
,  
While,  pious  Stones,  they ply their task with piety,  and, even  before  the Hotar,  taste the offered  food.   
3 Loudly they speak,  for they have  found  the savoury  meath:  they make  a humming  sound  over the meat  
prepared.   
As they devour  the branch  of the Red−coloured  Tree,  these,  the well−pastured  Bulls,  have  uttered  bellowi
ngs.  
4 They  cry aloud,  with strong  exhilarat ing drink,  calling  on Indra  now,  for they have found  the meath.   
Bold,  with the sisters  they have  danced,  embraced  by them,  making  the earth  reecho  with their ringing  sou
nd.  
 
5 The Eagles  have  sent forth  their cry aloft in heaven;  in the sky's  vault  the dark impetuous  ones have  dan
ced.  
Then  downward  to the nether  stone's  fixt place  they sink,  and, splendid  as the Sun, effuse  their copious  Rig Veda – English Translation  
stream.   
6 Like strong  ones drawing,  they have  put forth  all their strength:  the Bulls,  harnessed  together,  bear the 
chariot−poles.   
When  they have  bellowed,  panting,  swallowing  their food,  the sound  of their loud snorting  is like that of 
steeds.   
7 To these  who have  ten workers  and a tenfold  girth,  to these  who have ten yoke−straps  and ten binding  
thongs,   
To these  who bear ten reins,  the eternal,  sing ye praise,  to these  who bear ten car−poles,  ten when  they are 
yoked.   
8 These  Stones  with ten conductors,  rapid  in their course,  with lovely  revolution  travel  round  and round.   
They  have  been  first to drink  the flowing  Soma  juice,  first to enjoy  the milky  fluid  of the stalk.   
9 These  Soma−eaters  kiss Indra's  Bay−coloured  Steeds:  draining.  the stalk  they sit upon  the ox's hide.   
Indra,  when  he hath drunk  Soma−nicath  drawn  by them,  waxes  in strength,  is famed,  is mighty  as a Bull.  
 
10. Strong  is your stalk;  ye, verily,  never  shall  be harmed;  ye have  refreshment,  ye are ever satisfied.   
Fair are ye, as it were,  through  splendour  of his wealth,  his in whose  sacrifice,  O Stones,  ye find delight.   
11 Bored  deep,  but not pierced  through  with holes,  are ye, O Stones,  not loosened,  never  weary,  and exem
pt 
from  death,   
Eternal,  undiseased,  moving  in sundry  ways,  unthirsting,  full of fatness,  void of all desire.   
12 Your  fathers,  verily,  stand  firm from  age to age: they,  loving  rest, are not dissevered  from  their seat.  
Untouched  by time,  ne'er  lacking  green  plants  and green  trees,  they with their voice  have  caused  the heav
ens 
and earth  to hear.   
13 This,  this the Stones  proclaim,  what  time they are disjoined,  and when  with ringing  sound s they move  
and 
drink  the balm.   
Like tillers  of the ground  when  they are sowing  seed,  they mix the Soma,  nor, devouring,  minish  it.  
14 They  have  raised  high their voice  for juice,  for sacrifice,  striking  the Mother  earth  as though  they danc
ed 
thereon.   
So loose  thou too his thought  who hath effused  the sap, and let the Stones  which  we are honouring  be 
disjoined.   
 
HYMN  XCV.  Urvasi.  Pururavas.  
1. Ho there,  my consort!  Stay,  thou fierce−souled  lady,  and let us reason  for a while  together.   
Such  thoughts  as these  of ours,  while  yet unspoken  in days gone  by have  never  brought  us comfort.   
2 What  am I now to do with this thy saying?  I have  gone  from  thee like the first of Mornings.   
Pururavas,  return  thou to thy dwelling:  I, like the wind,  am difficult  to capture.  
3 Like a shaft  sent for glory  from  the quiver,  or swift−steed  winning  cattle  winning  hundreds.   
The lightning  seemed  to flash,  as cowards  planned  it. The minstrels  bleated  like a lamb  in trouble.   
4 Giving  her husband's  father  life and riches,  from  the near dwelling,  when  her lover  craved  her,  
She sought  the home  wherein  she found  her pleasure,  accepting  day and night  her lord's  embraces.   
5 Thrice  in the day didst  thou embrace  thy consort,  though  coldly  she received  thy fond caresses.   
To thy desir es, Pururavas,  I yielded:  so wast thou king,  O hero,  of my body.   
6 The maids  Sujirni,  Sreni,  Sumne−api,  Charanyu,  Granthini,  and Hradecaksus,−   Rig Veda – English Translation  
These  like red kine have hastened  forth,  the bright  ones,  and like milch−cows  have lowed  in emulation.   
7 While  he was born the Dames  sate down  together,  the Rivers  with free kindness  gave him nurture;   
And then,  Pururavas,  the Gods  increased  thee for mighty  battle,  to destroy  the Dasyus.   
8 When  I, a mortal,  wooed  to mine  embraces  these  heavenly  nymphs  who laid aside their raiment,   
Like a scared  snake  they fled from  me in terror,  like chariot  horses  when  the car has touched  them.   
 
9 When,  loving  these  Immortal  Ones,  the mortal  hath converse  with the nymphs  as they allow  him.  
Like swans  they show  the beauty  of their bodies,  like horses  in their play they bite and nibble.   
10 She who flashed  brilliant  as the falling  lightning  brought  me delicious  presents  from  the waters.   
Now  from  the flood  be born a strong  young  hero May Uruvasi  prolong  her life for ever  
11 Thy birth  hath made  me drink  from  earthly  milch−kine:  this power,  Pururavas,  hast thou vouchsafed  m
e.  
I knew,  and, warned  thee,  on that day. Thou  wouldst  not hear me. What  sayest  thou,  when  naught  avails  t
hee?  
12 When  will the son be born and seek his father ? Mourner−like,  will he weep  when  first he knows  him?   
Who  shall  divide  the accordant  wife and husband,  while  fire is shining  with thy consort's  parents?   
13 I will console  him when  his tears  are falling:  he shall  not weep  and cry for care that blesses.   
That which  is thine,  between  us, will I send thee.  Go home  again,  thou fool;.thou  hast not won me.  
14 Thy lover  shall  flee forth  this day for ever,  to seek,  without  return,  the farthest  distance.   
Then  let his bed be in Destruction's  bosom,  and there  let fierce  rapacious  wolves  devour  him.  
15 Nay,  do not die, Pururavas,  nor vanish:  let not the evil−omened  wolves  devour  thee.   
With  women  there  can be no lasting  friendship:  hearts  of hyenas  are the hearts  of women.   
16 When  amid  men in altered  shape  I sojour ned, and through  four autumns  spent  the nights  among  them,   
I tasted  once  a day a drop of butter;  and even  now with that am I am contented.   
17 I, her best love,  call Urvasi  to meet  me, her who fills air and measures  out the region.   
Let the gift brought  by piety  approach  thee.  Turn  thou to me again:  my heart  is troubled.   
18 Thus  speak  these  Gods  to thee,  O son of Ila: As death  hath verily  got thee for his subject,   
Thy sons shall  serve  the Gods  with their oblation,  and thou,  moreover,  shalt  rejoice  in Svarga.  
 
HYMN  XCVI.  Indra.  
1 In the great  synod  will I laud thy two Bay Steeds:  I prize  the sweet  strong  drink  of thee the Warrior−Go
d,  
His who pours  lovely  oil as 'twere  with yellow  drops.  Let my songs  enter  thee whose  form  hath golden  tin
ts.  
2 Ye who in concert  sing unto the goldhued  place,  like Bay Steeds  driving  onward  to the heavenly  seat,  
For Indra  laud ye strength  allied  with Tawny  Steeds,  laud him whom  cows  content  as 'twere  with yellow  
drops.   
3 His is that thunderbolt,  of iron, goldenhued,  gold−coloured,  very dear,  and yellow  in his arms;   
Bright  with strong  teeth,  destroying  with its tawny  rage.  In Indra  are set fast all forms  of golden  hue.  
4 As if a lovely  ray were  laid upon  the sky, the golden  thunderbolt  spread  out as in a race.   
That iron bolt with yellow  jaw smote  Ahi down.  A thousand  flames  had he who bore the tawny−hued.   
5 Thou,  thou,  when  praised  by men who sacrificed  of old. hadst  pleasure  in their lauds,  O Indra  
golden−haired.   
All that befits  thy song  of praise  thou welcornest,  the perfect  pleasant  gift, O Golden−hued  from  birth.   
6 These  two dear Bays  bring  hither  Indra  on his car, Thunder−armed,  joyous,  meet  for laud,  to drink  his fi
ll.  Rig Veda – English Translation  
Many  libations  flow for him who loveth  them:  to Indra  have  the gold−hued  Soma  juices  run.  
7 Tle gold−hued  drops  have  flowed  to gratify  his wish:  the yellow  dro s have  urged  the swift  Bays  to the 
Strong.   
He who speeds  on with Bay Steeds  even  as he lists hath satisfied  his longing  for the golden  drops.   
8 At the swift  draught  the Soma−drinker  waxed  in might,  the Iron One with yellow  beard  and yellow  hair.
  
He, Lord  of Tawny  Coursers,  Lord  of fleet−foot  Mares,  will bear his Bay Steeds  safely  over all distress.   
9 His yellow−coloured  jaws,  like ladles  move  apart,  what  time,  for strength,  he makes  the yellow−tinted  s
tir,  
When,  while  the bowl  stands  there,  he grooms  his Tawny  Steeds,  when  he hath drunk  strong  drink,  the sw
eet 
juice  that he loves.   
10 Yea, to the Dear  One's  seat in homes  of heaven  and earth  the Bay Steeds'  Lord  hath whinnied  like a ho
rse 
for food.   
Then  the great  wish  hath seized  upon  him mightily,  and the Beloved  One hath gained  high power  of life,  
11 Thou,  comprehending  with thy might  the earth  and heaven,  acceptest  the dear hymn  for ever new and 
new.   
 
O Asura,  disclose  thou and make  visible  the Cow's  beloved  home  to the bright  golden  Sun.  
12 O Indra,  let the eager  wishes  of the folk bring  thee,  delightful,  golden−visored,  on thy car,  
That,  pleased  with sacrifice  wherein  ten fingers  toil, thou mayest,  at the feast,  drink  of our offer ed meath.   
13 Juices  aforetime,  Lord  of Bays,  thou drankest;  and thine  especially  is this libation.   
Gladden  thee,  Indra,  with the meath−rich  Soma:  pour it down  ever,  Mighty  One!  within  thee.   
 
HYMN  XCVII.  Praise  of Herbs.  
1. HERBS  that sprang  up in time of old, three  ages earlier  than the Gods,−   
Of these,  whose  hue is brown,  will I declare  the hundred  powers  and seven.   
2 Ye, Mothers,  have a hundred  homes,  yea, and a thousand  are your growths.   
Do ye who have  a thousand  powers  free this my patient  from  disease.   
3 Be glad and joyful  in the Plants,  both blossoming  and bearing  fruit,   
Plants  that will lead us to success  like mares  who conquer  in the race.   
4 Plants,  by this name  I speak  to you, Mothers,  to you the Goddesses:   
Steed,  cow,  and garment  may I win, win back  thy very self, O man.   
5 The Holy  Fig tree is your home,  your mansion  is the Parna  tree:  
Winners  of cattle  shali  ye be if ye regain  for me this man.   
6 He who hath store  of Herbs  at hand  like Kings  amid  a crowd  of men,−   
Physician  is that sage's name,  fiend−slayer,  chaser  of disease.   
7 Herbs  rich in Soma,  rich in steeds,  in nourishments,  in strengthening  power,−   
All these  have  I provided  here,  that this man may be whole  again.   
8 The healing  virtues  of the Plants  stream  forth  like cattle  from the stall,−   
Plants  that shall  win me store  of wealth,  and save thy vital breath,  O man.   
9 Reliever  is your mother's  name,  and hence  Restorers  are ye called.   
Rivers  are ye with wings  that fly: keep  far whatever  brings  disease.   
10 Over  all fences  have  they passed,  as steals  a thief into the fold.  
The Plants  have  driven  from  the frame  whatever  malady  was there.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
11 When,  bringing  back  the vanished  strength,  I hold these  herbs  within  my hand,   
The spirit  of disease  departs  ere he can seize  upon  the life.  
12 He through  whose  frame,  O Plants,  ye creep  member  by member,  joint by joint,−   
From  him ye drive  away  disease  like some  strong  arbiter  of strife.   
13 Fly, Spirit  of Disease,  begone,  with the blue jay and kingfisher.   
Fly with the wind's  impetuousspee d, vanish  together  with the storm.   
14 Help  every  one the other,  lend assistance  each of you to each,   
All of you be accordant,  give furtherance  to this speech  of mine.   
15 Let fruitful  Plants,  and fruitless,  those  that blossom,  and the blossomless,   
Urged  onward  by Brhaspati,  release  us from  our pain and grief;   
16 Release  me from  the curse's  plague  and woe that comes  from  Varuna;   
Free me from  Yama's  fetter,  from  sin and offence  against  the Gods.   
17 What  time,  descending  from  the sky, the Plants  flew earthward,  thus they spake:   
No evil shall  befall  the man whom  while  he liveth  we pervade,   
18 Of all the many  Plants  whose  King  is, Soma,  Plants  of hundred  forms,   
Thou  art the Plant  most  excellent,  prompt  to the wish,  sweet  to the heart.   
19 O all ye variou s Herbs  whose  King  is Soma,  that o'erspread  the earth,   
Urged  onward  by Brhaspati,  combine  your virtue  in this Plant.   
20 Unharmed  be he who digs you up, unharmed  the man for whom  I dig:  
And let no malady  attack  biped  or quadruped  of ours.   
21 All Plants  that hear this speech,  and those  that have  departed  far away,   
 
Come  all assembled  and confer  your healing  power  upon  this Herb.  22 
With  Soma  as their Sovran  Lord  the Plants  hold colloquy  and say: O K
ing, we save from  death  the man whose  cure a Brahman  undertakes.  23
 Most  excellent  of all art thou,  O Plant  thy vassals  are the trees.  Let hi
m be subject  to our power,  the man who seeks  to injure  us. 
 
HYMN  XCVIII.  The Gods.  
1. COME,  be thou Mitra,  Varuna,  or Pusan,  come,  O Brhaspati,  to mine  oblation:   
With  Maruts,  Vasus,  or Adityas,  make  thou Parjanya  pour for Santanu  his rain−drops.   
2 The God,  intelligent,  the speedy  envoy  whom  thou hast sent hath come  to me, Devapi:   
Address  thyself  to me and turn thee hither  within  thy lips will I put brilliant  language.   
3 Within  my mouth,  Brhaspati,  deposit  speech  lucid,  vigorous,  and free from  weakness,   
Thereby  to win for Santanu  the rain−fall.  The meath−rich  drop from  heaven  hath passed  within  it.  
4 Let the sweet  drops  descend  on us, O Indra:  give us enough  to lade a thousand  wagons.   
Sit to thy Hotar  task;  pay worship  duly,  and serve  the Gods,  Devapi,  with oblation.   
5 Knowing  the God's  good−will,  Devapi,  Rsi, the son of Rstisena,  sate as Hotar.   
He hath brought  down  from  heaven's  most  lofty  summit  the ocean  of the rain, celestial  waters.   
6 Gathered  together  in that highest  ocean,  the waters  stood  by deities  obstructed.   
They  burried  down  set free by Arstisena,  in gaping  clefts,  urged  onward  by Devapi.   
7 When  as chief  priest  for Santanu,  Devapi,  chosen  for Hotar's  duty, prayed  beseeching,   
Graciously  pleased  Brhaspati  vouchsafed  him a voice  that reached  the Gods  and won the waters.   
8 O Agni  whom  Devapi  Arstisena,  the mortal  man,  hath kindled  in his glory,   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Joying  in him with all the Gods  together,  urge on the sender  of the rain, Parjanya.   
9 All ancient  Rsis with their songs  approached  thee,  even  thee,  O Much−invoked,  at sacrifices.   
We have  provided  wagon−loads  in thousands:  come  to the solemn  rite, Lord  of Red Horses.   
10 The wagon−loads,  the nine−and−ninety  thousa nd, these  have been  offered  up to thee,  O Agni.   
Hero,  with these  increase  thy many  bodies,  and, stimulated,  send us rain from  heaven.   
11 Give  thou these  ninety  thousand  loads,  O Agni,  to Indra,  to the Bull,  to be his portion.   
Knowing  the paths  which  Deities duly travel,  set mid the Gods  in heaven  Aulana  also.  
12 O Agni,  drive  afar our foes,  our troubles  chase  malady  away  and wicked  demons.   
From  this air−ocean,  from  the lofty  heavens,  send down  on us a mighty  flood  of waters.   
 
HYMN  XCIX.  Indra.  
I. WHAT Splendid  One,  Loud−voiced,  Farstriding,  dost thou,  well knowing,  urge us to exalt  with praises
?  
What  give we him?  When  his might  dawned,  he fashioned  the Vrtra−slaying  bolt, and sent us waters.   
2 He goes to end his work  with lightning  flashes:  wide  is the seat his Asura  glory  gives  him.  
With  his Companions,  not without  his Brother,  he quells  Saptatha's  magic  devices.   
3 On most  auspicious  path he goes to battle  he toiled  to win heaven's  light,  full fain to gain it;  
He seized  the hundred−gated  castle' s treasure  by craft,  unchecked,  and slew the lustful  demons.   
4 Fighting  for kine,  the prize  of war, and I roaming  among  the berd be brings  the young  streams  hither,   
Where,  footless,  joined,  without  a car to bear them,  with jars for steeds,  they pour their flood  like butter.   
5 Bold,  unsolicited  for wealth,  with Rudras  he came,  the Blameless,  having  left his dwelling,   
Came,  seized  the food of Vamra  and his consort,  and left the couple  weeping  and unsheltered.   
6 Lord  of the dwelling,  he subdued  the demon  who roared  aloud,  six−eyed  and triple−headed.   
Trta,  made  stronger  by the might  he lent him, struck  down  the boar with shaft  whose  point  was iron.  
7 He raised  himself  on high and shot his arrow  against  the guileful  and oppressive  foeman.   
 
Strong,  gloriou s, manliest,  for us he shattered  the forts of Nabus  when  he slew the Dasyus.   
8 He, like a cloud  that rains  upon  the pasture,  hath found  for us the way to dwell  in safety.   
When  the Hawk  comes  in body  to the Soma,  armed  with his iron claws  he slays  the Dasyus.  
9 He with his potent  Friends  gave up the mighty,  gave gusnia  up to Kutsa  for affliction.   
He led the lauded  Kavi,  he delivered  Atka  as prey to him and to his heroes.   
10 He, with his Gods  who love mankind,  the Wondrous,  giving  like Varuna  who works  with magic,   
Was known,  yet young  as guardian  of the seasons;  and he quelled  Araru,  four−footed  dernon.   
11 Through  lauds  of him hath Ausija  Rjisvan  burst,  with the Mighty's  aid, the stall of Pipru.   
When  the saint  pressed  the juice  and shone  as singer,  he seized  the forts and with his craft subdued  them.   
12 So, swiftly  Asura,  for exaltation,  hath the great  Vamraka  come  nigh to Indra.   
He will, when  supplicated,  bring  him blessing:  he hath brought  all, food,  strength,  a happy  dwelling.   
 
HYMN  C. Visvedevas .  
1. Be, like thyself,  O Indra,  strong  for our delight:  here lauded,  aid us, Maghavan,  drinker  of the juice.   
Savitar  with the Gods  protect  us: hear ye Twain.  We ask for freedom  and complete  felicity.   
2 Bring  swift,  for offering,  the snare  that suits the time,  to the pure−drinker  Vayu,  roaring  as he goes,   
To him who hath approached  the draught  of shining  milk.  We ask for freedom  and complete  felicity.   
3 May Savitar  the God send us full life, to each who sacrifices,  lives  aright  and pours  the juice   
That we with simple  hearts  may wait upon  the Gods.  We ask for freedom  and complete  felicity.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
4 May Indra  evermore  be gracious  unto us, and may King  Soma  meditate  our happiness,   
Even  as men secure  the comfort  of a friend.  We ask for freedom  and complete  felicity.  
5 Indra  hath given  the body  with its song  and strength:  Brhaspati,  thou art the lengthener  of life.  
The sacrifice  is Manu,  Providence,  our Sire. We ask for freedom  and complete  felicity.   
6 Indra  possesseth  might  celestial  nobly  formed:  the singer  in the hotise  is Agni,  prudent  Sage.   
lie is the sacrifice  in synod,  fair, most  near.  We ask for freedom  and complete  felicity,   
7 Not often  have  we sinned  against  you secretly,  nor, Vasus,  have we openly  provoked  the Gods.   
Not one of its, ye Gods,  hath worn an alien  shape.  We ask for freedom  and complete  felicity.   
8 May Savitar  remove  from  us our malady,  and may the Mountains  keep  it far away  from  where   
The press−stone  as it sheds  the meath  rings  loudly  forth.  We ask for freedom  and complete  felicity.   
9 Ye Vasus,  let the stone,  the presser  stand  erect:  avert  all enmities  and keep  them  far remo te.  
Our guard  to be adored  is Savitar  this God.  We ask for freedom  and complete  felicity.   
10 Eat strength  and fatness  in the pasture,  kine,  who are balmed  at the reservoir  and at the seat of Law.   
So let your body  be our body's  medicine.  We ask for freed om and complete  felicity.   
11 The singer  fills the spirit:  all mens,  love hath he. Indra  takes  kindly  care of those  who pour the juice.   
For his libation  is the heavenly  udder  full. We ask for freedom  and complete  felicity.   
12 Wondrous  thy spirit−filling  light,  triumpliant;  thy hosts  save from  decay  and are resistless.   
The pious  votary  by straightest  pathway  speeds  to possess  the best of all the cattle.   
 
HYMN  CI. Visvedevas.  
1. WAKE  with one mind,  my friends,  and kindle  Agni,  ye who are many  and who dwell together.   
Agni  and Dadhikras  and Dawn  the Goddess,  you, Gods  with Indra,  I call down  to help us.  
2 Make  pleasant  hymns,  spin out your songs  and praises:  build  ye a ship equipped  with oars for transport.   
Prepare  the implements,  make  all things  ready,  and let the sacrifice,  my friends,  go forward.   
3 Lay on the yokes,  and fasten  well the traces:  formed  is the furrow,  sow the seed within  it.  
Through  song  may we find bearing  fraught  with plenty:  near to the ripened  grain  approach  the sickle.   
4 Wise,  through  desire  of bliss from  Gods,  the skilful  bind the traces  fast, And lay the yokes  on either  side
.  
 
5 Arrange  the buckets  in their place  securely  fasten  on the straps.   
We will pour forth  the well that hath a copious  stream,  fair−flowing  well that never  fails.   
6 I pour the water  from  the well with pails  prepared  and goodly  straps,   
Unfailing,  full, with plenteous  stream.   
7 Refresh  the horses,  win the prize  before  you: equip  a chariot  fraught  with happy  fortune.   
Pour  forth  the well with stone  wheel,  wooden  buckets,  the drink  of heroes,  with the trough  for armour.   
8 Prepare  the cow−stall,  for there  drink your heroes:  stitch  ye the coats  of armour,  wide  and many.   
Make  iron forts,  secure  from  all assailants  let not your pitcher  leak:  stay it securely.   
9 Hither,  for help,  I turn the holy heavenly  mind  of you the Holy  Gods,  that longs  for sacrifice.   
May it pour milk for us, even as a stately  cow who,  having  sought  the pasture,  yields  a thousand  streams.   
10 Pour  golden  juice  within  the wooden  vessel:  with stone−made  axes fashion  ye and form  it.  
Embrace  and compass  it with tenfold  girdle,  and to both chari ot−poles  attach  the car−horse.   
11 Between  both poles  the car−horse  goes pressed  closely,  as in his dwelling  moves  the doubly−wedded.   
Lay in the wood  the Soviran  of the Forest,  and sink the well although  ye do not dig it.  
12 Indra  is he, O men,  who gives  us happiness:  sport,  urge the giver  of delight  to win us strength   
Bring  quickly  down,  O priests,  hither  to give us aid, to drink  the Soma,  Indra  Son of Nistigri.   
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  CII. Indra.  
1. FOR  thee may Indra  boldly  speed  the car that works  on either  side. Favour  us, Much−invoked!  in this 
most  glorious  fight  against  the raiders  of our wealth.   
2 Loose  in the wind  the woman's  robe was streaming  what  time she won a car−load  worth  a thousand.   
The charioteer  in fight  was Mudgalani:  she Indra's  dart, heaped  up the prize  of battle.   
3 O Indra,  cast thy bolt among  assailants  who would  slaughter  us:  
The weapon  both of Dasa  and of Arya  foe keep  far away,  O Maghavan.   
4 The bull in joy had drunk  a lake of water.  His shattering  horn encountered  an opponent.   
Swiftly,  in vigorous  strength,  eager  for glory,  he stretched  his forefeet,  fain to win and triumph.   
5 They  came  anear  the bull; they made  him thunder,  made  him pour rain down  ere the fight  was ended.   
And Mudgala  thereby  won in the contest  well−pastured  kine in hundreds  and in thousands.   
6 In hope  of victory  that bull was harnessed:  Kesi the driver  urged  him on with shouting.   
As he ran swiftly  with the car behind  him his lifted  heels  pressed  close  on Mudgalani.   
7 Deftly  for him he stretched  the car−pole  forward,  guided  the bull thereto  and firmly  yoked  him.  
Indra  vouchsafed  the lord of cows  his favour:  with mighty  steps  the buffalo  ran onward.   
8 Touched  by the goad  the shaggy  beast  went  nobly,  bound  to the pole by the yoke's  thong  of leather.   
Performing  deeds  of might  for many  people,  he, looking  on the cows,  gained  strength  and vigour.   
9 Here  look upon  this mace,  this bull's  companion,  now lying  midway  on the field of battle.   
Therewith  hath Mudgala  in ordered  contest  won for cattle  for himself,  a hundred  thousand.   
10 Far is the evil: who hath here beheld  it? Hither  they bring  the bull whom  they are yoking..   
To this they give not either  food or water.  Reaching  beyond  the pole it gives  directions.   
11 Like one forsaken,  she hath found  a husband,  and teemed  as if her breast  were  full and flowing.   
With  swiftly−racing  chariot  may we conquer,  and rich and blessed  be our gains  in battle.   
12 Thou,  Indra,  art the mark  whereon  the eyes of all life rest, when  thou,   
A Bull who drivest  with thy bull, wilt win the race together  with thy weakling  friend.   
 
HYMN  CIII. Indra.  
1. SWIFT,  rapidly  striking,  like a bull who sharpens  his horns,  terrific,  stirring  up the people,  
With  eyes that close  not, bellowing,  Sole Hero,  Indra.  subdued  at once  a hundred  armies.   
2 With  him loud−roaring,  ever watchful,  Victor,  bold,  hard to overthrow,  Rouser  of battle,   
Indra.  the Strong,  whose  hand  bears  arrows,  conquer,  ye warriors,  now,  now vanquish  in the combat.   
3 He rules  with those  who carry  shafts  and quivers,  Indra  who with his band  rings  hosts  together,   
Foe−conquering,  strong  of arm, the Soma−drinker,  with mighty  bow,  shooting  with well−laid  arrows.   
4 Brhaspati,  fly with thy chariot  hither,  slayer  of demons,  driving  off our foemen.   
Be thou protector  of our cars, destroyer,  victor  in battle,  breaker−up  of armies.   
5 Conspicuous  by thy strength,  firm,  foremost  fighter,  mighty  and fierce,  victorious,  all−subduing,   
The Son of Conquest,  passing  men and heroes,  kine−winner,  mount  thy conquering  car, O Indra.   
6 Cleaver  of stalls,  kine− winner,  armed  with thunder,  who quells  an army  and with might  destroys  it.−  
Follow  him, brothers!  quit yourselves  like heroes,  and like this Indra  show  your zeal and courage.   
7 Piercing  the cow−stalls  with surpassing  vigour,  Indra,  the pitiless  Hero,  wild with anger,   
Victor  in fight,  unshaken  and resistless,may  he protect  our armies  in our battles.   
8 Indra  guide  these:  Brhaspati  precede  them,  the guerdon,  and the sacrifice,  and Soma;   
And let the banded  Maruts  march  in forefront  of heavenly  hosts  that conquer  and demolish.   
9 Ours  be the potent  host of mighty  Indra,  King  Varuna,  and Maruts,  and Adityas.   
Uplifted  is the shout  of Gods  who conquer  high−minded  Gods  who cause  the worlds  to tremble.   
10 Bristle  thou up, O Maghavan,  our weapons:  excite  the spirits of my warring  heroes.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Urge  on the strong  steeds'  might,  O Vrtra−slayer,  and let the din of conquering  cars go upward.   
11 May Indra  aid us when  our flags  are gathered:  victorious  be the arrows  of our army.   
May our brave  men of war prevail  in battle.  Ye Gods,  protect  us in the shout  of onset.   
12 Bewildering  the senses  of our foemen,  seize  thou their bodies  and depart,  O Apva.   
Attack  them,  set their hearts  on fire and burn them:  so let our foes abide  in utter darkness.   
13 Advance,  O heroes,  win the day. May Indra  be your sure defence.   
Exceeding  mighty  be your arms,  that none  may wound  or injure  you.  
 
HYMN  CIV. Indra.  
1. Soma  hath flowed  for thee,  Invoked  of mat Speed  to our sacrifice  with both thy Coursers.   
To thee have  streameld  the songs  or mighty singers,  imploring,  Indra,  drink  of our libation.   
2 Drink  of the juice  which  men have  washed  in waters,  and fill thee full, O Lord  of Tawny  Horses.   
O Indra,  hearer  of the laud,  with Soma  which  stones  have mixed  for thee enhance  thy rapture.   
3 To make thee start,  a strong  true draught  I offer  to thee,  the Bull,  O thou whom  Bay Steeds  carry.   
Here  take delight,  O Indra,  in our voices  while  thou art hymned  with power  and all our spirit.   
4 O Mighty  Indra,  through  thine  aid, thy prowess,  obtaining  life, zealous,  and skilled  in Order,   
Men in the house  who share  the sacred  banquet  stand  singing  praise  that brings  them  store  of children.   
5 Through  thy directions,  Lord  of Tawny  Coursers,  thine  who art firm,  splendid,  and blest,  the people   
Obtain  most  liberal aid for their salvation,  and praise  thee,  Indra,  through  thine  excellencies.   
6 Lord  of the Bays,  come  with thy two Bay Horses,  come  to our prayers,  to drink  the juice  of Soma.   
To thee comes  sacrifice  which  thou acceptest:  thou,  skilled  in holy rites,  art he who giveth.   
7 Him of a thousand  powers,  subduing  foemen,  Maghavan  praised  with hymns  and pleased  with Soma,−   
Even  him our songs  approach,  resistless  Indra:  the adorations  of the singer  laud him.  
8 The way to bliss for Gods  and man thou foundest,  Indra,  seven  lovely  floods,  divine,  untroubled,   
Wherewith  thou,  rending  forts,  didst  move  the ocean,  and nine−and−ninety  flowing  streams  of water.   
9 Thou  from  the curse  didst  free the mighty  Waters,  and as their only God didst  watch  and guard  them.   
O Indra,  cherish  evermore  thy body  with those  which  thou hast won in quelling  Vrtra.   
10 Heroic  power  and noble  praise  is Indra  yea, the song worships  him invoked  of many.   
Vrtra  he quelled,  and gave men room  and freedom:  gakra,  victorious,  hath conquered  armies.  
11 Call we on Maghayan,  auspicious  Indra.  best Hero  in this fight  where  spoil  is gathered,   
The Strong,  who listens,  who gives  aid in battles,  who slays  the Vrtras,  wins  and gathers  riches.   
 
HYMN  CV. Indra.  
1. WHEN,  Vasu,  wilt thou love the laud?  Now  let the channel  bring  the stream.   
The juice  is ready  to ferment.   
2 He whose  two Bay Steeds  harnessed  well,  swerving,  pursue  the Bird's  tail−plumes,   
With  Rowing  manes,  like heaven  and earth,  he is the Lord  with power  to give.   
3 Bereft  of skill is Indra, if, like some  outwearied  man he fears   
The sinner,  when  the Mighty  hath prepared  himself  for victory.   
4 Indra  with these  drives  round,  until he meets  with one to worship  him:  
Indra  is Master  of the pair who snort  and swerve  upon  their way.   
5 Borne  onward  by the long−maned  Steeds  who stretch  themselves  as 'twere  for food,   
The God who wears  the helm  defends  them  with his jaws.   
6 The Mighty  sang with Lofty  Ones:  the Hero  fashioned  with his strength,   
Like skilful  Matarisvan  with his power  and might,   Rig Veda – English Translation  
7 The bolt, which  pierced  at once  the vitals  of the Dasyu  easy to be slain,   
With  jaw uninjured  like the wondrous  firmament.   
8 Grind  off our sins: with song will we conquer  the men who sing no hymns:   
Not easily  art thou pleased  with prayerless  sacrifice .  
9 When  threefold  flame  burns  high for thee,  to rest on poles  of sacrifice,   
Thou  with the living  joyest  in the self−bright  Ship.   
10 Thy glory  was the speckled  cup, thy glory  was the flawless  scoop.   
Wherewith  thou pourest  into thy receptacle.   
11 As hundreds,  O Immortal  God,  have sung  to thee,  so hath Sumitra,  yea, Durmitra  praised  thee here,   
What  time thou holpest  Kutsa's  son, when  Dasyus  fell, yea, holpest  Kutsa's  darling  when  the Dasyus  died.
  
 
HYMN  CVI. Asvins.  
1. THIS  very thing  ye Twain  hold as your object:  ye weave  your songs  as skilful  men weave  garments.   
That ye may come  united  have I waked  you: ye spread  out food like days of lovely  weather.   
2 Like two plough−bulls  ye move  along  in traces,  and seek like eager  guests  your bidder's  banquet.   
Ye are like glorious  envoys  mid the people:  like bulls,  approach  the place  where  ye are watered.   
3 Like the two pinions  of a bird, connected,  like two choice  animals,  ye have  sought  our worship.   
Bright  as the fire the votary  hath kindled,  ye sacrifice  in many  a spot as roamers.   
4 Ye are our kinsmen,  like two sons,  two fathers,  strong  in your splendour  and like kings  for conquest;   
Like rays for our enjoyment,  Lords  to feed us, ye, like quick  bearers,  have  obeyed  our calling.   
5 You are like two pleasantly  moving  well−fed  (hills)  like Mitra  and Varuna,  the two bestower s of felicity
, 
veracious,  possessors  of infinite  wealth,  happy,  like two horses  plump  with fodder,  abiding  in the firmame
nt, 
like two rams  (are you) to be nourished  with sacrificial  food,  to be cherished  (with  oblations).   
6 You are like two mad elephants  bending  their forequarters  and smiting  the foe, like the two sons of Nito
sa 
destroying  (foes),  and cherishing  (friends);  you are bright  as two water−born  (jewels),  do you, who are 
victorious,  (render)  my decaying  mortal  body  free from  decay.   
7 Fierce  (Asv ins), like two powerful  (heroes),  you enable  this moving,  perishable  mortal  (frame)  to cross  
over 
to the objects  (of its destination)  as over water;  extremely  strong,  like the Rbhus,  your chariot,  attained  its 
destination  swift  as the wind,  it pervaded  (everywhere),  it dispensed  riches.   
8 With  your bellies  full of the Soma,  like two saucepans,  preservers  of wealth,  destroyers  of enemies.  (yo
u 
are) armed  with hatchets,  moving  like two flying  (birds)  with forms  like the moon,  attaining  success  throu
gh 
the mind, like two laudable  beings,  (you are) approaching  (the sacrifice).   
 
9 Like giants,  ye will find firm ground  to stand  on in depths,  like feet for one who fords  a shallow.  Like c
ars ye will attend  to him who orders:  ye Two enjoy  our wondrous  work  as share rs. 10 Like toiling  bees ye
 bring  to us your honey,  as bees into the hide that opens  downward.  11 May we increase  the laud and gain
 us vigour:  come  to our song,  ye whom  one chariot  carries.  Filled  be our kine with ripened  meath  like glor
y: Bhutamsa  hath fulfilled  the Asvins'  longing.  Rig Veda – English Translation  
 
HYMN  CVII.  Daksina.  
1. THESE  men's  great  bounty  hath been  manifested,  and the whole  world  of life set free from  darkness.   
Great  light hath come,  vouchsafed  us by the Fathers:  apparent  is the spacious  path of Guerdon.   
2 High up in heaven  abide  the Guerdon−givers:  they who give steeds  dwell  with the Sun for ever.   
They  who give gold are blest  with life eternal.  they who give robes  prolong  their lives,  O Soma.   
3 Not from  the niggards−for  they give not fireely−comes  Meed  at sacrifice,  Gods'  satisfaction:   
Yea, many  men with hands  stretched  out with Guerdon  present  their gifts because  they dread  dishonour.   
4 These  who observe  mankind  regard  oblation  as streamy  Vayu  and light−finding  Arka.   
They  satisfy  and give their gifts in synod,  and pour in streams  the seven−mothered  Guerdon.   
5 He who brings  Guerdon  comes  as first invited:  chief  of the hamlet  comes  the Guerdon−bearer.   
Him I account  the ruler  of the people  who was the first to introduce  the Guerdon.   
6 They  call him Rsi, Brahman,  Sama−chanter,  reciter  of the laud,  leader  of worship.   
The brightly−shining  God's  three  forms  he knoweth  who first bestowed  the sacrificial  Guerdon.   
7 Guerdon  bestows  the horse,  bestows  the bullock,  Guerdon  bestows,  moreover,  gold that Rsisters.   
Guerdon  gives  food which  is our life and spirit.  He who is wise takes  Guerdon  for his armour.   
8 The liberal  die not, never  are they ruined:  the liberal  suffer  neither  harm  nor trouble.   
The light of heaven,  the universe  about  us,−all  this doth sacrificial  Guerdon  give them.   
9 First have the liberal  gained  a fragrant  dwelling,  and got themselves  a bride  in fair apparel.   
The liberal  have  obtained  their draught  of liquor,  and conquered  those  who,  unprovoked,  assailed  them.   
10 They  deck  the fleet steed  for the bounteous  giver:  the maid  adorns  herself  and waits  to meet  him.  
His home  is like a lake with lotus  blossoms,  like the Gods'  palaces  adorned  and splendid.   
11 Steeds  good  at draught  convey  the liberal  giver,  and lightly  rolling  moves  the car of Guerdon.   
Assist,  ye Gods,  the liberal  man in battles:  the liberal  giver  conquers  foes in combat.   
 
HYMN  CVIII.  Sarama.  Panis.  
1. WHAT  wish  of Sarama  hath brought  her hither?  The path leads  far away  to distant  places.   
What  charge  hast thou for us? Where  turns  thy journey?  How  hast thou made  thy way o'er Rasa's  waters.   
2 I come  appointed  messenger  of Indra,  seeking  your ample  stores  of wealth,  O Panis.   
This hath preserved  me from  the fear of crossing:  thus have  I made  my way o'er Rasa's  waters.   
3 What  is that Indra  like, what  is his aspect  whose  envoy,  Sarama,  from  afar thou comest?   
Let him approach,  and we will show  him friendship:  he shall  be made  the herdsman  of our cattle.   
4 I know  him safe from  harm:  but he can punish  who sent me hither  from  afar as envo y.  
Him rivers  flowing  with deep  waters  bide not. Low will ye be, O Panis,  slain  by Indra.   
5 These  are the kine which,  Sarama,  thou seekest,  flying,  O Blest  One,  to the ends of heaven.   
Who  will loose  these  for thee without  a battle?  Yea, and sharp−pointed  are our warlike  weapons.   
6 Even  if your wicked  bodies,  O ye Panis,  were  arrow−proof,  your words  are weak  for wounding;   
And were  the path to you as yet unmastered,  Brhaspati  in neither  case will spare  you.  
7 Paved  with the rock is this our treasure−chamber;  filled  full of precious  things,  of kine,  and horses.   
These  Panis  who are watchful  keepers  guard  it. In vain hast thou approached  this lonely  station.   
8 Rsis will come  inspirited  with Soma,  Angirases  unwearied,  and Navagvas.   
 
This stall of cattle  will they part among  them:  then will the Panis  wish  these  words  unspoken.  
9 Even  thus,  O Sarama,  hast thou come  hither,  forced  by celestial  might  to make  the journey.  
Turn  thee not back,  for thou shalt  be our sister:  O Blest  One,  we will give thee of the cattle.  10Rig Veda – English Translation  
 Brotherhood,  sisterhood,  I know  not either:  the dread  Angirases  and Indra  know  them.  They  s
eemed  to long for kine when  I departed.  Hence,  into distance,  be ye gone,  O Panis.  11 Hence,  
far away,  ye Panis!  Let the cattle  lowing  come  forth  as holy Law commandeth,  Kine  which  Br
haspati,  and Soma,  Rsis,  sages,  and pressing−stones  have found  when  hidden.  
 
HYMN  CIX. Visvedevas.  
1. THESE  first, the boundless  Sea, and Matarisvan,  fierce−glowing  Fire, the Strong,  the Bliss−bestower.   
And heavenly  Floods,  first−born  by holy Order,  exclaimed  against  the outrage  on a Brahman.   
2 King  Soma  first of all, without  reluctance,  made  restitution  of the Brahman's  consort.   
Mitra  and Varuna  were  the inviters:  Agni  as Hota;  took her hand  and led her.  
3 The man,  her pledge,  must  by her hand  be taken  when  they have  cried,  She is a Brahman's  consort.   
She stayed  not for a herald  to conduct  her: thus is the kingdom  of a ruler  guarded.   
4 Thus  spake  of her those  Gods  of old, Seven  Rsis who sate them  down  to their austere devotion:   
Dire is a Brahman's  wife led home  by others:  in the supremest  heaven  she plants  confusion.   
5 The Brahmacari  goes engaged  in duty:  he is a member  of the Gods'  own body.   
Through  him Brhaspati  obtained  his consort,  as the Gods  gained  the ladle brought  by Soma.   
6 So then the Gods  restored  her, so men gave the woman  back  again.   
The Kings  who kept their promises  restored  the Brahman's  wedded  wife,   
7 Having  restored  the Brahman's  wife,  and freed  them,  with Gods'  aid, from  sin,  
They  shared  the fulness  of the earth,  and won themselves  extended  sway.   
 
HYMN  CX. Apris.  
1. THOU  in the house  of man this day enkindled  worshippest  Gods  as God,  O Jatavedas.   
Observant,  bright  as Mitra,  bring  them  hither:  thou art a sapient  and foreknowing  envoy.   
2 Tanunapat,  fair−tongued,  with sweet  meath  balming  the paths  and waysof  Order,  make  them  pleasant.   
Convey  our sacrifice  to heaven,  exalting  with holy thoughts  ourhymns  of praise  and worship.   
3 Invoked,  deserving  prayer  and adoration,  O Agni,  come  accordant  with the Vasus.   
Thou  art, O Youthful  Lord,  the Gods'  Invoker,  so, best of Sacrificers,  bring  them  quickly.   
4 By rule the Sacred  Grass  is scattered  eastward,  a robe to clothe  this earth  when  dawns  are breaking.   
Widely  it spreads  around  and far−extended,  fair for the Gods  and bringing  peace  and freedom.   
5 Let the expansive  Doors  be widely  opened,  like wives  who deck their beauty  for their husbands.   
Lofty,  celestial,  all−impelling  Portals,  admit  the Gods  and give them  easy entrance.   
6 Pouring  sweet  dews  let holy Night  and Morning,  each close  to each,  he seated  at their station,   
Lofty,  celestial  Dames  with gold to deck them.  assuming  all their fair and radiant  beauty.   
7 Come  the two first celestial  sweet−voiced  Hotars,  arranging  sacrifice  for man to wors hip  
As singers  who inspire  us in assemblies,  showing  the eastward  light with their direction.   
8 Let Bharati  come  quickly  to our worship,  and Ila showing  like a human  being.   
So let Sarasvati  and both her fellows,  deft Goddesses,  on this fair grass  be seated.  
9 Hotar  more  skilled  in sacrifice,  bring  hither  with speed  to−day  God Tvastar,  thou who knowest.   
Even  him who formed  these  two, the Earth  and Heaven  the Parents,  with their forms,  and every  creature.   
10 Send  to our offerings  which  thyself  thou balm est the Companies  of Gods  in ordered  season.   
Agni,  Vanaspati  the Immolator  sweeten  our offered  gift with meath  and butter.   
11 Agni,  as soon  as he was born,  made  ready  the sacrifice,  and was the Gods'  preceder.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
 
May the Gods  cat our offering  consecrated  according  to this true Priest's  voice  and guidance.  
 
HYMN  CXI. Indra.  
1. BRING  forth  your sacred  song  ye prudent  singers,  even as are the thoughts  of human  beings.   
Let us draw  Indra  with true deeds  anear  us: he loves  our songs,  the Hero,  and is potent.   
2 The hymn  shone  brightly  from  the seat of worship:  to the kine came  the Bull,  the Heifer's  Offipring   
With  mighty  bellowing  hath he arisen,  and hath pervaded  even  the spacious  regions.   
3 Indra  knows,  verily,  how to hear our singing,  for he, victorious,  made  a path for Surya.   
He made  the Cow,  and be became  the Sovran  of Heaven,  primeval,  matchless,  and unshaken.   
4 Praised  by Angirases,  Indra  demolished  with might  the works  of the great  watery  monster   
Full many  regions,  too, hath he pervaded,  and by his truth  supported  earth's  foundation.   
5 The counterpart  of heaven  and earth  is Indra:  he knoweth  all libations,  slayeth  Susna.   
The vast sky with the Sun hath he extended,  and, best otpillars,  stayed  it with a pillar.   
6 The Vrtra−slaver  with his bolt felled Vrtra:  the magic  of the godless,  waxen  mighty,   
Here  hast thou,  Bold  Assailant,  boldly  conquered.  Yea, then thine  arms,  O Maghavan,  were  potent.   
7 When  the Dawns  come  attendant  upon  Surya  their rays discover  wealth  of divers  colours.   
The Star of heave n is seen as 'twere  approaching:  none  knoweth  aught  of it as it departeth.   
8 Far have they gone,  the first of all these  waters,  the waters  that flowed  forth  when  Indra  sent them.   
Where  is their spring,  and where  is their foundation?  Where  now,  ye Waters,  is your inmost  centre?   
9 Thou  didst  free rivers  swallowed  by the Dragon;  and rapidly  they set themselves  in motion,   
Those  that were  loosed  and those  that longed  for freedom.  Excited  now to speed  they run unresting.   
10 Yearning  together  they have  sped to Sindhu:  the Fort−destroyer,  praised,  of old, hath loved  them.   
Indra,  may thy terrestrial  treasures  reach  us, and our full songs  of joy approach  thy dwelling.   
 
HYMN  CXII.  Indra.  
1. DRINK  of the juice,  O Indra,  at thy plea.  sure,  for thy first draught  is early  morn's  libation.   
Rejoice,  that thou mayst  slay our foes,  O Hero,  and we with lauds  will tell thy mighty  exploits.   
2 Thou  hast a car more  swift  than thought,  O Indra;  thercon  come  hither,  come  to drink  the Soma.   
Let thy Bay Steeds,  thy Stallions , hasten  hither,  with whom  thou cornest  nigh and art delighted.   
3 Deck  out thy body  with the fairest  colours,  with golden  splendour  of the Sun adorn  it.  
O Indra,  turn thee hitherward  invited  by us thy friends;  be seated  and be joyful.   
4 O thou whose  grandeur  in thy festive  transports  not even these  two great  worlds  have  comprehended.   
Come,  Indra,  with thy dear Bay Horses  harnessed,  come  to our dwelling  and the food thou lovest.   
5 Pressed  for thy joyous  banquet  is the Soma,  Soma  whereof  thou,  Indra,  ever drinking,   
Hast waged  unequalled  battles  with thy foemen,  which  prompts  the mighty  flow of thine  abundance.   
6 Found  from  of old is this thy cup, O Indra:  Satakratu,  drink  therefrom  the Soma.   
Filled  is the beaker  with the meath  that gladdens,  the beaker  which  all Deities  delight  in.  
7 From  many  a side with proffered  entertainment  the folk are calling  thee,  O Mighty  Indra.   
These  our libations  shall  for thee be richest  in sweet  meath:  dvink  thereof  and find them  pleasant.   
8 I will declare  thy deeds  of old, O Indra,  the mighty  acts which  thou hast first accomplished.   
In genuine  wrath  thou loosenedst  the mountain  so that the Brahman  easily  found  the cattle.   
9 Lord  of the hosts,  amid  our bands  be seated:  they call thee greatest  Sage  among  the sages.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Noth ing is done,  even  far away,  without  thee:  great,  wondrous,  Maghavan,  is the hymn  I sing thee.   
10 Aim of our eyes be thou,  for we implore  thee,  O Maghavan,  Friend  of friends  and Lord  of treasures.   
Fight,  Warrior  strong  in truth,  fight  thou the battle:  give us our share  of undivided  riches.   
 
HYMN  CXTII.  Indra.  
1. THE  Heavens  and the Earth  accordant  with all Gods  encouraged  graciously  that vigorous  might  of his.  
When  he came  showing  forth  his majesty  and power,  he drank  of Soma  juice  and waxed  exceeding  strong
.  
2 This majesty  of his Visnu  extols  and lauds,  making  the stalCthat  gives  the meath  flow forth  with inight.   
When  Indra  Maghavan  with those  who followed  him had smitten  Vrtra  he deserved  the choice  of Gods.   
3 When,  bearing  warlike  weapons,  fain to win thee praise,  thou mettest  Vrtra,  yea, the Dragon,  for the fig
ht,  
Then  all the Maruts  who were  gathered  with dice there  extolled,  O Mighty  One,  thy powerful  majesty.   
4 Soon  as he sprang  to life he forced  asun.  der hosts:  forward  the Hero  looked  to manly deed  and war.  
He cleft the rock,  he let concurrent  streams  flow forth,  and with his skilful  art stablished  the heavens'  wid
e 
vault.   
5 Indra  hath evermore  possessed  surpassing  power:  he forced,  far from  each other,  heaven  and earth  apart.
  
He hurled  impetuous  down  his iron thunderbolt,  a joy to Varuna's  and Mitra's  worshipper.   
6 Then  to the mighty  powers  of Indra,  to his wrath,  his the fierce  Stormer,  loud of voice,  they came  with 
speed;   
What  time the Potent  One rent Vrtra  with his strength,  who held the waters  back,  whom  darkness  compas
sed 
round.   
7 Even  in the first of those  heroic  acts which  they who strove  together  came  with might  to execute,   
Deep  darkness  fell upon  the slain,  and Indra  won by victory  the right  of being  first invoked.   
8 Then  all the Gods  extolled,  with eloquence  inspired  by draughts  of Soma  juice,  thy deeds  of manly  mig
ht.  
As Agni  eats the dry food with his tcetlv,  he ate Vrtra,  the Dragon,  maimed  by Indra's  deadly  dart.  
9 Proclaim  his many  friendships,  met with friendship,  made with singers,  with the skilful  and the eloquent
.  
Indra,  when  he subdues  Dhuni  and Cumuri,  lists to Dabhiti  for his faithful  spirit's  sake.   
10 Give  riches  manifold  with noble  horses,  to be remembered  while  my songs  address  thee.   
May we by easy paths  pass all our troubles:  find us this day a ford wide  and extensive.   
 
HYMN  CXIV.  Visvedevas.  
1. Two perfect  springs  of heat pervade  the Threefold,  and come  for their delight  is Matarisvan.   
Craving  the milk of heaven  the Gods  are present:  well do they know  the praisesong  and the Saman.   
2 The priests  beard  far away,  as they are ordered,  serve  the three  Nirrtis,  for well they know  them.   
Sages  have  traced  the cause  that first produced  them,  dwelling  in distant  and mysterious  chambers.   
3 The Youthful  One,  well−shaped,  with four locks  braided,  brightened  with oil, puts on the ordinances.   
Two Birds  of mighty  power  are seated  near her, there  where  the Deities  receive  their portion.   
4 One of these  Birds  hath passed  into the sea of air: thence  he looks  round  and views  this universal  world.
  Rig Veda – English Translation  
With  simple  heart  I have  beheld  him from  anear:  his Mother  kisses  him and he returns  her kiss.  
5 Him with fair wings  though  only One in nature,  wise singers  shape,  with songs,  in many  figures.   
While  they at sacrifices  fix the metres,  they measure  out twelve  chalices  of Soma.   
6 While  they arrange  the four and six−and−thirty,  and duly order,  up to twelve,  the measures,   
Having  disposed  the sacrifice  thoughtful  sages  send the Car forward  with the Rc and Saman.   
7 The Chariot's  majesties  are fourteen  others:  seven  sages  lead it onward  with their Voices.   
Who  will declare  to us the ford Apnana,  the path whereby  they drink  first draughts  of Soma?   
8 The fifteen  lauds  are in a thousand  places  that is as vast as heaven  and earth  in measure.   
A thousand  spots  contain  the mighty  thousand.  Vak spreadeth  forth  as far as Prayer  extendeth.   
9 What  sage hath learned  the metres'  application?  Who  hath gained  Vak,  the spirit's  aim and object?   
Which  ministering  priest  is called  eighth  Hero?  Who  then hath tracked  the two Bay Steeds  of Indra?   
10 Yoked  to his chariot−pole  there  stood  the Coursers:  they only travel  round  earth's  farthest  limits.   
These,  when  their driver  in his home  is settled,  receive  the allotted  meed  of their exertion.   
 
HYMN  CXV. Agni.  
1. VERILY  wondrous  is the tender  Youngling's  growth  who never  draweth  nigh to drink  his Mothers'  mil
k.  
As soon  as she who hath no udder  bore him, he, faring  on his great  errand,  suddenly  grew  strong.   
2 Then  Agni  was his name,  most  active  to bestow, gathering  up the trees  with his consuming  tooth;   
Skilled  in fair sacrifice,  armed  with destroying  tongue,  impetuous  as a bull that snorteth  in the mead.   
3 Praise  him, yourGod  who, bird−like,  rests upon  a tree, scattering  drops  of juice  and pouring  forth  his flo
od,  
Speaking  aloud  with flame  as with his lips a priest,  and broadening  his paths  like one of high command.   
4 Thou  Everlasting,  whom,  far−striding  fain to burn,  the winds,  uninterrupted,  never  overcome,   
They  have  approached,  as warriors  eager  for the fight,  heroic  Trita,  guiding  him to gain his wish.   
5 This Agni  is the best of Kanvas,  Kanvas'  Friend,  Conqueror  of the foe whether  afar or near.   
May Agni  guard  the singers,  guard  the princes  well:  may Agni  grant  to us our princes'  gracious  help.   
6 Do thou,  Supitrya,  swiftly  following,  make  thyself  the lord of Jatavedas,  mightiest  of all,  
Who  surely  gives  a boon  even  in thirsty  land most  powerful,  prepared  to aid us in the wilds.  
7 Thus  noble  Agni  with princes  and mortal  men is lauded,  excellent  for conquering  strength  with chiefs,   
Men who are well−disposed  as friends  and true to Law,  even  as the heavens  in majesty  surpass  mankind.   
8 O Son of Strength,  Victorious,  with this title Upastuta's  most  potent  voice  reveres  thee.   
Blest  with brave  sons by thee we will extol  thee,  and lengthen  out the days of our existence.   
9 Thus,  Agni,  have  the sons of Vrstihavya,  the Rsis,  the Upastutas  invoked  thee.   
Protect  them,  guard  the singers and the princes.  With  Vasat!  have  they come,  with hands  uplifted,  with th
eir 
uplifted  hands  and cries  of Glory!   
 
HYMN  CXV1.  Indra.  
1. DRINK  Soma  juice  for mighty  power  and vigour,  drink,  Strongest  One,  that thou mayst  smite  down  Vr
tra.  
Drink  thou,  invoked,  for strength,  and riches:  drink  thou thy fill of meath  and pour it down,  O Indra.   
2 Drink  of the foodful  juice  stirred  into motion,  drink  what  thou choosest  of the flowing  Soma.   
Giver  of weal,  be joyful  in thy spirit,  and turn thee hitherward  to bless  and prosper.   
3 Let heavenly  Soma  gladden  thee,  O Indra,  let that effused  among  mankind  delight  thee.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Rejoice  in that whereby  thou gavest  freedom,  and that whereby  thou conquerest  thy foemen.   
4 Let Indra  come,  impetuous,  doubly  mighty,  to the poured juice,  the Bull,  with two Bay Coursers.   
With  juices  pressed  in milk,  with meath  presented,  glut evermore  thy bolt, O Foe−destroyer.   
5 Dash  down,  outffaming  their sharp  flaming  weapons,  the strong−holds  of the men urged  on by demons.   
I give thee,  Mighty One,  great  strength  and conquest:  go, meet  thy foes and rend them  in the battle.   
6 Extend  afar the votary's  fame  and glory,  as the firm archer's  strength  drives  off the foeman.   
Ranged  on our side, grown  strong  in might  that conquers,  never  defeated,  still increase  thy body.   
7 To thee have  we presented  this oblation:  accept  it, Sovran  Ruler,  free from  anger.   
Juice,  Maghavan,  for thee is pressed  and ripened:  eat, Indra,  drink  of that which  stirs to meet  thee.   
8 Eat, Indra,  these  oblations  which  appro ach thee:  be pleased  with food made  ready  and with Soma.   
With  entertainment  we receive  thee friendly:  effectual  be the sacrificer's  wishes.   
9 I send sweet  speech  to Indra  and to Agni:  with hymns  I speed  it like a boat through  waters.   
Even  thus,  the Gods  seem  moving  round  about  me, the fountains  and bestowers  of our riches.   
 
HYMN  CXVII.  Liberality.  
1. THE  Gods  have  not ordained  hunger  to be our death:  even  to the well−fed  man comes  death  in varied  
shape.   
The riches  of the liberal  never  waste  away,  while  he who will not give finds  none  to comfort  him.  
 
2 The man with food in store  who,  when  the need y comes  in miserable  case begging  for bread  to eat,  
Hardens  his heart  against  him−even  when  of old he did him service−finds  not one to comfort  him.  
3 Bounteous  is he who gives  unto the beggar  who comes  to him in want  of food and feeble.   
Success  attends  him in the shout  of battle.  He makes  a friend  of him in future  troubles.   
4 No friend  is he who to his friend  and comrade  who comes  imploring  food,  will offer  nothing.   
Let him depart−no  home  is that to rest in−, and rather  seek a stranger  to support  him.  
5 Let the rich satisfy  the poor implorer,  and bend  his eye upon  a longer  pathway.   
Riches  come  now to one, now to another,  and like the wheels  of cars are ever rolling.   
6 The foolish  man wins  food with fruitless  labour:  that food −I speak  the truth−  shall be his ruin.  
He feeds  no trusty  friend,  no man to love him. All guilt is he who eats with no partaker.   
7 The ploughshare  ploughing  makes  the food that feeds  us, and with its feet cuts through  the path it follo
ws.  
Better  the speaking  than the silent  Brahman:  the liberal  friend  outyalues  him who gives  not.  
8 He with one foot hath far outrun  the biped,  and the two−footed  catches  the three−footed.   
Four−footed  creatures  come  when  bipeds  call them,  and stand  and look where  five are met together.   
9 The hands are both alike:  their labour  differs.  The yield  of sister  milch−kine  is unequal.   
Twins  even  diffier  in their strength  and vigour:  two, even kinsmen,  differ  in their bounty.   
 
HYMN  CXVIII.  Agni.  
1. AGNI,  refulgent  among  men thou slayest  the devouring  fiend,  Bright  Ruler  in thine  own abode.   
2 Thou  springest  up when  worshipped  well the drops  of butter  are thy joy  
When  ladies  are brought  near to thee.   
3 Honoured  with gifts he shines  afar, Agni  adorable  with song:   
The dripping  ladle  balms  his face.   
4 Agni  with honey  in his mouth,  honoured  with gifts,  is balmed  with oil,  
Refulgent  in his wealth  of light.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
5 Praised  by our hymns  thou kindlest  thee,  Oblation−bearer,  for the Gods   
As such do mortals  call on thee.   
6 To that Immortal  Agni  pay worship  with oil, ye mortal  men,−   
Lord  of the house,  whom  none  deceives.   
7 O Agni,  burn the Raksasas  with thine  unconquerable  flame   
Shine  guardian  of Eternal Law.   
8 So, Agni,  with thy glowing  face burn fierce  against  the female  fiends,   
Shining  among  Uruksayas.   
9 Uruksayas  have  kindled  thee,  Oblation−bearer,  thee,  with hymns.   
Best Worshipper  among  mankind.   
 
HYMN  CXIX.  Indra.  
1. THIS,  even  this was my resolve,  to win a cow,  to win a steed:  Have  I not drunk  of Soma  juice?   
2 Like violent  gusts  of wind  the draughts  that I have  drunk  have  lifted  me  
Have  I not drunk  of Soma  juice?   
3 The draughts  I drank  have  borne  me up, as fleet−foot  horses  draw  a car:  
Have  I not drunk  of Soma  juice?   
4 The hymn  hath reached  me, like a cow who lows  to meet  her darling  calf:  
Have  I not drunk  of Soma  juice?   
 
5 As a wright  bends  a chariot−seat  so round  my heart  I bend  the hymn:   
Have  I not drunk  of Soma  juice?   
6 Not as a mote  within  the eye count  the Five Tribes  of men with me:  
Have  I not drunk  of Soma  juice?   
7 The heavens  and earth  themselves  have  not grown  equal  to one half of me  
Have  I not drunk  of Soma  juice?   
8 I in my grandeur  have  surpassed  the heavens  and all this spacious  earth   
Have  I not drunk  of Soma  juice?   
9 Aha!  this spacious  earth  will I deposit  either  here or there   
Have  I not drunk  of Soma  juice?   
10 In one short  moment  will I smite  the earth  in fury here or there:   
Have  I not drunk  of Soma  juice?   
11 One of my flanks  is in the sky; I let the other  trail below:   
Have  I not drunk  of Soma  juice?   
12 1, greatest  of the Mighty  Ones,  am lifted  to the firmament:   
Have  I not drunk  of Soma  juice?   
13 I seek the worshipper's  abode;  oblation−bearer  to the Gods:   
Have  I not drunk  of Soma  juice?   
 
HYMN  CXX.  Indra.  
1. IN all the worlds  That was the Best and Highest  whence  sprang  the Mighty  Gods,  of splendid  valour.   
As soon  as born he overcomes  his foemen,  be in whom  all who lend him aid are joyful.   
2 Grown  mighty  in his strength,  with ample  vigour,  he as a foe strikes  fear into the Dasa,   
Eager  to win the breathing  and the breathless.  All sang thy praise  at banquet  and oblation.   
3 All concentrate  on thee their mental  vigour,  what  time these,  twice  or thrice,  are thine  assistants.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Blend  what  is sweeter  than the sweet  with sweetness:  win. quickly  with our meath  that meath  in battle.   
4 Therefore  in thee too, thou who winnest  riches,  at every  banquet  are the sages  joyful.   
With  mightier  power,  Bold  God,  extend  thy firmness:  let not malignant  Yatudhanas  harm  thee.   
5 Proudly  we put our trust in thee in battles,  when  we behold  great  wealth  the prize  of combat.   
I with my words  impel  thy weapons  onward,  and sharpen  with my prayer  thy vital vigour.   
6 Worthy  of praises,  many−shaped,  most  skilful,  most  energetic,  Aptya  of the Aptyas:   
He with his might  destroys  the seven  Danus,  subduing  many  who were  deemed  his equals.   
7 Thou  in that house  which  thy protection  guardeth  bestowest  wealth,  the higher  and the lower.   
Thou  stablishest  the two much−wandering  Mothers,  and bringest  many  deeds  to their completion.   
8 Brhaddiva,  the foremost  of light−winners,  repeats  these  holy prayers,  this strength  of Indra.   
He rules  the great  self−luminous  fold of cattle,  and all the doors  of light hath he thrown  open.   
9 Thus  hath Brhaddiva,  the great  Atharvan,  spoken  to Indra  as himself  in person.   
The spotless  Sisters,  they who are his Mothers,  with power  exalt  him and impel  him onward.   
 
HYMN  CXXI.  Ka.  
1. IN the beginning  rose Hiranyagarbha , born Only  Lord  of all created  beings.   
He fixed  and holdeth  up this earth  and heaven.  What  God shall  we adore  with our oblation?   
2 Giver  of vital breath,  of power  and vigour,  he whose  commandments  all the Gods  acknowledge  −.  
The Lord  of death,  whose  shade is life immortal.  What  God shall  we adore  with our oblation?   
3 Who  by his grandeur  hath become  Sole Ruler  of all the moving  world  that breathes  and slumbers;   
He who is Loord  of men and Lord  of cattle.  What  God shall  we adore  with our oblation?   
 
4 His, through  his might,  are these  snow−covered  mountains,  and men call sea and Rasa  his possession:   
His arms  are these,  his are these  heavenly  regions.  What  God shall  we adore  with our oblation?   
5 By him the heavens  are strong  and earth  is stedfast,  by him light's  realm  and sky−vault  are supported:   
By him the regions  in mid−air  were  measured.  What  God shall  we adore  with our oblation?   
6 To him, supported  by his help,  two armies  embattled  look while  trembling  in their spirit,   
When  over them  the risen  Sun is shining.  What  God shall  we adore  with our oblation?   
7 What  time the mighty  waters  came,  containing  the universal  germ,  producing  Agni,   
Thence  sprang  the Gods'  one spirit  into being.  What  God shall  we adore  with our oblation?   
8 He in his might  surveye d the floods  containing  productive  force  and generating  Worship.   
He is the God of gods,  and none  beside  him. What  God shall  we adore  with our oblation?   
9 Neer  may he harm  us who is earth's  Begetter,  nor he whose  laws are sure,  the heavens'  Creator,   
He who brought  forth  the great  and lucid  waters.  What  God shall  we adore  with our oblation?   
10 Prajapati!  thou only comprehendest  all these  created  things,  and none  beside  thee.   
Grant  us our hearts'  desire  when  we invoke  thee:  may we have  store  of riches  in possession.   
 
HYMN  CXXII.  Agni.  
1. I PRAISE  the God of wondrous  might  like Indra,  the lovely  pleasant  Guest  whom  all must  welcome.   
May Agni,  Priest  and Master  of the household,  give hero strength  and all−sustaining  riches.   
2 O Agni,  graciously  accept  this song  of mine,  thou passing−wis e who knowest  every  ordinance.   
Enwrapped  in holy oil further  the course  of prayer:  the Gods  bestow  according  to thy holy law.  
3 Immortal,  wandering  round  the seven  stations,  give,  a liberal  Giver,  to the pious  worshipper,   
Wealth,  Agni,  with brave  sons and ready  for his use: welcome  the man who comes  with fuel unto thee.   
4 The seven  who bring  oblations  worship  thee,  the Strong,  the first, the Great  Chief  Priest,  Ensign  of Rig Veda – English Translation  
sacrifice,   
The oil−anointed  Bull,  Agni  who hears,  who sends  as God full hero stren gth to him who freely  gives.   
5 First messenger  art thou,  meet  for election:  drink  thou thy fill invited  to the Anirta,   
The Maruts  in the votary's  house  adorned  thee;  with lauds  the Bhrgus  gave thee light and glory.   
6 Milking  the teeming  Cow  for all−sust aining  food.  O Wise  One,  for the worship−loving  worshipper,   
Thou,  Agni,  dropping  oil, thrice  lighting  works  of Law,  showest  thy wisdom  circling  home  and sacrifice.   
7 They  who at flushing  of this dawn  appointed  thee their messenger,  these  men have paid thee reverence.   
Gods  strengthened  thee for work  that must  be glorified,  Agni,  while  they made  butter  pure for sacrifice.   
8 Arrangers  in our synods,  Agni,  while  they sang Vasisistha  s sons have  called  thee down,  the Potent  One
.  
Maintain  the growth  of wealt h with men who sacrifice.  Ye Gods,  preserve  us with your blessings  evermor
e.  
 
HYMN  CXXIII.  Vena.  
1. SEE,  Vena,  born in light,  hath driven  hither,  on chariot  of the air, the Calves  of Prsni.   
Singers  with hymns  caress  him as an infant  there  where  the waters and the sunlight  mingle.   
2 Vena  draws  up his wave  from  out the ocean.  mist−born,  the fair one's  back  is made  apparent,   
Brightly  he shone  aloft on Order's  summit:  the hosts  sang glory  to their common  birthplace.   
3 Full many,  lowing  to their joint−pos session,  dwelling  together  stood  the Darling's  Mothers.   
Ascending  to the lofty height  of Order,  the bands  of singers  'sip the sweets  of Amrta.   
4 Knowing  his form,  the sages  yearned  to meet  him: they have  come  nigh to hear the wild Bull's  bellow.   
Perform ing sacrifice  they reached  the river:  for the Gandharva  found  the immortal  waters.   
5 The Apsaras,  the Lady,  sweetly  smiling,  supports  her Lover  in sublimest  heaven.   
In his Friend's  dwelling  as a Friend  he wanders:  he, Vena,  rests him on his golden  pinion .  
6 They  gaze on thee with longing  in their spirit,  as on a strong−winged  bird that mounteth  sky−ward;   
 
On thee with wings  of gold,  Varuna's  envoy,  the Bird that hasteneth  to the home  of Yam
a. 7 Erect,  to heaven  hath the Gandharva  mounted,  pointing  at us his many−coloured  we
apons;  Clad  in sweet  raiment  beautiful  to look on, for he, as light,  produceth  forms  that p
lease  us. 8 When  as a spark  he cometh  near the ocean,  still looking  with a vulture's  eye t
o heaven,  His lustre,  joying  in its own bright  splendo ur, maketh  dear glories  in the lowes
t region.  
 
HYMN  CXXIV.  Agni,  Etc.  
1. COME  to this sacrifice  of ours,  O Agni,  threefold,  with seven  threads  and five divisions.   
Be our oblation−bearer  and preceder:  thou hast lain long enough  in during  darkness.   
2 I come a God foreseeing  from  the godless  to immortality  by secret  pathways,   
While  I, ungracious  one, desert  the gracious,  leave  mine  own friends  and seek the kin of strangers.   
3 1, looking  to the guest  of other  lineage,  have  founded  many  a rule of Law and Order.  
I bid farewell  to the Great  God,  the Father,  and, for neglect,  obtain  my share  of worship.   
4 I tarried  many  a year within  this altar:  I leave  the Father,  for my choice  is Indra.   
Away  pass Agni,  Varuna  and Soma.  Rule  ever changes:  this I come  to favour.   
5 These  Asuras  have  lost their powers  of magic.  But thou,  O Varuna,  if thou dost love me,  Rig Veda – English Translation  
O King,  discerning  truth  and right  from  falsehood,  come  and be Lord  and Ruler  of my kingdom.   
6 Here  is the light of heaven,  here allis lovely;  here there  is radiance,  here is air's wide  region.   
Let us two slaughter  Vrtra.  Forth,  O Soma!  Thou  art oblation:  we therewith  will serve  thee.   
7 The Sage  hath fixed  his form  by wisdom  in the heavens : Varuna  with no violence  let the waters  flow.   
Like women−folk,  the floods  that bring  prosperity  have  eau lit his hue and colour  as they gleamed  and sh
one.  
8 These  wait upon  his loftiest  power  and vigour:  he dwells  in these  who triumph  in their Godhead;   
And they,  like people  who elect  their ruler,  have in abhorrence  turned  away  from  Vrtra.   
9 They  call him Swan,  the abhorrent  floods'  Companion,  moving  in friendship  with celestial  Waters.   
The poets  in their thought  have looked  on Indra  swiftly  approachin g when  Anustup  calls him.  
 
HYMN  CXXV.  Vak.  
1. I TRAVEL  with the Rudras  and the Vasus,  with the Adityas  and All−Gods  I wander.   
I hold aloft both Varuna  and Mitra,  Indra  and Agni,  and the Pair of Asvins.   
2 I cherish  and sustain  high−swelling  Soma,  and Tvastar  I support,  Pusan,  and Bhaga.   
I load with wealth  the zealous  sdcrificer  who pours  the juice  and offers  his oblation   
3 I am the Queen,  the gatherer−up  of treasures,  most  thoughtful,  first of those  who merit  worship.   
Thus  Gods  have stablished  me in many  places  with many  homes  to enter  and abide  in.  
4 Through  me alone  all eat the food that feeds  them,−each  man who sees,  brewhes,  hears  the word  outspo
ken  
They  know  it not, but yet they dwell  beside  me. Hear,  one and all, the truth  as I declare  it.  
5 1, verily,  myself  announce  and utter the word  that Gods  and men alike  shall  welcome.   
I make  the man I love exceeding  mighty,  make  him a sage,  a Rsi, and a Brahman.   
6 I bend  the bow for Rudra  that his arrow  may strike  and slay the hater  of devotion.   
I rouse  and order  battle  for the people,  and I have penetrated  Earth  and Heaven.   
7 On the world's  summit  I bring  forth  the Father:  my home  is in the waters,  in the ocean.   
Thence  I extend  o'er all existing  creatures,  and touch  even yonder  heaven  with my forehead.   
8 I breathe  a strong  breath  like the wind and tempest,  the while  I hold together  all existence.   
Beyond  this wide  earth  and beyond  the heavens  I have  become  so mighty  in my grandeur.   
 
HYMN  CXXVI.  Visvedevas.  
1. No peril,  no severe  distress,  ye Gods,  affects  the mortal  man,  Whom  Aryaman  and Mitra lead,  and Vari
ma, of one accord,  beyond  his foes.   
2 This very thing  do we desire,  Varuna,  Mitra,  Aryaman,   
Whereby  ye guhrd  the mortal  man from  sore distress,  and lead him safe beyond  his foes.   
3 These  are, each one, our present  helps,  Varuna,  Mitra,  Aryaman.   
Best leaders,  best deliverers  to lead us on and bear as safe beyond  our foes.   
4 Ye compass  round  and guard  each man,  Varuna,  Mitra,  Aryaman:   
In your dear keeping  may we be, ye who are excellent  as guides  beyond  our foes.   
5 Adityas  are beyond  all foes,−Varuna,  Mitra,  Aryaman:   
Strong  Rudra  with the Marut  host,  Indra,  Agni  let us call for weal  beyond  our foes.   
6 These  lead us safely  over all, Varuna,  Mitra,  Aryaman,   
These  who are Kings  of living  men,  over all troubles  far away  beyond  our foes.   
7 May they give bliss to aid us well,  Varuna,  Mitra,  Aryaman:   
May the Adityas,  when  we pray,  grant  us wide  shelter  and defence  beyond  our foes.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
8 As in this place,  O Holy  Ones,  ye Vasus  freed  even  the Gaud  when  her feet were  fettered.   
So free us now from trouble  and affliction:  and let our life be lengthened  still, O Api.  
 
HYMN  CXXVII.  Night.  
1. WITH  all her eyes the Goddess  Night  looks  forth  approaching  many  a spot:   
She hath put all her glories  on.  
2 Immortal.  she hath filled  the waste,  the Godde ss hath filled  height  and depth:   
She conquers  darkness  with her light.   
3 The Goddess  as she comes  hath set the Dawn  her Sister  in her place:   
And then the darkness  vanishes.   
4 So favour  us this night,  O thou whose  pathways  we have visited   
As birds  their nest upon  the tree.  
5 The villagers  have sought  their homes,  and all that walks  and all that flies,   
Even  the falcons  fain for prey.   
6 Keep  off the she−wolf  and the wolf,  O Urmya,  keep  the thief away;   
Easy  be thou for us to pass.   
7 Clearly  hath she come nigh to me who decks  the dark with richest  hues:   
O Morning,  cancel  it like debts.   
8 These  have  I brought  to thee like kine.  O Night,  thou Child  of Heaven,  accept   
This laud as for a conqueror.   
 
HYMN  CXXVIII.  Visvedevas.  
1. LET me win glory,  Agni,  in our battles:  enkindling  thee,  may we support  our bodies.  May the four regi
ons bend  and bow before  me: with thee for guardian  may we win in combat.  2 May all the Gods  be on my
 side in battle,  the Maruts  led by Indra,  Visnu,  Agni.  Mine  be the middle  air's extended  region,  ani may th
e wind  blow  favouring  these  my wishes.  3 May the Gods  grant  me riches;  may the blessing  and invocatio
n of the Gods  assist  me. Foremost  in fight  be the divine  Invokers:  may we, unwounded,  have  brave  heroes
 round  us. 4 For me let them  present  all mine  oblations,  and let my mind's  intention  be accomplished.  Ma
y I he guiltless  of the least transgression:  and, all ye Go−is,  do ye combine  to bless  us.  
5 Ye six divine  Expanses,  grant  us freedom:  here,  all ye Gods,  acquit  yourselves  like heroes.   
Let us not lose our children  or our bodies:  let us not benefit  the foe, King  Soma!   
6 Baffling  the wrath  of our opponents,  Agni,  guard  us as our infallible  Protector.   
Let these  thy foes turn back  and seek their houses,  and let their thought  who watch  at home  be ruined.   
7 Lord  of the world,  Creator  of creators  the saviour  God who overcomes  the foeman.   
May Gods,  Brhaspati,  both Asvins  shelter  from  ill thii sacrifice  and sacrificer.   
8 Foodful,  and much−invoked,  at this our calling  mty the great  Bull vouchsafe  us wide  protection.   
Lord  of Bay Coursers,  Indra,  blew  our children:  harm  us not, give us riot as prey to others.   
9 Let those  who are our foemen  stay. afar from  us: with Indra  and with Agni  we will drive  them  off.  
Vasus,  Adityas,  Rudras  have  exalted  me, made  me far−reaching,  inighty,  thinker,  sovran  lord.  
 
HYMN  CXXIX.  Creation.  
1. THEN  was not non−existent  nor existent:  there  was no realm  of air, no sky beyond  it.  
What  covere d in, and where?  and what  gave shelter?  Was water  there,  unfathomed  depth  of water?   Rig Veda – English Translation  
2 Death  was not then,  nor was there  aught  immortal:  no sign was there,  the day's  and night's  divider.   
That One Thing,  breathless,  breathed  by its own nature:  apart  from  it was nothing  whatsoever.   
3 Darkness  there  was: at first concealed  in darknew  this All was indiscriminated  chaos.   
All that existed  then was void and form  less: by the great  power  of Warmth  was born that Unit.   
4 Thereafter  rose Desire  in the beginning,  Desire,  the primal  seed and germ  of Spirit.   
Sages  who searched  with their heart's  thought  discovered  the existent's  kinship  in the non−existent.   
5 Transversely  was their severing  line extended:  what  was above  it then,  and what  below  it?  
There  were  begett ers, there  were  mighty  forces,  free action  here and energy  up yonder   
6 Who  verily  knows  and who can here declare  it, whence  it was born and whence  comes  this creation?   
TheGods  are later than this world's  production.  Who  knows  then whence  it first came  into being?   
7 He, the first origin  of this creation,  whether  he formed  it all or did not form  it,  
Whose  eye controls  this world  in highest  heaven,  he verily  knows  it, or perhaps  he knows  not.  
 
HYMN  CXXX.  Creation.  
1. THE  sacrifice  drawn  out with threads  on every  side, stretched  by a hundred  sacred  ministers  and one,−   
This do these  Fathers  weave  who hitherward  are come:  they sit beside  the warp  and cry, Weave  forth,  wea
ve 
back.   
2 The Man extends  it and the Man unbinds  it: even  to this vault  of heaven  hath he outspun,  it.  
These  pegs are fastened  to the seat of worship:  they made  the Sama−hymns  their weaving  shuttles.   
3 What  were  the rule, the order  and the model?  What  were  the wooden  fender  and the butter?   
What  were  the hymn,  the chant,  the recitation,  when  to the God all Deities  paid worship?   
4 Closely  was Gayatri  conjoined  with Agni,  and closely  Savitar  combined  with Usnih.   
Brilliant  with Ukthas,  Soma  joined  Anustup:  Brhaspati's  voice  by Brhati  was aided.   
5 Viraj  adhered  to Varuna  and Mitra:  here Tristup  day by day was Indra's  portion.   
Jagati  entered  all the Gods  together:  so by this knowledge  men were  raised  to Rsis.   
6 So by this knowledge  men were  raised  to Rsis,  when  ancient  sacrifice  sprang  up, our Fathers.   
With  the mind's  eye I think  that I behold  them  who first performed  this sacrificial  worship.   
7 They  who were  versed  in ritual  and metre,  in hymns  and rules,  were  the Seven  Godlike  Rsis.   
Viewing  the path of those  of old, the sages  have taken  up the reins  like chariot−drivers.   
 
HYMN  CXXXI . Indra.  
1. DRIVE  all our enemies  away,  O Indra,  the western,  mighty  Conqueror,  and the eastern.   
Hero,  drive  off our northern  foes and southern,  that we in thy wide  shelter  may be joyful.   
2 What  then?  As men whose  fields  are full of barley  reap the ripe corn removing  it in order,   
So bring  the food of those  men,  bring  it hither,  who went  not to prepare  the grass  for worship.   
3 Men come  not with one horse  at sacred  seasons;  thus they obtain  no honour  in assemblies.   
Sages  desiring  herds  of kine and horse s strengthen  the mighty  Indra  for his friendship.   
4 Ye, Asvins,  Lords  of Splendour,  drank  full draughts  of grateful  Soma  juice,   
And aided  Indra  in his work  with Namuci  of Asura  birth.   
5 As parents  aid a son, both Asvins,  Indra,  aided  thee with their wondrous  Powers  and wisdom.   
When  thou,  with might.  hadst  drunk  the draught  that gladdens,  Sarasvati,  O Maghavan,  refreshed  thee.   
6 Indra  is strong  to save,  rich in assistance  may he, possessing  all, be kind and gracious.   
May he disperse  our foes and give us safety,  and may we be the lords  of hero vigou  r.  
7 May we enjoy  his favour,  his the Holy  may we enjoy  his blessed  loving  kindness.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
May this rich Indra,  as our good  Protector,  drive  off and keep  afar all those  who hate us.  
 
HYMN  CXXXII.  Mitra.  Varuna.   
1. MAY  Dyaus  the Lord  of lauded  wealth,  and Earth  stand  by the man who offers  sacrifice,   
And may the Asvins,  both the Gods,  strengthen  the worshipper  with bliss.   
2 As such we honour  you, Mitra  and Varuna,  with hasty  zeal, most  blest,  you who sustain  the folk.  
So may we, through  your friendship  for the worshipper,  subdue  the fiends.   
3 And when  we seek to win your love and friendship,  we.who  have  precious  wealth  in our possession,   
Or when  the worshipper  augments  his riches  let not his treasures  be shut up  
4 That other,  Asura!  too was born of Heaven.  thou art, O Varuna,  the King  of all men.   
The chariot's  Lord  was well content,  forbearing  to anger  Death  by sin so great.   
This sin hath Sakaputa  here committed.  Heroes  who fled to their dear friend  he slayeth,  
When  the Steed  bringeth  down  your grace  and favour  in bodies  dear and worshipful.   
6 Your  Mother  Aditi,  ye wise,  was purified  with water  even  as earth  is purified  from  heaven.   
Show  love and kindness  here below:  wash  her in rays of heavenly  light.   
7 Ye Twain  have seated  you as Lords  of Wealth,  as one who mounts  a car to him who sits upon  the pole,  
upon  the wood.   
These  our disheartened  tribes  Nrmedhas  saved  from  woe,  Sumedhas  saved  from  Woe.   
 
HYMN  CXXXIII.  Indra.  
1. SING  strength  to Indra  that shall set his chariot  in the foremost  place.   
Giver  of room  in closest  fight,  slayer  of foes in shock  of war, be thou our great  encourager.  Let the weak  
bowstrings  break  upon  the bows  of feeble  enemies.   
2 Thou  didst  destroy  the Dragon:  thou sentest  the river s down  to earth.   
Foeless,  O Indra,  wast thou born.  Thou  tendest  well each choicest  thing.  Therefore  we draw  us close  to th
ee. 
Let the weak  bowstrings  break  upon  the bows  of feeble  enemies.   
3 Destroyed  be all malignities  and all our enemy's  designs.   
Thy bolt thou castest,  at the foe, O Indra,  who would  srnite  us dead:  thy liberal  bounty  gives  us wealth.   
4 The robber  people  round  about,  Indra,  who watch  and aim at us,−  
Trample  them  down  beneath  thy foot;  a conquering  scatterer  art thou.   
5 Whoso  assails  us, Indra,  be the man a stranger  or akin,   
 
Bring  down,  thyself,  his strength  although  it be as vast as are the heavens.   
6 Close  to thy friendship  do we cling,  O Indra,  and depend,  or, thee.   
Lead  us beyond  all pain and grief  along  the path of holy Law.   
7 Do thou bestow  upon  us her, O Indra,  who yields  according  to the singer's  longing,   
That the great  Cow  may,  with exhaustless  udder,  pouring  a thousand  streams,  give milk to feed us.  
 
HYMN  CXXXIV.  Indra.  
1. As, like the Morning,  thou hast filled,  O Indra, both the earth  and heaven.   
So as the Mighty  One,  great  King  of all the mighty  world  of men,  the Goddess  Mother  brought  thee forth,
 the Rig Veda – English Translation  
Blessed  Mother  gave thee life.  
2 Relax  that mortal's  stubborn  strength  whose  heart  is bent on wickedness.   
Trample  him down  beneath  thy feet who watches  for and aims  at us. The Goddess  Mother  brought  thee fo
rth, 
the Blessed  Mother  gave thee life.  
3 Shake  down,  O Slayer  of the foe, those  great  all splendid  enemies.   
With  all thy powers,  O Sakra,  all thine  helps,  O Indra, shake  them  down:   
4 As thou,  O Satakratu,  thou,  O Indrv,  shakest  all things  down   
As wealth  for him who sheds  the juice,  with thine  assistance  thousandfold.   
5 Around,  on every  side like drops  of sweat  let lightning−flashes  fall.  
Let all malevolence  pass away  from  us like threads  of Darva  grass.   
6 Thou  bearest  in thine  hand  a lance  like a long hook,  great  Counsellor!   
As with his foremost  foot a goat,  draw  down  the branch,  O Maghavan.   
7 Never,  O Gods,  do we offend,  nor are we ever obstinate:  we walk  as holy texts  command.   
Closely  we clasp  and cling  to you, cling  to your sides,  beneath  your arms.   
 
HYMN  CXXXV.  Yama.  
1. IN the Tree clothed  with goodly  leaves  where  Yama  drinketh  with the Gods,   
The Father,  Master  of the house,  tendeth  with love our ancient Sires.   
2 I looked  reluctantly  on him who cherishes  those  men of old,  
On him who treads  that evil path,  and then I yearned  for this again.   
3 Thou  mountest,  though  thou dost not see, O Child,  the new and wheel−less  car  
Which  thou hast fashioned  ment ally, onepoled  but turning  every  way.   
4 The car which  thou hast made  to roll hitherward  from  the Sages,  Child!   
This hath the Saman  followed  close,  hence,  laid together  on a ship.   
5 Who  was the father  of the child?  Who  made  the chariot  roll away?   
Who  will this day declare  to us how the funeral  gift was made?   
6 When  the funeral  gift was placed,  straightway  the point  of flame  appeared.   
A depth  extended  in the front:  a passage  out was made  behind.   
7 Here  is the seat where  Yama  dwells,  that which  is calle d the Home  of Gods:   
Here  minstrels  blow  the flute for him here he is glorified  with songs.   
 
HYMN  CXXXVI.  Kesins.  
1. HE with the long loose  locks  supports  Agni,  and moisture,  heaven,  and earth:   
He is all sky to look upon:  he with long hair is called  this light.   
2 The Munis,  girdled  with the wind,  wear  garments  soiled  of yellow  hue.  
 
They,  following  the wind's  swift  course  go where  the Gods  have  gone  before.   
3 Transported  with our Munihood  we have  pressed  on into the winds:   
You therefore,  mortal  men.  behold  our natural  bodies  and no more.   
4 The Muni,  made  associate  in the holy work  of every  God,   
Looking  upon  all varied  forms  flies through  the region  of the air.  
5 The Steed  of Vata,  Vayu's  friend,  the Muni,  by the Gods  impelled,   
In both the oceans  hath his home,  in eastern  and in western  sea.  
6 Treading  the path of sylvan  beasts,  Gandharvas,  and Apsarases,   Rig Veda – English Translation  
He with long locks,  who knows  the wish,  is a sweet  most  delightful  friend   
7 Vayu  hath churned  for him: for him he poundeth  things  most  hard to bend,   
When  he with long loose  locks  hath drunk,  with Rudra,  water  from  the cup.  
 
HYMN  CXXXVII  Visvedevas.  
1. YE Gods,  raise  up once  more  the man whom  ye have  humbled  and brought  low.  
O Gods,  restore  to life again  the man who hatb committed  sin.  
2 Two several  winds  are blowing  here,  from  Sindhu,  from  a distant  land.   
May one breathe  energy  to thee,  the other  blow  disease  away.   
3 Hither,  O Wind,  blow  healing  balm,  blow  all disease  away,  thou Wind;   
For thou who hast all medicine  comest  as envoy  of the Gods.   
4 I am come  nigh to thee with balms  to give thee rest and keep  thee safe.  
I bring  thee blessed  strength,  I drive  thy weakening  malady  away.   
5 Here  let the Gods  deliver  him, the Maruts'  band  deliver  him:  
All things  that be deliver  him that he be freed  from  his disease.   
6 The Waters  have their healing  power,  the Waters  drive  disease  away.   
The Waters  have a balm  for all: let them  make  medicine  for thee.   
7 The tongue  that leads  the voice  precedes.  Then  with our ten−fold  branching  hands,   
With  these two chasers  of disease  we stroke  thee with a gentle  touch.   
 
HYMN  CXXXVIII.  Indra.  
1. ALLIED  with thee in friendship,  Indra,  these,  thy priests,  remembering  Holy  Law,  rent Vrtra  limb from  
limb,   
When  they bestowed  the Dawns  and let the waters  flow,  and when  thou didst  chastise  dragons  at Kutsa's  c
all.  
2 Thou  sentest  forth  productive  powers,  clavest  the hills,  thou dravest  forth  the kine,  thou drankest  pleasa
nt 
meath.   
Thou  gavest  increase  through  this Tree's  surpassing  might.  The Sun shone  by the hymn  that sprang  from  
Holy  
Law.   
3 In the mid−way  of heaven  the Sun unyoked  his car: the Arya  found  a match  to meet  his Dam  foe.  
Associate  with Rjisvan  Indra  overthrew  the solid  forts of Pipru,  conjuring  Asura.   
4 He boldly  cast down  forts which  none  had e'er assailed:  unwearied  he destroycd  the godless  
treasure−stores.   
Like Sun and Moon  he took the stronghold's  wealth  away,  and, praised  in song,  demolished  foes with 
flashing  dart.  
5 Armed  with resistless  weapons,  with vast power  to cleave,  the Vrtra−slayer  whets his darts  and deals  for
di 
wounds.   
Bright  Usas  was afraid  of Indra's  slaughtering  bolt: she went  upon  her way and left her chariot  there.   
6 These  are thy famous  exploits,  only thine,  when  thou alone  hast left the other  reft of sacrifice.   
 
Thou  in the heavens  hast set the ordering  of the Moons:  the Father  bears  the felly portioned  out by thee.  Rig Veda – English Translation  
 
HYMN  CXXXIX.  Savitar.  
1. SAVITAR,  golden−haired,  hath lifted  eastward,  bright  With  the sunbeams,  his eternal  lustre;   
He in whose  energy  wise Pusan  marches,  surveying  all existence  like a herdsman.   
2 Beholding  men he sits amid  the heaven  filling  the two world−halves  and air's wide  region.   
He looks  upon  the rich far−spreading  pastures  between  the eastern  and the western  limit.   
3 He, root of wealth,  the gatherer−up  of treasures,  looks  with his might  on every  form  and figure.   
Savitar,  like a God.whose  Law is constant,  stands  in the battle  for the spoil  like Indra.   
4 Waters  from  sacrifice  came  to the Gandharva  Visvavasu,  O Soma,  when  they saw him.  
Indra,  approaching  quickly,  marked  their going,  and looked  around  upon  the Sun's  enclosures.   
5 This song  Visvavasu  shall  sing us, meter of air's mid−realm  celestial  Gandharva,   
That we may know  aright  both truth  and falsehood:  may he inspire  our thoughts  and help our praises.   
6 In the floods'  track  he found  the bootyseeker:  the rocky  cow−pen's  doors  he threw  wide  open.   
These,  the Gandharva  told him, Rowed  with Amrta.  Indra  knew  well the puissancc  of the dragons.   
 
HYMN  CXL.  Agni.  
1. AGNI,  life−power  and fame  are thine:  thy fires blaze  mightily,  thou rich in wealth  of beams!   
Sage,  passing  bright,  thou givest  to the worshipper,  with strength,  the food that merits  laud.   
2 With  brilliant,  purifying  sheen,  with perfect  sheen  thou liftest  up thyself  in light.   
Thou,  visiting  both thy Mothers,  aidest  them  as Son: thou joinest  close  the earth  and heaven.   
3 O Jatavedas,  Son of Strength,  rejoice  ihyself,  gracious,  in our fair hymns  and songs.   
In thee are treasured  various  forms  of strengthening  food,  born nobly  and of wondrous  help.   
4 Agni,  spread  forth,  as Ruler,  over living  things:  give wealth  to us, Immortal  God.   
Thou  shinest  out from  beauty  fair to look upon:  thou leadest  us to conquering  power.   
5 To him, the wise,  who orders  sacrifice,  who hath great  riches  un der his control,   
Thou  givest  blest  award  of good,  and plenteous  food,  givest  him wealth  that conquers  all.  
6 The men have  set before  them  them  for their welfare  Agni,  strong,  visible  to all, the Holy.   
Thee,  Godlike  One,  with ears to hear,  most  famous,  men' s generations  magnify  with praise−songs.   
 
HYMN  CXLI.  Visvedevas.  
1. TURN  hither,  Agni,  speak  to us: come  to us with a gracious  mind.  Enrich  us, Master  of the house:  thou
 art the Giver  of our wealth.   
2 Let Aryarnan  vouchsafe  us wealth,  and Bhaga,  and Brhaspati.   
Let the Gods  give their gifts,  and let Sunrta,  Goddess,  grant  us wealth.   
3 We call King  Soma  to our aid, and Agni  with our songs  and hymns,   
Adityas,  Visnu,  Surya,  and the Brahman  Priest  Brhaspati.   
4 Indra,  Vayu,  Brhaspati,  Gods  swift  to listen , we invoke,   
That in the synod  all the folk may be benevolent  to us.  
5 Urge  Aryaman  to send us gifts,  and Indra,  and Brhaspati,   
Vata,  Visnu,  Sarasvati  and the Strong  Courser  Savitar.   
6 Do thou,  O Agni,  with thy fires strengthen  our prayer  and sacrifice :  
Urge  givers  to bestow  their wealth  to aid our service  of the Gods.   
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  CXLII.  Agni.  
1. WITH  thee,  O Agni,  was this singer  of the laud:  he hath no other  kinship,  O thou Son of Strength.   
Thou  givest  blessed  shelter  with a triple  guard.  Keep  the destructive  lightning  far away  from  us.  
2 Thy birth  who seekest  food is in the falling  flood,  Agni:  as Comrade  thou winnest  all living  things.   
Our coursers  and our songs  shall  be victorious:  they of themselves  advance  like one who guards  the herd.   
3 And thou, O Agni,  thou of Godlike  nature,  sparest  the stones,  while  caring  up the brushwood.   
Then  are thy tracks  like deserts  in the corn−lands.  Let us not stir to wrath  thy mighty  arrow.   
4 O'er hills through  vales  devouring  as thou goest,  thou partest  like an army  fain for booty   
As when  a barber  shaves  a beard,  thou shavest  earth  when  the wind  blows  on thy flame  and fans it.  
5 Apparent  are his lines  as he approaches  the course  is single,  but the cars are many,   
When,  Agni,  thou,  making  thine  arms  resplendent,  advancest  o'er the land spread  out beneath  thee.   
6 Now  let thy strength,  thy burning  flames  fly upward,  thine  energies,  O Agni,  as thou toilest.   
Gape  widely,  bend  thee,  waxing  in thy vigour:  let all the Vasus  sit this day beside  thee.   
7 This is the waters' reservoir,  the great  abode  of gathered  streams.   
Take  thou another  path than this, and as thou listest  walk  thereon.   
8 On thy way hitherward  and hence  let flowery  Durva  grass  spring  up  
Let there  be lakes  with lotus  blooms.  These  are the mansions  of the flood.   
 
HYMN  CXLIII.  Asvins.  
1. YE made  that Atri, worn  with eld, free as a horse  to win the goal.  When  ye restored  to youth  and streng
th Kaksivan  like a car renewed,   
2 Ye freed  that Atri like a horse,  and brought  him newly−born  to earth.   
Ye loosed  him like a firm−tied  knot which  Gods  unsoiled  by dust had bound.   
3 Heroes  who showed  most  wondrous  power  to Atri, strive  to win fair songs;   
For then,  O Heroes  of the sky, your hymn  of praise  shall  cease  no more.   
4 This claims  your notice,  Bounteous  Gods!  − oblation,  Asvins!  and our love,   
That ye, O Heroes,  in the fight may bring  us safe to ample  room.   
5 Ye Twain  to Bhujyu  tossed  about  in ocean  at the region's  end,  
Nasat yas, with your winged  sterds  came  nigh,  and gave him strength  to win.  
6 Come  with your joys,  most  liberal  Gods,  Lords  of all treasures,  bringing  weal.   
Like fresh  full waters  to a well,  so, Heroes  come  and be with us.  
 
HYMN  CXLIV.  Indra.  
1. THIS  deathl ess Indu,  like a steed,  strong  and of full vitality,  Belongs  to thee,  the Orderer.   
2 Here,  by us, for the worshipper,  is the wise bolt that works  with skill.   
It brings  the bubbling  beverage  as a dexterous  man brings  the effectual  strong  drink.   
3 Impetuo us Ahisuva,  a bull among  cows  of his,  
looked  down  upon  the restless  Hawk.   
4 That the strong−pinioned  Bird hath brought,  Child  of the Falcon,  from  afar,  
What  moves  upon  a hundred  wheels  along  the female  Dragon's  path.   
5 Which,  fair, unrobbed,  the Falcon  brought  thee in his foot, the red−hued  dwelling  of the juice;   
Through  this came  vital power  which  lengthens  out our days,  and kinship  through  its help awoke.   
6 So Indra  is by lndu's  power;  e'en among  Gods  will it repel  great  treachery.   
Wisdom,  Most  Sapient One,  brings  force  that lengthens  life. May wisdom  bring  the juice  to us.  Rig Veda – English Translation  
 
HYMN  CXLV.  Sapatnibadhanam.  
1. FROM  out the earth  I dig this plant,  a herb of most  effectual  power,  Wherewith  one quells  the rival wif
e and gains  the husband  for oneself.   
2 Auspicious,  with expanded  leaves,  sent by the Gods,  victorious  plant,   
Blow  thou the rival wife away,  and make  my husband  only mine.   
3 Stronger  am 1, O Stronger  One,  yea, mightier  than the mightier;   
And she who is my rival wife is lower  than the lowest  dames.   
4 Her very name  I utter not: she takes  no pleasure  in this man.   
Far into distance  most  remote  drive  we the rival wife away.   
5 I am the conqueror,  and thou,  thou also act victorious:   
As victory  attends  us both we will subdue  my fellow−wife.   
6 I have gained  thee for vanquisher,  have grasped  thee with a stronger  spell.   
As a cow hastens  to her calf, so let thy spirit  speed  te me, hasten  like water  on its way.   
 
HYMN  CXLVI.  Aranyani.  
1. GODDESS  of wild and forest  who seemest  to vanish  from  the sight. How  is it that thou seekest  not the 
village?  Art thou not afraid?   
2 What  time the grasshopper  replies  and swells  the shrill  cicala's  voice,   
Seeming  to sound  with tinkling  bells,  the Lady  of the Wood  exults.   
3 And,  yonder,  cattle  seem  to graze,  what  seems  a dwelling−place  appears:   
Or else at eve the Lady  of the Forest  seems  to free the wains.   
4 Here  one is calling  to his cow,  another  there  hath felled  a tree:  
At eve the dweller  in the wood  fancies  that somebody  hath screamed.   
5 The Goddess  never  slays, unless  some  murderous  enemy  approach.   
Man eats of savoury  fruit and then takes,  even  as he wills,  his rest.  
6 Now  have  I praised  the Forest  Queen,  sweet−scented,  redolent  of balm,   
The Mother  of all sylvan  things,  who tills not but hath stores  of food.  
 
HYMN  CXLVII  Indra.  
1. I TRUST  in thy first wrathful  deed,  O Indra,  when  thou slewest  Vrtra  and didst  work  to profit  man;   
What  time the two world−halves  fell short  of thee in might,  and the earth  trembled  at thy force,  O 
Thunder−anned.   
2 Thou  with thy magic  powers  didst  rend the conjurer  Vrtra,  O Blameless  One,  with heart  that longed  for 
fame.   
Heroes  elect  thee when  they battle  for the prey,  thee in all sacrifices  worthy  of renown.   
3 God Much−invoked,  take pleasure  in these  princes  here,  who,  thine exalters,  Maghavan,  have  come  to 
wealth.   
In synods,  when  the rite succeeds,  they hymn  the Strong  for sons and progeny  and riches  undisturbed.   
4 That man shall  find delight  in well−protected  wealth  whose  care provides  for him the quick−sought  joy
ous 
draught.   
Bringing  oblations,  strengthened  Maghavan,  by thee,  he swiftly  wins  the spoil  with heroes  in the fight.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
5 Now  for our band,  O Maghavan,  when  lauded,  make  ample  room  with might,  and grant  us riches.   
Magician  thou,  our Varuna  and Mitra,  deal food to us, O Wondrous,  as Dispenser.   
 
HYMN  CXLVIII.  Indra.  
1. WHEN  we have  pressed  the juice  we laud thee,  Indra,  and when,  Most  Valorous  we have  won the boot
y.  
Bring  us prosperity,  as each desires  it under  thine  own protection  may we conquer.   
2 Sublime  from birth,  mayst  thou O Indra,  Hero,  with Surya  overcome  the Dasa  races.   
As by a fountain's  side, we bring  the Soma  that lay concealed,  close−hidden  in the waters.   
3 Answer  the votary's  hymns,  for these  thou knowest,  craving  the Rsis'  prayer,  thyself  a Singer  
May we be they who take delight  in Somas:  these  with sweet  food for thee,  O Chariot−rider.   
4 These  holy prayers,  O Indra,  have  I sung  thee:  grant  to the men the strength  of men,  thou Hero.   
Be of one mind  with those  in whom  thou joyest:  keep  thou the singers  safe and their companions.   
5 Listen  to Prthi's  call, heroic  Indra,  and be thou lauded  by the hymns  of Venya,   
Him who hath sung  thee to thine  oil−rich  dwelling,  whose  rolling  songs  have  sped thee like a torrent.   
 
HYMN  CXLIX.  Savitar.  
1. SAVIT AR fixed  the earth  with bands  to bind it, and made  heaven  stedfast  where  no prop supported.   
Savitar  milked,  as 'twere  a restless  courser,  air, sea bound  fast to what  no foot had trodden.   
2 Well  knoweth  Savitar,  O Child  of Waters,  where  ocean,  firmly  fixt, o'erflowed  its limit.   
Thence  sprang  the world,  from  that uprose  the region:  thence  heaven  spread  out and the wide  earth  expan
ded.  
3 Then,  with a full crowd  of Immortal  Beings,  this other  realm  came  later,  high and holy.   
First,  verily,  Savitar's  strong −pinioned  Eagle  was born:  and he obeys  his law for ever.   
4 As warriors  to their steeds,  kine to their village,  as fond milk giving  cows  approach  their youngling,   
As man to wife,  let Savitar  come  downward  to us, heaven's  bearer,  Lord  of every  blessing.   
5 Like the Angirasa  Hiranvastupa,  I call thee,  Savitar,  to this achievement:   
So worshipping  and lauding  thee for favour  I watch  for thee as for the stalk of Soma.   
 
HYMN  CL. Agni.  
1. THOU,  bearer  of oblations,  though  kindled,  art kindled  for the Gods.  With the Adityas,  Rudras,  Vasus,  
come  to us: to show  us favour  come  to us.  
2 Come  hither  and accept  with joy this sacrifice  and hymn  of ours.   
O kindled  God,  we mortals  are invoking  thee,  calling  on thee to show  us grace.   
3 I laud thee Jatavedas,  thee Lord  of all blessings,  with my song.   
Agni,  bring  hitherward  the Gods  whose  Laws  we love,  whose  laws we love,  to show  us grace.   
4 Agni  the God was made  the great  High−Priest  of Gods,  Rsis have  kindled  Agni,  men of mortal  mould.   
Agni  I invocate  for winning  ample wealth.  kindly  disposed  for winning  wealth.   
5 Atri and Bharadvaja  and Gavisthira,  Kanva  and Trasadasyu,  in our fight  he helped.   
On Agni  calls Vasistha,  even  the household  priest,  the household  priest  to win his grace.   
 