Rig Veda – English Translation  
14 Past and gone  are three  mortal  generations:  the fourth  and last into the Sun hath entered.   
He mid the worlds  his lofty  place  hath taken.  Into green  plants  is gone  the Purifying.   
15 The Rudras'  Mother,  Daughter  of the Vasus,  centre  of nectar,  the Adity as' Sister−   
To folk who understand  will 1 proclaim  it−injure  not Aditi,  the Cow,  the sinless.   
16 Weak−minded  men have  as a cow adopted  me who came  hither  from  the Gods,  a Goddess,   
Who,  skilled  in eloquence,  her voice  uplifteth,  who standeth  near at hand  with all devotions.   
 
HYMN  XCI. Agni.  
1. LORD  of the house,  Sage,  ever young,  high power  of life, O Agni,  God,   
Thou  givest  to thy worshipper.   
2 So with our song  that prays  and serves,  attentive,  Lord  of spreading  light,   
Agni,  bring  hitherward  the Gods.  
3 For, Ever−Youthful  One,  with thee,  best Furtherer,  as our ally,  
We overcome,  to win the spoil.   
4 As Aurva  Bhrgu  used,  as Apnavana  used,  I call the pure  
Agni  who clothes  him with the sea.  
5 1 call the Sage  who sounds  like wind,  the Might  that like Parjanya  roars,   
Agni  who clothes  him with the sea.  
6 As Savitar's  productive  Power,  as him who sends  down  bliss,  I call  
Agni  who clothes  him with the sea.  
7 Hither,  for powerful  kirship,  I call Agni,  him Who  prospers  you,  
Most  frequent  at our solemn  rites  
8 That through  this famed  One's  power,  he may stand  by us even  as Tvastar  comes   
Unto  the forms  that must  he shaped.   
9 This Agni  is the Lord  supreme  above  all glories  mid the Gods:   
May he come  nigh to us with strength.   
10 Here  praise  ye him the most renowned  of all the ministering  Priests,   
Agni,  the Chief  at sacrifice;   
11 Piercing,  with purifying  flame,  enkindled  in our homes,  most  high,   
Swiftest  to hear from  far away.   
12 Sage,  laud the Mighty  One who wins  the spoil  of victory  like a steed,   
 
And,  Mitra  like, unites  the folk.  
13 Still turning  to their aim in thee,  the oblation−bearer's  sister  hymns   
Have  come  to thee before  the wind.   
14 The waters  find their place  in him, for whom  the threefold  sacred  grass   
Is spread  unbound,  unlimited.   
15 The station  of the Bounteous  God hath,  through  his aid which  none  impair,   
A pleasant  aspect  like the Sun.  
16 Blazing  with splendour,  Agni,  God,  through  pious  gifts of sacred  oil,  
Bring  thou the Gods  and worship  them.   
17 The Gods  as mothers  brought  thee forth,  the Immortal  Sage,  O Afigiras,   
The bearer  of our gifts to heaven.   
18 Wise  Agni,  Gods  established  thee,  the Seer,  noblest  messenger,   
As bearer  of our sacred  gifts.   
19 No cow have  I to call mine  own,  no axe at hand  wherewith  to work,   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Yet what  is here I bring  to thee.   
20 O Agni,  whatsoever  be the fuel that we lay for thee,   
Be pleased  therewith,  Most  Youthful  God  
21 That which  the white−ant  cats away,  that over which  the emmet  crawls−   
May all of this be oil to thee.   
22 When  he enkindles  Agni,  man should  with his heart  attend  the song:   
I with the priests  have  kindled  him.  
 
HYMN  XCII.  Agni  
1. THAT  noblest  Furtherer  hath appeared,  to whom  men bring  their holy works.   
Our songs  of praise  have  risen  aloft to Agni  who was barn to give the Arya  strength.   
2 Agni  of Divodasa  turned,  as 'twere  in majesty,  to the Gods.   
Onward  he sped along  the mother  earth,  and took his station  in the height  of heaven.   
3 Him before  whom  the people  shrink  when  he performs  his glorious  deeds,   
Him who wins  thousands  at the worship  of the Gods,  himself,  that Agni,  serve  with son s.  
4 The mortal  man whom  thou wouldst  lead to opulence,  O Vasu,  he who brings  thee gifts.   
He, Agni,  wins  himself  a hero singing  lauds,  yea, one who feeds  a thousand  men.   
5 He with the steed  wins spoil  even  in the fenced  fort, and gains  imperishable  fame.   
In thee,  O Lord  of wealth,  continually  we lay all precious  offerings  to the Gods.   
6 To him who dealeth  out all wealth,  who is the cheerful  Priest  of men,   
To him, like the first vessels  filled with savoury  juice,  to Agni  go the songs  of praise.   
7 Votaries,  richly−gifted,  deck him with their songs,  even as the steed  who draws  the car.  
On both,  Strong  Lord  of men!  on child  and grandson  pour the bounties  which  our nobles  give.   
8 Sing forth  to him, the Holy,  most  munificent,  sublime  with his refulgent  glow,   
To Agni,  ye Upastutas.   
9 Worshipped  with gifts,  enkindled,  splendid,  Maghavan  shall  win himself  heroic  fame.   
And will not his most  newly  shown  benevolence  come  to us with abundant  strengt h?  
10 Priest,  presser  of the juice!  praise  now the dearest  Guest  of all our friends,   
Agni,  the driver  of the cars.  
11 Who,  finder−out  of treasures  open  and concealed,  bringeth  them  hither,  Holy  One;   
Whose  waves,  as in a cataract,  are hard to pass,  when  he, through  song,  would  win him strength.   
12 Let not the noble  Guest,  Agni,  be wroth  with us: by many  a man his praise  is sung,   
Good  Herald,  skilled  in sacrifice.   
13 O Vasu,  Agni,  let not them  be harmed  who come  in any way with lauds  to thee.   
Even  the lowly,  skilled  in rites,  with offered  gifts,  seeketh  thee for the envoy's  task.  
 
14 Friend  of the Maruts,  Agni,  come  with Rudras  to the Soma−draught,   
To Sobhar's  fair song  of praise,  and be thou joyful  in the light.   
VALAKHILYA   
APPENDIX:  (Book  VIII.  Hymns  49−59.  M. Müller.)   
 
HYMN  I. Indra.  
1. TO you will I sing Indra's  praise  who gives  good  gifts as well we know;   
The praise  of Maghavan  who,  rich in treasure,  aids his singers  with wealth  thousandfold.   
2 As with a hundred  hosts,  he rushes  boldly  on, and for the offerer  slays  his foes.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
As from  a mountain  flow the water−brooks,  thus flow his gifts who feedeth  many  a one.  
3 The drops  effused,  the gladdening  draughts,  O Indra,  Lover  of the Son  
As waters  seek the lake where  they are wont  to rest, fill thee,  for bounty,  Thunderer.   
4 The matchless  draught  that strengthens  and gives  eloquence,  the sweetest  of the meath  drink  thou,   
That in thy joy thou maysi  scatter  thy gifts o'er us, plenteously,  even  as the dust.   
5 Come  quickly  to our laud,  urged  on by Soma−pressers  like a horse−   
Laud,  Godlike  Indra,  which  milch−kine  make  sweet  for thee: with Kanva's  sons are gifts for thee.   
6 With  homage  have  we sought  thee as a Hero,  strong,  preeminent,  with unfailing  wealth.   
O Thunderer,  as a plenteous  spring  pours  forth  its stream,  so, Indra,  flow our songs  to thee.   
7 If now thou art at sacrifi ce, or if thou art upon  the earth,   
Come  thence,  high−thoughted!  to our sacrifice  with the Swift,  come,  Mighty  with the Mighty  Ones.   
8 The active,  fleet−foot,  tawny  Coursers  that are thine  are swift  to victory,  like the Wind,   
Wherewith  thou goest  round  to visit Manus'  seed,  wherewith  all heaven  is visible.   
9 Indra,  from  thee so great  we crave  prosperity  in wealth  of kine,   
As, Maghavan,  thou favouredst  Medhyatithi,  and, in the fight,  Nipatithi.   
10 As, Maghavan,  to Kanva,  Trasadasyu,  and to Paktha  and Dasavraja;   
As, Indra,  to Gosarya  and Rjisvan,  thou vouchsafedst  wealth  in kine and gold.   
 
HYMN  II. Indra.  
1. SAKRA  I praise,  to win his aid, far−famed,  exceeding  bountiful,  Who  gives,  as 'twere  in thousands,  pre
cious  wealth  to him who sheds  the juice  and worships  him.  
2 Arrows  with hundred  points,  unconquerable,  are this Indra's  n−dghty  arms  in war.  
He strea ms on liberal  worshippers  like a hill with springs,  when  juices  poured  have gladdened  him.  
3 What  time the flowing  Soma−drops  have  gladdened  with their taste the Friend,   
Like water,  gracious  Lord!  were  my libations  made,  like milch−kine  to the worshipper .  
4 To him the peerless,  who is calling  you to give you aid, forth  flow the drops  of pleasant  meath.   
The Soloa−drops  which  call on thee,  O gracious  Lord,  have  brought  thee to our hymn  of praise.   
5 He rushes  hurrying  like a steed  to Soma  that adorns  our rite,  
Which  hymns  make  sweet  to thee,  lover  of pleasant  food.  The call to Paura  thou dost love.   
6 Praise  the strong,  grasping  Hero,  winner  of the spoil,  ruling  supreme  oer mighty  wealth.   
Like a full spring,  O Thunderer,  from  thy store  hast thou poured  on the worshipper  evermore.   
7 Now  whether  thou be far away,  or in the heavens,  or on the earth,   
O Indra,  mighty−  thoughted,  harnessing  thy Bays,  come  Lofty  with the Lofty  Ones.   
8 The Bays  who draw  thy chariot,  Steeds  who injure  none,  surpass  the wind's  impetuous  strength−   
With  whom  thou silencest  the enemy  of man,  with whon;  thou goest  round  the sky.  
9 O gracious  Hero,  may we learn  anew  to know  thee as thou art:  
As in decisive  fight  thou holpest  Etasa,  or Vasa  'gainst  Dasavraja,   
10 As, Maghavan,  to Kanva at the sacred  feast,  to Dirghanitha  thine  home−friend,   
As to Gosarya  thou,  Stone−darter,  gavest  wealth,  give me a gold−bright  stall of kine.   
 
HYMN  III. Indra.  
1. As with Manu  Samvarani,  Indra,  thou drankest  Soma  juice,  And,  Maghavan,  with Nipatithi , Medbyatit
hi, with Pustigu  and Srustigu,−   
2 T'he son of Prsadvana  was Praskaniva's  host,  who lay decrepit  and forlorn.   
Aided  by thee the Rsi Dasyave−vrka  strove  to obtain  thousands  of kine.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
3 Call hither  with thy newest  song Indra  who lacks  not hymns  of praise,   
Him who observes  and knows,  inspirer  of the sage,  him who seems  eager  to enjoy.   
4 He unto whom  they sang the seven−headed  hymn,  three−parted,  in the loftiest  place,   
He sent his thunder  down  on all these  living  things,  and so displayed  heroic  might.  
5 We invocate  that Indra  who bestoweth  precious  things  on us.  
Now  do we know  his newest  favour;  may we gain a stable  that is full of kine.   
6 He whom  thou aidest,  gracious  Lord,  to give again,  obtains  great  wealth  to nourish  him.  
We with our Soma  ready,  Lover  of the Song!  call, Indra  Maghavan,  on thee.   
7 Ne'er  art thou fruitless,  Indra  ne'er  dost thou desert  the worshipper   
But now,  O Maghavan,  thy bounty  as a God is poured  forth  ever more  and more.   
8 He who hath.  overtaken  Krvi with his might,  and silenced  Susna  with deathbolts,−   
When  he supported  yonder  heaven  and spread  it out, then first the son of earth  was born.   
9 Good  Lord  of wealth  is he to whom  all Aryas,  Dasas  here belong.   
Directly  unto thee,  the pious  Rusama  Paviru,  is that wealth  brought  nigh.   
10 In zealous  haste  the singers  have sung  forth  a song  distilling  oil and rich in sweets.   
Riches  have  spread  among  us and heroic  strength,  with us are flowing  Soma−drops.   
 
HYMN  IV. Indra.  
1. As, Sakra,  thou with Manu  called  Vivasvan  dranke st Soma  juice,  As, Indra,  thou didst  love the hymn  b
y Trita's  side, so dost thou joy with Ayu now.   
2 As thou with Matarisvan,  Medhya,  Prsadhra,  hast cheered  thee Indra,  with pressed  juice,   
Drunk  Soma  with Rjunas,  Syumarasmi,  by Dasonya's  Dasasipra's  side.  
3 'Tis he who made  the lauds  his own and boldly  drank  the Soma  juice,   
He to whom  Visnu  came  striding  his three  wide  steps,  as Mitra's  statutes  ordered  it.  
4 In whose  laud thou didst  joy, Indra,  at the great  deed,  O Satakratu,  Mighty  One!   
Seeking  renown we call thee as the milkers  call the cow who yields  abundant  milk.   
5 He is our Sire who gives  to us, Great,  Mighty,  ruling  as he wills.   
Unsought,  may he the Strong,  Rich,  Lord  of ample  wealth,  give us of horses  and of kine.   
6 He to whom  thou,  Good  Lord, givest  that he may give increases  wealth  that nourishes.   
Eager  for wealth  we call on Indra,  Lord  of wealth,  on Satakratu  with our lauds.   
7 Never  art thou neglectful:  thou guardest  both races  with thy care.   
The call on Indra,  fourth  Aditya!  is thine  own.  Amrta  is stablished  in the heavens.   
8 The offercr  whom  thou,  Indra,  Lover  of the Song,  liberal  Maghavan,  favourest,−   
As at the call of Kanva  so, O gracious  Lord,  hear,  thou our songs  and eulogy.   
9 Sung  is the song of ancient  time:  to Indra  have  ye said the prayer.   
They  have  sung  many  a Brhati  of sacrifice,  poured  forth  the worshipper's  many  thoughts.   
10 Indra  hath tossed  together  mighty  stores  of wealth,  and both the worlds,  yea, and the Sun.  
Pure,  brightly−shining,  mingled  with the milk,  the draughts  of Soma  have  made  Indra  glad.   
 
HYMN  V. Indra.  
1. As highest  of the Maghavans,  preeminent  among  the Bulls,  Best breaker−down  of forts,  kine−winner,  
Lord  of wealth,  we seek thee,  Indra  Maghavan.   
 
2 Thou  who subduedst  Ayu,  Kutsa,  Atithigva,  waxing  daily in thy might,   
As such,  rousing  thy power,  we invocate  thee now,  thee Satakratu,  Lord  of Bays.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
3 The pressing−stones  shall  pour for us the essence  of the meath  of all,  
Drops  that have  been  pressed  out afar among  the folk, and those  that have  been  pressed  near us.  
4 Repel  all enmities  and keep thern  far away:  let all win treasure  for their own.   
Even  among  Sistas  are the stalks  that make  thee glad,  where  thou with Soma  satest  thee.   
5 Come,  Indra,  very near to us with aids of firmly−based  resolve;   
Come,  most  auspicious,  with thy most  auspicious  help,  good  Kinsman,  with good  kinsmen,  come!   
6 Bless  thou with progeny  the chief  of men,  the lord of heroes,  victor  in the fray.  
Aid with thy powers  the men who sing thee lauds  and keep their spirits  ever pure and bright.   
7 May we be such in battle  as are surest  to obtain  thy grace:   
With  holy offerings  and invocations  of the Gods,  we mean,  that we may win the spoil.   
8 Thine,  Lord  of Bays,  am I. Prayer  longeth  for the spoil.  Still with thy help I seek the fight.  
So, at the raiders'  head,  I, craving  steeds  and kine,  unite  myself  with thee alone.   
 
HYMN  VI. Indra.  
1. INDRA,  the poets  with.  their hymns  extol  this hero might  of thine:  They  strengthened,  loud in song,  th
y power  that droppeth  oil. With  hymns  the Pauras  came  to thee.   
2 Through  piety  they came  to Indra  for his aid, they whose  libations  give theejoy.   
As thou with,  Krsa  and Samvarta  hast rejoiced,  so, Indra,  be thou glad with us.  
3 Agreeing  in your spirit,  all ye Deities,  come  nigh to us.  
Vasus  and Rudras  shall  come  near to give us aid, and Maruts  listen  to our call.  
4 May Pusan,  Visnu,  and Sarasvati  befriend,  and the Seven  Streams,  this call of mine:   
May Waters,  Wind,  the Mountains,  and the Forest−Lord,  and Earth  give ear unto my cry.  
5 Indra , with thine  own bounteous  gift, most  liberal  of the Mighty  Ones,   
Be our boon  benefactor,  Vrtra−slayer,  be our feast−companion  for our weal.   
6 Leader  of heroes,  Lord  of battle,  lead thou us to combat,  thou Most  Sapient  One.   
High  fame  is theirs  who win by invocations,  feasts  and entertainment  of the Gods.   
7 Our hopes  rest on the Faithful  One:  in Indra  is the people's  life.  
O Maghavan,  come  nigh that thou mayst  give us aid: make  plenteous  food stream  forth  for us.  
8 Thee  would  we worship,  Indra,  with our songs  of praise:  O Satakratu,  be thou ours.   
Pour  down  upon  Praskanva  bounty  vast and firm,  exuberant,  that shall  never  fail.  
 
HYMN  VII. Praskanva's  Gift.  
1. GREAT,  verily,  is Indra's  might.  I have  beheld,  and hither  comes  Thy bounty,  Dasyave−vrka!   
2 A hundred  oxen  white  of hue are shining  like the stars in heaven,   
So tall, they seem  to prop the sky.  
3 Bamboos  a hundred,  a hundred  dogs,  a hundred  skins  of beasts  well−tanned,   
A hundred  tufts of Balbaja,  four hundred  red−hued  mares  are mine.   
4 Blest  by the Gods,  Kinvayanas!  be ye who spread  through  life on life:  
Like horses  have  ye stridden  forth.   
5 Then  men extolled  the team  of seven  not yet full−grown,  its fame  is great.   
The dark mares  rushed  along  the paths,  so that no eye could  follow  them.   
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  VIII Praskanva's  Go.  
1. THY  bounty,  Dasyave−vrka,  exhaustless  hath displayed  itself:  Its fulness  is as broad  as heaven.   
2 Ten thousand  Dasyave−vrka,  the son of Putakrata,  hath  
From  his own wealth  bestowed  on me.  
3 A hundred  asses  hath he given,  a hundred  head  of fleecy  sheep,   
A hundred  slaves,  and wreaths  besides.   
4 There  also was a mare  led forth,  picked  out for Putakrata's  sake,   
Not of the horses  of the herd.   
5 Observant  Agni  hath appeared,  oblation−bearer  with his car.  
Agni  with his resplendent  flame  hath shone  on high as shines  the Sun, hath shone  like Surya  in theheaven
s.  
 
HYMN  IX. Asvins.  
1. ENDOWED,  O Gods,  with your primeval  wisdom,  come  quickly  with your chariot,  O ye Holy.   
Come  with your mighty  powers,  O ye Nasatyas;  come  hither,  drink  ye this the third  libation.   
2 The truthful  Deities,  the Three−and−Thirty,  saw you approach  before  the Ever−Truthful.   
Accepting  this our worship  and libation,  O Asvins  bright  with fire, drink  ye the Soma.   
3 Asvins,  that work  of yours  deserves  our wonder,−the  Bull of heaven  and earth  and air's mid region;   
Yea, and your thousand  promises  in battle,  −to all of these  come  near and drink  beside  us.  
4 Here  is your portion  laid for you, ye Holy:  come  to these  songs  of ours,  O ye Nasatyas.   
Drink  among  us the Soma  full of sweetness,  and with your powers  assist  the man who worships.   
 
HYMN  X. Visvedevas.  
1. HE whom  the priests  in sundry  ways  arranging  the sacrifice,  of one accord,  bring  hither,   
Who  was appointed  as a learned  Brahman,  −what  is the sacrificer's  knowledge  of him?   
2 Kindled  in many  a spot,  still One is Agni;  Silrya  is One though  high o'er all he shineth.   
Illumining  this All, still One is usas.  That which  is One hath into All developed.   
3 The chariot  bright  and radiant,  treasure−laden,  three−wheeled,  with easy seat, and lightly  rolling,   
Which  She of Wondrous  Wealth  was born to harness,−this  car of yours  I call. Drink  what  remaineth.   
 
HYMN  XI. Indra−Varuna.  
1. IN offerings  poured  to you, O Indra−Varuna,  these  shares  of yours  stream  forth  to glorify  your state.   
Ye haste  to the libations  at each sacrifice  when  ye assist  the worshipper  who sheds  the juice.   
2 The waters  and the plants,  O Indra−Va runa,  had efficacious  vigour,  and attained  to might:   
Ye who have  gone  beyond  the path of middle  air,−no  godless  man is worthy  to be called  your foe.  
3 True  is your Krsa's  word,  Indra  and Varuna:  The seven  holy voices  pour a wave  of meath.   
For their sake, Lords  of splendour!  aid the pious  man who,  unbewildered,  keeps  you ever in his thoughts.   
4 Dropping  oil, sweet  with Soma,  pouring  forth  their stream,  are the Seven  Sisters  in the seat of sacrifice.   
These,  dropping  oil, are yours,  O Indra−Varuna:  with these enrich  with gifts and help the worshipper.   
5 To our great  happiness  have we ascribed  to these  Two Bright  Ones  truthfulness,  great  strength,  and 
majesty.   
O Lords  of splendour,  aid us through  the Three−times−Seven,  as we pour holy oil, O Indra−Varuna.   
6 What  ye in time of old Indra  and Varuna,  gave Rsis revelation,  thought,  and power  of song,   Rig Veda – English Translation  
And places  which  the wise made,  weaving  sacrifice,−these  through  my spirit's  fervid  glow  have  I beheld.,
  
7 O Indra−Varuna,  grant  to the worshippers  cheerfulnes s void of pride,  and wealth  to nourish  them.   
Vouchsafe  us food,  prosperity,  and progeny,  and lengthen  out our days that we may see long life.  
 
RIG VEDA  − BOOK  THE NINTH  
HYMN  I. Soma  Pavamana.  
1. In sweetest  and most  gladdening  stream  flow pure,  O Soma, on thy way,   
Pressed  out for Indra,  for his drink.   
2 Fiend−queller,  Friend  of all men,  he hath with the wood  attained  unto  
His place,  his iron−fashioned  home.   
3 Be thou best Vrtra−slayer,  best granter  of bliss,  most  liberal:   
Promote  our wealthy  princes' gifts.   
4 Flow  onward  with thy juice  unto the banquet  of the Mighty  Gods:   
Flow  bither  for our strength  and fame.   
5 O Indu,  we draw  nigh to thee,  with this one object  day by day:  
To thee alone  our prayers  are said  
6 By means  of this eternal  fleece  may Surya's  Daughter  purify   
Thy Soma  that is foaming  forth.   
7 Ten sister  maids  of slender  form  seize  him within  the press  and hold  
Him firmly  on the final day.  
8 The virgins  send him forth:  they blow  the the skin musician−like  and fuse  
The triple  foe−repelling  meath.   
9 Inviolable  milch−kine  round  about  him blend  for Indra's  drink,   
The fresh  young  Soma  with their milk.   
10 In the wild raptures  of this draught,  Indra  slays  all the Vrtras:  he,  
The Hero,  pours  his wealth  on us.  
 
HYMN  II. Soma  Pavamana .  
1. Soma,  flow on, inviting  Gods,  speed  to the purifying  cloth:  Pass into Indra,  as a Bull.   
2 As mighty  food speed  hitherward,  Indu,  as a most  splendid  Steer:   
Sit in thy place  as one with strength.   
3 The well−loved  meath  was made  to flow,  the stream  of the creative  juice   
ne Sage  drew  waters  to himself.   
4 The mighty  waters,  yea, the floods  accompany  thee Mighty  One,   
When  thou wilt clothe  thee with the milk.   
5 The lake is brightened  in the floods.  Soma,  our Friend,  heaven's  prop and stay,  
Falls  on the purifying  cloth.   
6 The tawny  Bull hath bellowed,  fair as mighty  Mitra  to behold:   
He shines  together  with the Sun.  
7 Songs,  Indu,  active  in their might  are beautified  for thee,  wherewith   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Thou  deckest  thee for our delight.   
8 To thee who givest  ample  room  we pray,  to win the joyous  draught:   
Great  are the praise&  due to thee.   
9 Indu as, Indra's  Friend,  on us pour with a stream  of sweetness,  like  
Parjanya  sender  of the rain.  
10 Winner  of kine,  Indu,  art thou,  winner  of heroes,  steeds,  and strength   
 
Primeval  Soul of sacrifice.  
 
HYMN  III. Soma  Pavamana.  
1. HERE  present  this Immortal  God flies,  like a bird upon  her wings,  To settle  in the vats of wood.   
2 This God,  made  ready  with the hymn,  runs swiftly  through  the winding  ways,   
Inviolable  as he flows.  
3 This God while  flowing  is adorned,  like a bay steed  for war, by men  
Devout  and skilled  in holy songs.   
4 He, like a warrior  going  forth  with heroes,  as he flows  along   
Is fain to win all precious  boons.   
5 This God,  as he is flowing  on, speeds  like a car and gives  his gifts:   
He lets his voice  be heard  of all  
6 Praised  by the sacred  bards,  this God dives  into waters,  and bestows   
Rich  gifts upon  the worshipper.   
7 Away  he rushes  with his stream,  across  the regions,  into heaven,   
And roars  as he is flowing  on.  
8 While  flowing,  meet  for sacrifice,  he hath gone  up to heaven  across   
The regions,  irresistible.   
9 After  the 'way of ancient  time,  this God,  pressed  out for Deities,   
Flows  tawny  to the straining−cloth.   
10 This Lord  of many  Holy  Laws,  even  at his birth  engendering  strength,   
Effused,  flows  onward  in a stream.   
 
HYMN  IV. Soma  Pavamana.   
1. O Soma  flowing  on thy way,  win thou and conquer  high renown;  And make  us better  than we are.  
2 Win thou the light,  win heavenly  light,  and, Soma,  all felicities;   
And make  us better  than we are.  
3 Win skilful  strength  and mental  power.  O Soma,  drive  away  our foes;   
And make  us better  than we are.  
4 Ye purifiers,  purify  Soma  for Indra,  for his drink:   
Make  thou us better  than we are.  
5 Give  us our portion  in the Sun through  thine  own mental  power  and aids;   
And make  us better  than we are.  
6 Through  thine  own mental  power  and aid long may we look upon  the Sun;  
Make  thou us better  than we are.  
7 Well−weaponed  Soma,  pour to usa stream  of riches  doubly  great;   Rig Veda – English Translation  
And make  us better  than we are.  
8 As one victorious  unsubdued  in battle  pour forth  wealth  to us;  
And make  us better  than we are.  
9 By worship,  Pavamana!  men have  strengthened  thee to prop the Law:   
Make  thou us better  than we are.  
10 O Indu,  bring  us wealth  in steeds,  manifold.  quickening  all life;  
And mate  us better  than we are.  
 
HYMN  V Apris.  
1. ENKINDLED,  Pavamana,  Lord,  sends  forth  his light on, every  side In friendly  show,  the bellowing  Bu
ll.  
2 He, Pavamana,  Self−produced,  speeds  onward  sharpening  his horns:   
He glitters  through  the firmament.   
3 Brilliant  like wealth,  adorable,  with splend our Pavamana  shines,   
Mightily  with the streams  of meath.   
4 The tawny  Pavamana,  who strews  from  of old the grass  with might,   
Is worshipped,  God amid  the Gods.   
5 The golden,  the Celestial  Doors  are lifted  with their frames  on high,   
By Pavamana  glorified .  
6 With  passion  Pavamana  longs  for the great  lofty  pair, well−formed   
Like beauteous  maidens,  Night  and Dawn   
7 Both  Gods  who look on men I call, Celestial  Heralds:  Indra's  Self  
Is Pavamana,  yea, the Bull.   
8 This,  Pavamana's  sacrifice,  shall  the three  beauteous  Goddesses,   
Sarasvati  and Bharati  and Ila, Mighty  One,  attend.   
9 1 summon  Tvastar  hither,  our protector,  champion,  earliest−born,   
Indu is Indra,  tawny  Steer;  Pavamana  is Prajapati.   
10 O Pavamana,  with the meath  in streams  anoint  Vanaspati,   
The ever−green.  the golden−hued,  refulgent,  with a thousand  boughs.   
11 Come  to the consecrating  rite of Pavamana,  all ye Gods,−   
Vayu,  Surya,  Brhaspati,  Indra,  and Agni,  in accord.   
 
HYMN  VI. Soma  Pavamana.  
1. 1. SOMA,  flow on with pleasant  stream,  a Bull devoted  to the Gods,  Our Friend,  unto the woollen
 sieve.   
2 Pour  hitherward,  as Indra's  Self, Indu,  that gladdening  stream  of thine,   
And send us coursers  full of strength.   
3 Flow  to the filter  hitherward,  pouring  that ancient  gladdening  juice,   
Streaming  forth power  and high renown.   
4 Hither  the sparkling  drops  have  flowed,  like waters  down  a steep  descent   
They  have  reached  Indra  purified.   
5 Whom,  having  passed  the filter,  ten dames  cleanse,  as 'twere  a vigorous  steed,   
While  he disports  him in the wood, −  
6 The steer−strong  juice  with milk pour forth,  for feast and service  of the Gods,   
To him who bears  away  the draught.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
 
2. 7. Effused,  the God flows  onward  with his stream  to Indra,  to the God,   
So that his milk may strengthen  him.  
8 Soul of the sacrifice , the juice  effused  flows  quickly  on: he keeps   
His ancient  wisdom  of a Sage.   
9 So pouring  forth,  as Indra's  Friend,  strong  drink,  best Gladdener!  for the feast,   
Thou,  even  in secret,  storest  hymns.   
 
 
HYMN  VII. Soma  Pavamana.  
1. FORTH  on their way the glorious  drops  have flowed  for maintenance  of Law,   
Knowing  this sacrifice's  course.   
2 Down  in the mighty  waters  sinks  the stream  of meath,  most  excellent,   
Oblation  best of all in worth.   
3 About  the holy place,  the Steer  true, guileless,  noblest,  hath sent forth   
Continuous  voices  in the wood.   
4 When,  clothed  in manly  strength,  the Sage  flows  in celestial  wisdom  round,   
The Strong  would  win the light of heaven.   
5 When  purified,  he sits as King  above  the hosts,  among  his folk,  
What  time the sages  bring him nigh.   
6 Dear,  golden−coloured,  in the fleece  he sinks  and settles  in the wood:   
The Singer  shows  his zeal in hymns.   
7 He goes to Indra,  Vayu,  to the Asvins,  as his custom  is,  
With  gladdening  juice  which  gives  them  joy.  
8 Tle streams  of pleasant  Soma flow to Bhaga,  Mitra−Varuna,−   
Well−knowing  through  his mighty  powers.   
Heaven  and Earth,  riches  of meath  to win us wealth:   
Gain  for us treasures  and renown.   
 
HYMN  VIII. Soma  Pavamana.  
1. OBEYING  Indra's  dear desire  these  Soma  juices  have flowed  forth, Increasing  his heroic  might.   
2 Laid in the bowl,  pure−flowing  on to Vayu  and the Asvins,  may  
These  give us great  heroic  strength.   
3 Soma,  as thou art purified,  incite  to bounty  Indra's  heart,   
To sit in place  of sacrifice.   
4 The ten swift  fingers  deck thee forth,  seven  ministers  impel  thee on:  
The sages  have rejoiced  in thee.   
5 When  through  the filter  thou art poured,  we clothe  thee with a robe of milk  
To be a gladdening  draught  for Gods.   
6 When  purified  within  the jars, Soma,  brightred  and golden−hued,   
Hath  clothed  him with a robe of milk.   
7 Flow  on to us and make  us rich. Drive  all our enemies  away.   
O Indu,  flow into thy Friend.   
Send  down  the rain from  heaven,  a stream  of opulence  from  earth.  Give  us,  
O Soma,  victory  in war.  Rig Veda – English Translation  
9 May we obtain thee,  Indra's  drink,  who viewest  men and findest  light,   
Gain  thee,  and progeny  and food.   
 
HYMN  IX. Soma  Pavamana.  
I. THE  Sage  of Heaven  whose  heart  is wise,  when  laid between  both hands  and pressed,   
Sends  us delightful  powers  of life.  
2 On, onwar d to a glorious  home;  dear to the people  void of guile,   
With  excellent  enjoyment,  flow.   
 
3 He, the bright  Son, when  born illumed  his Parents  who had sprung  to life,  
Great  Son great  Strengtheners  of Law.   
4 Urged  by the seven  devotions  he hath stirred  the guileless  rivers  which   
Have  magnified  the Single  Eye.  
5 These  helped  to might  theYouthful  One,  high over all, invincible,   
Even  Indu,  Indra!  in thy law.  
6 The immortal  Courser,  good  to draw,  looks  down  upon  the Seven:  the fount   
Hath  satisfied  the Goddesses   
7 Aid us in holy rites,  O Man:  O Pavamana,  drive  away   
Dark  shades  that must  be met in fight.   
8 Make  the paths  ready  for a hymn  newer  and newer  evermore:   
Make  the lights  shine  as erst they shone.   
9 Give,  Pavamana,  high renown,  give kine and steeds and hero sons:   
Win for us wisdom,  win the light.   
 
HYMN  X. Soma  Pavamana.  
1. LIKE  cars that thunder  on their way,  like coursers  eager  for renown,  Have  Soma−drops  flowed  forth  fo
r wealth.   
2 Forth  have  they rushed  from  holding  hands,  like chariots  that are urged  to speed,   
Like joyful  songs  of singing−men.   
3 The Somas  deck  themselves  with milk,  as Kings  are graced  with eulogies,   
And,  with seven  priests,  the sacrifice.   
4 Pressed  for the gladdening  draught,  the drops  flow forth  abundantly  with song,   
The Soma  juices  in a stream.   
5 Winning  Vivasvan's  glory  and producing  Morning's  light,  the Suns   
Pass through  the openings  of the cloth.   
6 The singing−men  of ancient  time open  the doors  of sacred  songs,−   
Men,  for the mighty  to accept.   
7 Combined  in close society  sit the seven  priests,  the brother−hood,   
Filling  the station  of the One.   
8 He gives  us kinship  with the Gods,  and with the Sun unites  our eye:  
The Sage's  ofrspring  hath appeared.   
9 The Sun with his dear eye beholds  that quarter  of the heaven s which  priests   
Have  placed  within  the sacred  cell.  
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  XL Soma  Pavamana.  
1. SING  forth  to Indu,  O ye men,  to him who is purified,  Fain to pay worship  to the Gods.   
2 Together  with thy pleasant  juice  the Atharvans  have  commingled  milk,   
Divine,  devot ed to the God.   
3 Bring,  by thy flowing,  weal  to kine,  weal  to the people,  weal  to steeds.   
Weal,  O thou King,  to growing  plants   
4 Sing a praise−song  to Soma  brown  of hue, of independent  might.   
The Red, who reaches  up to heaven.   
5 Purify  Soma  when  effused  with stones  which  bands  move  rapidly,   
And pour the sweet  milk in the meath.   
 
6 With  humble  homage  draw  ye nigh;  blend  the libation  with the curds:   
To Indra  offer  Indu up.  
7 Soma,  foe−que  chief  o'er men,  doing  the will of pour forth   
Prosperity  upon  our kine.   
8 Heart−knower,  Sovran  of the heart,  thou art effused,  O Soma,  that Indra may drink  thee and rejoice.   
9 O Soma  Pavamana,  give us riches  and heroic  strength,−   
Indu!  with.  Indra  for ally.  
 
HYMN  XII. Soma  Pavamana.  
1. To Indra  have  the Soma  drops,  exceeding  rich in sweets,  been  poured,  Shed  in the seat of sacrifice.   
2 As mother  kine low to their calves,  to Indra  have  the sages  called,   
Called  him to drink  the Soma  juice.   
3 In the stream's  wave  wise Soma  dwells,  distilling  rapture,  in his seat,  
Resting  upon  a wiId−cow's  hide.   
4 Far−sighted  Soma,  Sage  and Seer,  is worshi pped  in the central  point   
Of heaven,  the straining−cloth  of wool.   
5 In close  embraces  Indu holds  Soma  when   
poured  within  the jars.  
And on the. purifying  sieve.   
6 Indu sends  forth  a voice  on high to regions  of the sea of air,  
Shaking  the vase that drops with meath.   
7 The Tree whose  praises  never  fail yields  heavenly  milk among  our hymns,   
Urging  men's  generations  on.  
8 The Wise  One,  with the Sage's  stream,  the Soma  urged  to speed,  flows  on  
To the dear places  of the sky.  
9 O Pavamana,  bring  us wealt h bright  with a thousand  splendours.  Yea.  
O Indu,  give us ready  help.   
 
HYMN  XIII. Soma  Pavamana.  
1. PASSED  through,  the fleece  in thousand  streams  the Soma,  purified,  flows  on  
To Indra's,  Viyu's  special  place.   
2 Sing forth,  ye men who long for help,  to Pavamana,  to the Sage,   
Effused  to entertain  the Gods.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
3 The Soma−drops  with thousand  powers  are purified  for victory,   
Hymned  to become  the feast  of Gods.   
4 Yea, as thou flowest  bring  great  store  of food that we may win the spoil   
Indu,  bring  splendi d manly  might.   
5 May they in flowing  give us wealth  in thousands,  and heroic  power,−   
These  Godlike  Soma−drops  effused.   
6 Like coursers  by their drivers  urged,  they were  poured  forth,  for victory,   
Swift  through  the woollen  straining−cloth.   
7 Noisily  flow the Soma−drops,  like milch−kine  lowing  to their calves:   
They  have  run forth  from  both the hands.   
8 As Gladdener  whom  Indra  loves,  O Pavamana,  with a roar  
Drive  all our enemies  away.   
 
9 O Pavamamas,  driving  off the godless,  looking  on the light,  Sit in the place  of s
acrifice.  
 
HYMN  XIV. Soma  Pavamana.  
1. REPOSING  on the river's  wave  the Sage  hath widely  flowed  around,  Bearing  the hymn  which  many  lo
ve.  
2 When  the Five kindred  Companies,  active  in duty,  with the song   
Establish  him, the Powerful,   
3 Then  in his juice  whose  strength  is great,  have all the Gods  rejoiced  themselves,   
When  he hath clothed  him in the milk.   
4 Freeing  himself  he flows  away,  leaving  his body's  severed  limbs,   
And meets  his own Companion  here.   
5 He by the daughters  of the priest, like a fair youth,  hath been  adorned,   
Making  the milk,  as 'twere,  his robe.   
6 O'er the fine fingers,  through  desire  of milk,  in winding  course  he goes,   
And utters  voice  which  he hath found.   
7 The nimble  fingers  have  approached,  adorning  him the Lord of Strength:   
They  grasp  the vigorous  Courser's  back.   
8 Comprising  all the treasures  that are in the heavens  and on the earth,   
Come,  Soma,  as our faithful  Friend.   
 
HYMN  XV. Soma  Pavamana.  
1. THROUGH  the fine fingers,  with the song,  this Hero  comes  with rapid  ears,  
Going  to Indra's  special  place.   
2 In holy thought  he ponders  much  for the great  worship  of the Gods.   
Where  the Immortals  have their seat.  
3 Like a good  horse  is he led out, when  on the path that shines  with light  
The mettled  steeds  exert their strength.   
4 He brandishes  his horns  on high,  and whets  them  Bull who leads  the herd,   
Doing  with might  heroic  deeds.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
5 He moves,  a vigorous  Steed,  adorned  with beauteous  rays of shining  gold,   
Becoming  Sovran  of the streams.   
6 He, over places  rough  to pass,  bringing  rich treasures  closely  packed.   
Descends  into the reservoirs.   
7 Men beautify  him in the vats, him worthy  to be beautified,   
Him who brings  forth  abundant  food.   
8 Him,  even  him, the fingers  ten and the seven  songs  make  beautiful,   
Well−weaponed,  best of gladdeners.   
 
HYMN  XVI. Soma  Pavamana.  
1. THE  pressers  from  the Soma−press  send forth  thy juice  for rapturous  joy  
The speckled  sap runs like a flood.   
2 With  strength  we follow  through  the sieve  him who brings  might  and wins  the kine,   
Enrobed  in water  with his juice.   
 
3 Pour  on the sieve  the Soma,  ne'er  subdued  in waters,  waterless,   
And make  it pure for Indra's  drink.   
4 Moved  by the purifier's  thought,  the Soma  flows  into the sieve:   
By wisdom  it hath gained  its home.   
5 With  humble  homage,  Indra,  have the Soma−drops  flowed  forth  to thee,   
Contending  for the glorious  prize.   
6 Purified  in his fleecy  garb,  attaining  every  beauty,  he  
Stands,  hero−like,  amid  the kine.   
7 Swelling,  as 'twere,  to heights  of heaven,  the stream  of the creative  juice   
Falls  lightly  on the cleansing  sieve.   
8 Thus,  Soma,  purifying  himwho  knoweth  song  mid living  men,   
Thou  wanderest  through  the cloth  of wool.   
 
HYMN  XVII.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. LIKE  rivers  down  a steep  descent,  slaying  the Vrtras,  full of zeal, The rapid  Soma−streams  have  flowe
d.  
2 The drops  of Soma  juice  effused  fall like the rain upon  the earth:   
To Indra  flow the Soma−streams.   
3 With  swelling  wave  the gladdening  drink,  the Soma,  flows  into.the  sieve,   
Loving  the Gods  and slaying  fiends.   
4 It hastens  to the pitchers,  poured  upon  the sieve  it waxes  strong   
At sacrifices  through  the lauds.   
5 Soma,  thou shinest  mounting  heaven  as 'twere  above  light's  triple  realm,   
And moving  secm'st  to speed  the Sun.  
6 To him, the head  of sacnfice,  singe rs and bards  have  sung  their songs,   
Offering  what  he loves  to see.  
7 The men,  the sages  with their hymns,  eager  for help,  deck  thee strong  &teed,   
Deck  thee for service  of the Gods.   
8 Flow  onward  to the stream  of meath  rest efficacious  in thy home,   
Fair, to be drunk  at sacrifice.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
 
HYMN  XVIII.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. THOU,  Soma,  dweller  on the hills,  effused,  hast flowed  into the sieve,:   
All−bounteous  art thou in carouse.   
2 Thou  art a sacred  Bard,  a Sage;  the meath  is offipring  of thy sap:  
All−bountcous  art thou in carouse.   
3 All Deities  of one accord  have  come  that they may drink  of thee:   
All−bounteous  art thou in carouse.   
4 He who containeth  in his hands  all treasures  much  to be desired:   
All−bounteous  art thou in carouse.   
5 Who  milketh  out this mighty Pair, the Earth  and Heaven,  like mother  kine  
All−bounteous  art thou in carouse.   
6 Who  in a moment  mightily  floweth  around  these  two world−halvcs:   
All−bounteous  art thou in carouse.   
7 The Strong  One,  being  purified,  hath in the pitchers  cried  aloud:   
All−bounteous  art thou in carouse.   
 
HYMN  XIX. Soma  Pavamana.  
1. O SOMA,  being  purified  bring  us the wondrous  treasure,  meet  For lauds,  that is in earth  and heaven.   
2 For ye Twain,  Indra,  Soma,  are Lords  of the light,  Lords  of the kine:   
Great  Rulers,  prosper  ye our songs.   
3 The tawny  Steer,  while  cleansed  among  the living,  bellowing  on the grass,   
Hath  sunk and settled  in his home.   
4 Over  the Steer's  productive  flow the sacred  songs  were  resonant,   
The mothers  of the darling  Son.  
5 Hath  he not, purified,  impregned  the kine whb long to meet  their Lord,   
The kine who yield  the shining  milk?   
6 Bring  near us those  who stand  aloof  strike  fear into our enemies:   
O Pavamana,  find us wealth.   
7 Soma,  bring  down  the foeman's  might,  his vigorous  strength  and vital powe'r,   
Whether  he be afar or near.   
 
HYMN  XX Soma  Pavamana.  
1. FORTH  through  the straining−cloth  the Sage  flows  to the banquet  of the Gods,   
Subduing  all our enemies.   
2 For he, as Pavamana,  sends  thousandfold  treasure  in the shape   
Of cattle  to the singing−men.   
3 Thou  graspest  all things  with thy mind,  and purifiest  thee with thoughts   
As such,  O Soma,  find us fame.   
4 Pour  lofty  glory  on us, send sure riches  to our liberal  lords,   
Bring  food to those  who sing thy praise.   
5 As thou art cleanse d, O Wondrous  Steed,  O Soma,  thou hast entered,  like  
A pious  King,  into the songs.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
6 He, Soma,  like a courser  in the floods  invincible,  made  clean   
With  hands,  is resting  in the jars.  
7 Disporting,  like a liberal  chief,  thou goest,  Soma,  to the sieve,   
Lending  the laud a Hero's  strength.   
 
HYMN  XXI. Soma  Pavamana.  
1. To Indra  flow these  running  drops,  these  Somas  frolicsome  in mood.  Exhilarating,  finding  light;   
2 Driving  off foes,  bestowing  room  upon  the presser,  willingly   
Bringing  their praiser  vitalforce.   
3 Lightly  disporting  them,  the drops  flow to one common  reservoir,   
And fall into the river's  wave.   
4 These  Pavamanas  have  obtained  all blessings  much  to be desired,   
Like coursers  harnessed  to a car.  
5 With  view  to us, O Soma−drops,  bestow  his manifold  desire   
On him who yet hath given  us naught.   
 
6 Bring  us our wish  with this design,  as a wright  brings  his new−wrought  wheel:   
Flow  pure and shining  with the stream.   
7 These  drops  have  cried  with resonant  voice:  like swift  steeds  they have  run the course,   
And roused  the good  man's  hymn  to life.  
 
HYMN  XXII.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. THESE  rapid  Soma−streams  have  stirred  themselves  to motion  like strong  steeds,   
Like cars, like armies  hurried  forth.   
2 Swift  as wide  winds  they lightly  move,  like rain−s torms  of Parjanya,  like  
The flickering  flames  of burning  fire.  
3 These  Soma  juices,  blent  with curds,  purified,  skilled  in sacred  hymns,   
Have  gained  by song  their hearts'desire.   
4 Immortal,  cleansed,  these  drops,  since  first they flowed,  have  never  wearied, fain  
To reach  the regions  and their paths.   
5 Advancing  they have  travelled  o'er the ridges  of the earth  and heaven,   
And this the highest  realm  of all.  
6 Over  the heights  have  they attained  the highest  thread  that is spun  out,  
And this which  must  be deemed  most  high.   
7 Thou,  Soma,  boldest  wealth  in kine which  thou hast seized  from  niggard  churls:   
Thou  calledst  forth  the outspun  thread.   
 
HYMN  XXIII.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. SWIFT  Soma  drops  have been  effused  in streams  of meath,  the gladdening  drink,   
For sacred  lore of every  kind.   
2 Hither  to newer.  resting−place  the ancient  Living  Ones  are come.   
They  made  the Sun that he might  shine.   
3 O Pavamana,  bring  to us the unsacrificing  foeman's  wealth,   Rig Veda – English Translation  
And give us food with progeny.   
4 The living  Somas  being cleansed  diffuse  exhilarating  drink,   
Turned  to the vat which  drips  with meath.   
5 Soma  gows  on intelligent,  possessing  sap and mighty  strength,   
Brave  Hero  who repels  the curse.   
6 For Indra,  Soma!  thou art cleansed,  a feast−companion  for the Gods:   
1ndu,  thou fain wilt win us strength   
7 When  he had drunken  draughts  of this, Indra  smote  down  resistless  foes:   
Yea, smote  them,  and shall  smite  them  still.  
 
HYMN  XXIV.Soma  Pavamana.  
1. HITHERWARD  have  the Soma  streamed,  the drops  while  they are purifi ed:  
When  bIent,  in waters  they are rinsed.   
2 The milk hath run to meet  them  like floods  rushing  down  a precipice:   
They  come  to Indra,  being  cleansed.   
3 O Soma  Pavamana,  thou art flowing  to be Indra's  drink:   
 
The men have  seized  and lead thee forth.   
4 Victorious,  to be hailed  with joy, O Soma,  flow,  delighting  men,   
To him who ruleth  o'er mankind.   
5 Thou,  Indu,  when,  effused  by stones,  thou runnest  to the filter,  art,  
Ready  for Indra's  high decree.   
6 Flow  on, best Vrtra−slayer;  flow meet  to be haile d with joyful  lauds.   
Pure,  purifying,  wonderful.   
7 Pure,  purifying  is he called  the Soma  of the meath  eflused,   
Slayer  of sinners,  dear to Gods.   
 
HYMN  XXV.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. GREEN−HUED!  as one who giveth  strength  flow on for Gods  to drink,  a draught   
For Vayu  and the Marut  host.   
2 O Pavamana,  sent by song,  roaring  about  thy dwelling−place,   
Pass into Vayu  as Law bids.   
3 The Steer  shines  with the Deities,  dear Sage  in his appointed  home,   
Foe−Slayer,  most  beloved  by Gods.   
4 Taking  each beauteous  form , he goes,  desirable,  while  purified,   
Thither  where−  the Immortals  sit.  
5 To Indra  Soma  flows,  the Red, engendering  song,  exceeding  wise,   
The visitor  of living  men.   
6 Flow,  best exhilarator,  Sage,  flow to the filter  in a stream   
To seat thee in the place of song.   
 
HYMN  XXVI.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. THE  sages  with the fingers'  art have  dressed  and decked  that vigorous  Steed   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Upon  the lap of Aditi,   
2 The kine have called  aloud  to him exhaustless  with a thousand  streams,   
To Indu who supporteth  heaven.   
3 Him, nourisher  of many,  Sage,  creative  Pavamana,  they  
Have  sent, by wisdom,  to the sky.  
4 Him,  dweller  with Vivasvan,  they with use of both arms  have  sent forth,   
The Lord  of Speech  infallible.   
5 Him,  green,  beloved,  many  eyed,  the Sisters  with prosing  stones  
Send  down  to ridges  of the sieve.   
6 O Pavamana,  Indu,  priests  hurry  thee on to Indra,  thee  
Who  aidest  song and cheerest  him.  
 
HYMN  XXVII.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. THIS  Sage,  exalted  by our lauds,  flows  to the purifying  cloth,  Scattering  foes as he is cleansed.   
2 As giving  power  and winning  light,  for Indra  and for Vayu  he  
Is poured  upon  the filtering−cloth.   
3 The men conduct  him, Soma,  Steer,  Omniscient,  and the Head  of Heaven,   
 
Effused  into the vats of wood.   
4 Longing  for kine,  longing  for gold hath Indu Pavamana  lowed,   
Still Conqueror,  never  overcome.   
5 This Pavamana,  gladdening  draught,  drops  on the filtering  cloth,  and then  
Mounts  up with Surya  to the sky.  
6 To Indra  in the firmament  this mighty  tawny  Steer  hath flowed,   
This Indu,  being  purified.   
 
HYMN  XXVIII.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. URGED  by the men,  this vigorous  Steed,  Lord  of the mind , Omniscient,  Runs  to the woollen  straining
−cloth.   
2 Within  the filter  hath he flowed,  this Soma  for the Gods  effused,   
Entering  all their essences.   
3 He shines  in beauty  there,  this God Immortal  in his dwelling−place,   
Foe−slayer,  dearest  to the Gods.   
4 Directed  by the Sisters  ten, bellowing  on his way this Steer   
Runs  onward  to the wooden  vats.  
5 This Pavamana,  swiftand  strong,  Omniscient,  gave spleudour  to  
The Sun and all his forms  of light.   
6 This Soma  being  purified,  flows  mighty  and infallible,   
Slayer  of sinners,  dear toGods.   
 
HYMN  XXIX.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. FORWARD  with mighty  force  have  flowed  the currents  of this Steer  effused,   
Of him who sets him by the Gods.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
2 The singers  praise  him with their song,  and learned  priests  adorn  the Steed,   
Brought  forth  as light that merits  laud.   
3 These  things  thou winnest  lightly  while  purified,  Soma,  Lord  of wealth:   
Fill full the sea that claims  our praise.   
4 Winning  all precious  things  at once,  flow on, O Soma,  with thy stream   
Drive  to one place  our enemies.   
5 Preserve  us from  the godless,  from  ill−omened  voice  of one and all,  
That so we may be freed  from  blame.   
6 O Indu,  as thou flowest  on bring  us the wealth  of earth  and heaven,   
And splendid  vigour,  in thy stream.   
 
HYMN  XXX.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. STREAMS  of this Potent  One have  flowed  easily  to the straining−cloth:   
While  he is cleansed  he lifts his voice.   
2 Indu,  by pressers  urged  to speed,  bellowing  out while  beautified.   
Sends  forth  a very mighty  sound.   
3 Pour  on us, Soma,  with thy stream  manc onquering  might  which  many  crave,   
Accompanied  with hero sons.   
4 Hither  hath Pavamana  flowed,  Soma  flowed  hither  in a stream,   
 
To settle  in the vats of wood.   
5 To waters  with the stones  they drive  thee tawny−hued,  most  rich in sweets,   
O Indu,  to be Indra's drink.   
6 For Indra,  for the Thunderer  press  the Soma  very rich in sweets,   
Lovely,  inspiriting,  for strength.   
 
HYMN  XXXI.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. THE,  Soma−drops,  benevolent,  come  forth  as they are purified,  Bestowing  wealth  which  all may see.  
2 O Indu, high o'er heaven  and earth  be thou,  increaser  of our might:   
The Master  of all strength  be thou.   
3 The winds  are gracious  in their love to thee,  the rivers  flow to thee  
Soma,  they multiply  thy power.   
4 Soma,  wax great.  From  every  side may vigorous  powers unite  in thee:   
Be in the gathering−Place  of strength.   
5 For thee,  brown−hued!  the kine have  poured  imperishable  oil and milk.   
Aloft  on the sublimest  height.   
6 Friendship,  O Indu,  we desire  with thee who bearest  noble  arms,   
With  thee,  O Lord  of all that is.  
 
HYMN  XXXII.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. THE  rapture−shedding  Soma−drops,  effused  in our assembly,  have  Flowed  forth  to glorify  our prince.   
2 Then  Trita's  Maidens  onward  urge the Tawny−coloured  with the stones,   
Indu for Indra,  for his drink.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
3 Now  like a swan  he maketh  all the company  sing each his hymn:   
He, like a steed,  is bathed  in milk.   
4 O Soma,  viewing  heaven  and earth,  thou runncst  like a darting  deer  
Set in the place  of sacrifice.   
5 The cows  have  sung  with joy to him, even  as a woman  to her love  
He came  as to a settled  race.   
6 Bestow  illustrious  fame  on us, both on our liberal  lords  and me,  
Glory,  intelligence,  and wealth.   
 
HYMN  XXXIII.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. LIKE  waves  of waters,  skilled  in song the juices  of the Soma  speed  Onward,  as buffaloes  to woods.   
2 With  stream  of sacrifice  the brown  bright  drops  have flowed  with strength  in store   
Of kine into the wooden  vats.  
3 To Indra,  Vayu,  Varuna,  to Visnu,  and the Maruts,  flow  
The drops  of Soma  juice  effused.   
4 Three  several  words  are uttered:  kine are ]owing,  cows  who give their milk:   
The Tawny−hued  goes bellowing  on.  
5 The young  and sacred  mothers  of the holy rite have  uttered  praise:   
 
They  decorate  the Child  of Heaven.   
6 From  every  side, O Soma,  for our profit,  pour thou forth  four seas  
Filled  full of riches  thousandfold.   
 
HYMN  XXXIV.  Some  Pavamana.  
1. THE  drop of Soma  juice  effused  flows  onward  with this stream  impelled.   
Rending  strong  places  with its might.   
2 Poured  forth  to Indra,  Varuna,  to Vayu  and the Marut  hosts,   
To Visnu, flows  the Soma  juice.   
3 With  stones  they press  the Soma  forth,  the Strong  conducted  by the strong:   
They  milk the liquor  out with skill.   
4 'Tis he whom  Trita  must  refine,  'tis he who shall  make  Indra  glad:   
The Tawny  One is decked  with tints.   
5 Him do the Sons  of Prsni  milk,  the dwelling−place  of sacrifice,   
Oblation  lovely  and most  dear.   
6 To him in one unitcd  stream  th−,se  songs  flow on straight  forward.  he,  
Loud  voiced,  hath made  the milch−kine  low.  
 
HYMN  XXXV.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. Pour  forth  on us abundant  wealth,  O Pavamana,  with thy stream.  Wherewith  thou mayest  find us light  
2 O Indu,  swayer  of the sea, shaker  of all things,  flow thou on,  
Bearer  of wealth  to us with might.   
3 With  thee for Hero,  Valiant  One!  may we subdue  our enemies:   
Let what  is precious  flow to us.  Rig Veda – English Translation  
4 Indu arouses  strength  the Sage  who strives  for victory,  winning  power,   
Discovering  holy works  and means.   
5 Mover  of speech,  we robe him with our songs  as he is purified   
Soma,  the Guardian  of the folk;   
6 On whose  way,  Lord of Holy  Law,  most  richi as he is purified.   
The people  all have  set their hearts.   
 
HYMN  XXXVI.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. FORTH  from  the mortar  is the juice  sent, like a car−horse,  to the sieve:   
The Steed  steps  forward  to the goal.   
2 Thus,  Soma,  watchful,  bearing  well,  cheering  the Gods,  flow past the sieve,   
Turned  to the vat that drops  with meath.   
3 Excellent  Pavamana,  make  the lights  shine  brightly  out for us.  
Speed  us to mental  power  and skill.   
4 He, beautified  by pious  men,  and coming  from  their hands  adorned,   
Flows  through  the fleecy  straining−cloth.   
5 May Soma  pour all treasures  of the heavens,  the earth,  the firmament   
Upon  the liberal  worshipper.   
6 Thou  mountest  to the height  of heaven,  O Soma,  seeking  steeds  and kine,   
 
And seeking  heroes,  Lord  of Strength!  
 
HYMN  XXXVII.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. SOMA,  the Steer,  effused  for draught,  flows  to the purifying  sieve,  Slaying  the fiends,  loving  the Gods.
  
2 Far−sighted,  tawny−coloured,  he flows  to the sieve,  intelligent,   
Bellowing,  to his place  of rest.  
3 This vigorous  Pavamana  runs forth  to the luminous  realm  of heaven,   
Fiend−slayer,  through  the fleecy  sieve.   
4 This Payamana  up above  Trita's  high ridge  hath made  the Sun,  
Together  with the Sisters,  shine.   
5 This Vrtra−slaying  Steer,  effused,  Soma  room −giver,  ne'er  deceived,   
Hath  gone,  as 'twere,  to win the spoil.   
6 Urged  onward  by the sage,  the God speeds  forward  to the casks  of wood,   
Indu to Indra  willingly.   
 
HYMN  XXXVIII.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. THIS  Steer,  this Chariot,  rushes  through  the woollen  filter, as he goes  
To war that wins  a thousand  spoils.   
2 The Dames  of Trita  with the stones  onward  impel  this Tawny  One  
Indu to Indra  for his drink.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
3 Ten active  fingers  carefully  adorn  him here;  they make  him bright   
And beauteous  for the gladdening  draught.   
4 He like a falcon  settles  down  amid  the families  of men.   
Speeding  like lover  to his love.   
5 This young  exhilarating  juice  looks  downward  from its place  in heaven,   
This Soma−drop  that pierced  the sieve.   
6 Poured  for the draught,  this tawny  juice   
flows  forth,  intelligent,  crying  out,  
Unto  the well−beloved  place.   
 
HYMN  XXXIX  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. FLOW  On, O thou of lofty thought,  flow swift  in thy beloved  form,  Saying,  I go where  dwell  the Gods.
  
2 Preparing  what  is unprepared,  and bringing  store  of food to man,   
Make  thou the rain descend  from  heaven.   
3 With  might,  bestowing  power,  thejuice  enters  the purifying  sieve,   
Far−seeing,  sending  forth its light.   
4 This is it which  in rapid  course  hath with the river's  wave  flowed  down   
From  heaven  upon  the straining  cloth.   
5 Inviting  him frorh  far away,  and even  from  near at hand,  the juice   
For Indra  is poured  forth  as meath.   
6 In union  they have sung  the hymn:  with stones  they urge the Tawny  One.   
Sit in the place  of sacrifice.   
 
HYMN  XL. Soma  Pavamana.  
1. THE  Very  Active  hath assailed,  while  purified,  all enemies:  They  deck  the Sage  with holy songs.   
2 The Red hath mounted  to his place;  to India,  goes the mighty  juice:   
He settles  in his firm abode.   
3 O Indu,  Soma,  send us now great  opulence  from  every  side, Pour  on us treasures  thousandfold.   
4 O Soma  Pavamana,  bring,  Indu,  all splcndours  hitherward:   
Find for us food in boundless  store.   
5 As thou art cleansed,  bring  hero strength  and riches  to thy worshipper,   
And prosper  thou the singer's  hymns.   
6 O Indu,  Soma,  being  cleansed,  bring  hither  riches  doublypiled,   
Wealth,  mighty  Indu,  meet  for lauds.   
 
HYMN  XLI. Soma  Pavamana.  
1. ACTIVE  and bright  have they come  forth,  impetuous  in speed  like bulls,   
Driving  the black  skin far away.   
2 Quelling  the riteless  Dasyu,  may we think  upon  the bridge  of bliss,   
Leaving  the bridge  of woe behind.   
3 The mighty  Pavamana's  roar is heard  as 'twere  the rush of rain  
Lightnings  are flashing  to the sky.  Rig Veda – English Translation  
4 Pour  out on us abundant  food,  when  thou art pressed,  O Indu wealth   
In kine and gold and steeds  and spoil.   
5 Flow  on thy way,  Most  Active,  thou.  fill full the mighty  heavens  and earth,   
As Dawn,  as Surya  with his beams.   
6 On every  side, O Soma,  flow round  us with thy protecting  stream,   
As Rasa  flows  around  the world.   
 
HYMN  XLII.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. ENGENDERING  the Sun in floods,  engendering  heaven's  lights,  green−hued,   
Robed  in the waters  and the milk,  
2 According  to primeval  plan this Soma,  with his stream,  effused   
Flows  purely  on, a God for Gods.   
3 For him victorious,  waxen  great,  the juices  with a thousand  powers   
Are purified  for winning  spoil.   
4 Shedding  the ancient  fluid  he is poured  into the cleansing  sieve:   
He, thundering,  hath produced  the Gods.   
5 Soma,  while  purifying,  sends  hither  all things  to be desired,   
He sends  the Gods  who strengthen  Law.   
6 Soma,  effused,  pour on us wealth  in kine,  in heroes,  steeds,  and spoil,   
Send  us abundant  store  of food.   
 
HYMN  XLIII.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. WE will enrobe  with sacred  song the Lovely  One who,  as a Steed,  Is decked  with milk for rapturous  jo
y.  
2 All songs  of ours desiring  grace  adorn  him in the ancient  way,   
Indu for Indra,  for his drink.   
3 Soma flows  on when  purified,  beloved  and adorned  with songs,   
Songs  of the sage Medhyatithi.   
4 O Soma  Pavamana,  find exceeding  glorious  wealth  for us,  
Wealth,  Indu,  fraught  with boundless  might.   
5 Like courser  racing  to the prize  Indu,  the lover  of the Gods,  
Roars,  as he passes,  in the sieve.   
6 Flow  on thy way to win us strength,  to speed  the sage who praises  thee:   
Soma,  bestow  heroic  power.   
 
HYMN  XLIV.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. INDU,  to us for this great  rite, bearing  as 'twere  thy wave  to Gods,  Unwearied,  thou art flowing  forQh.   
2 Pleased  with the hymn,  impelled  by prayer,  Soma  is hurried  far away,   
The Wise  One in the Singer's  stream.,   
3 Watchful  among  the. gods,  this juice  advances  to the cleansing  sieve   
Soma,  most  active,  travels  on.  
4 Flow  onward,  seeking  strength  for us, embellishing  the sacrifice:   
The priest  with trimmed  grass  calleth  thee.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
5 May Soma,  ever bringing  power  to Bhaga  and to Vayu,  Sage   
And Hero,  lead us to the Gods.   
6 So, to increase  our wealth  to−day,  Inspirer,  best of Furtherers,   
Win for us strength  and high renown.   
 
HYMN  XLV.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. FLOW,  thou who viewest  men,  to give delight,  to entertain  the Gods,  Indu,  to Indra  for his drink.   
2 Stream  to thine  embassy  for us: thou hastenest,  for Indra,  to  
The Gods,  O better  than our friends.   
3 We balm  thee,  red of hue, with milk to fit thee for the rapturous  joy:  
Unbar  for us the doors  of wealth.   
4 He through  the sieve  hath passed,  as comes  a courser  to the pole,  to run  
Indu belongs  unto the Gods.   
5 All friends  have  lauded  him as he sports  in the wood,  beyond  the fleece:   
Singers  have chanted  Indu's  praise.   
6 Flow,  Indu,  with that stream  wherein  steeped  thou announcest  to the man  
Who  worships  thee heroic  strength.   
 
HYMN  XLVI.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. LIKE  able coursers  they have been  sent forth  to be the feast  of Gods,   
joying  in mountains,  flowing  on.  
2 To Vayu  flow the Soma−streams,  the drops  of juice  made  beautiful   
Like a bride  dowered  by her sire.  
3 Pressed  in the mortar,  these,  the drops  of  
juice,  the Somas  rich in food,  
Give  strength  to Indra  with their work.   
4 Deft−handed  men,  run hither,  seize  the brilliant  juices  blent  with meal,   
And cook  with milk the gladdening  draught.   
5 Thus,  Soma,  Conqueror  of wealth!  flow,  finding  furtherance  for us,  
Giver  oF ample  opulen ce.  
6 This Pavamana,  meet  to be adorned,  the fingers  ten adorn,   
The draught  that shall  make  Indra  glad.   
 
HYMN  XLVII.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. GREAT  as he was, Soma  hath gained  strength  by this high solemnity:  joyous  he riseth  like a bull.  
2 His task is done : his crushings  of the Dasyus  are made  manifest:   
He sternly  reckoneth  their debts.   
3 Soon  as his song  of praise  is born,  the Soma,  Indra's  juice,  becomes   
A thousand−winning  thunderbolt.   
4 Seer and Sustainer,  he himself  desireth  riches  for the sage  
Whe n he embellisheth  his songs.   
5 Fain would  they both win riches  as in races  of the steeds.  In war  
Thou  art upon  the conquerors'  side.  Rig Veda – English Translation  
 
HYMN  XLVIII.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. WITH  sacrifice  we seek to thee kind Cherisher  of manly  might  In mansions  of the lofty  heavens;   
2 Gladdening  crusher  of the bold,  ruling  with very mighty  sway,   
Destroyer  of a hundred  forts.   
3 Hence,  Sapient  One!  the Falcon,  strong  of wing,  unwearied,  brought  thee down,   
Lord  over riches,  from  the sky.  
4 That each may see the light,  the Bird brought  us the guard  of Law,  the Friend   
Of all, the speeder  through  the air.  
5 And now,  sent forth,  it hath attained  to mighty  power  and majesty,   
Most  active,  ready  to assist.   
 
HYMN  XLIX.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. Poust  down  the rain upon  us, pour a wave  of waters  from  the sky, And plenteous  store  of wholesome  fb
od.  
2 Flow  onward  with that stream  of thine,  whereby  the cows  have  come  to us,  
 
The kine of strangers  to our home.   
3 Chief  Friend  of Gods  in sacred  rites,  pour on us fatness  with thy stream,   
Ppur down  on us a flood  of rain.  
4 To give us vigour,  with thy stream  run through  the fleecy  straining−cloth   
For verily  the Gods  will bear.   
5 Onward  hath Pavamana  flowed  and beaten  off the Raksasas,   
Flashing  out splendour  as of old.  
 
HYMN  L. Soma  Pava mana.  
1. LOUD  as a river's  roaring  wave  thy powers  have  lifted  up themselves:  Urge  on thine  arrow's  sharpened
 point.   
2 At thine  effusion  upward  rise three  voices  full of joy, when  thou  
Flowest  upon  the fleecy  ridge.   
3 On to the fleece  they urge with stone the tawny  well−beloved  One,   
Even  Pavamana,  dropping  meath.   
4 Flow  with thy current  to the sieve,  O Sage  most  powerful  to cheer,   
To seat thee in the place  of song.   
5 Flow,  Most  Exhilarating!  flow anointed  with the milk for balm,   
Indu,  for Indra,  for his drink.   
 
HYMN  LI. Soma  Pavamana.  
1. ADHVARYU,  on the filter  pour the Soma  juice  expressed  with stones,  And make  it pure for Indra's  dri
nk.  
2 Pour  out for Indra,  Thunder−armed,  the milk of heaven,,  the Soma's  juice,   
Most  excellent,  most  rich in sweets.  Rig Veda – English Translation  
3 These  Gods  and all the Marut  host,  Indu enjoy  this juice  of thine,   
This Pavamana's  flowing  meath.   
4 For, Soma,  thou hast been effused,  strengthening  for the wild carouse,   
O Steer,  the singer,  for our help.   
5 Flow  with thy stream,  Far−sighted  One, effused,  into the cleansing  sieve:   
Flow  on to give us strength  and fame.   
 
HYMN  LII. Soma  Pavamana.  
1. WEALTH−WINNER,  dwelling  in the sky, bringing  us vigour  with the juice,   
Flow  to the filter  when  effused.   
2 So, in thine  ancient  ways,  may he, beloved,  with a thousand  streams   
Run o'er the fleecy  straining−cloth.   
3 Him who is like a caldron  shake:  O Indu,  shake  thy gift to us  
Shake  it, armed  Warrior!  with thine  arms.   
4 Indu,  invoked  with many  a prayer,  bring  down  the vigour  of these  men,   
Of him who threatens  us with war.  
5 Indu,  Wealth−giver,  with thine  help pour out for us a hundred,  yea,  
A thousand  of thy pure bright  streams.   
 
HYMN  LIII. Soma  Pavamana.  
1. O THOU  with stones  for arms,  thy powers,  crushing  the fiends,  have raised  themselves :  
Chase  thou the foes who compass  us.  
2 Thou  conquerest  thus with might  when  car meets  car, and when  the prize  is staked:   
With  fearless  heart  will I sing praise.   
3 No one with evil thought  assails  this Pavamana's  holy laws:   
Crush  him who fain would  fight with thee.   
4 For Indra  to the streams  they drive  the tawny  rapture−dropping  Steed,   
Indu the bringer  of delight.   
 
HYMN  LIV. Soma  Pavamana.  
1. AFTER  his ancient  splendour,  they,  the bold,  have  drawn  the bright  milk from   
The Sage  who wins  a thousand  gifts.   
2 In aspect  he is like the Sun; he runneth  forward  to the lakes,   
Seven  currents  flowing  through  the sky.  
3 He, shining  in his splendour,  stands  high over all things  that exist−   
Soma,  a God as Surya  is.  
4 Thou,  Indu,  in thy brilliancy,  pourest  on us, as Indra's  Friend,   
Wealth  from  the kine to feast  the Gods.   
 
HYMN  LV. Soma  Pavamana.  
1. POUR  on us with thy juice  all kinds  of corn,  each sort of nourishment,   
And,  Soma,  all felicities.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
2 As thine,  O Indu,  is the praise,  and thine  what  springet h from  the juice,   
Seat thee on the dear sacred  grass.   
3 And,  finding  for us kine and steeds,  O Soma,  with thy juice  flow on  
Through  days that fly most  rapidly.   
4 As one who conquers,  ne'er  subdued,  attacks  and stays  the enemy,   
Thus,  Vanquisher  of thousands!  flow.   
 
HYMN  LVI. Soma  Pavamana.  
1. SWIFT  to the purifying  sieve  flows  Soma  as exalted  Law,  Slaying  the fiends,  loving  the Gods.   
2 When  Soma  pours  the strengthening  food a hundred  ever−active  streams   
To Indra's  friendship  win theirway.   
3 Ten Dames have  sung  to welcome  thee,  even  as a maiden  greets  her love:   
O Soma,  thou art decked  to win.  
4 Flow  hitherward,  O Indu,  sweet  to Indra  and to Visnu:  guard   
The men,  the singers,  from  distress.   
 
HYMN  LVII.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. THY  streams  that never  fail or waste  flow forth  like showers  of rain from  heaven,   
To bring  a thousand  stores  of strength.   
2 He flows  beholding  on his way all wellbeloved  sacred  lore,  
Green−tinted,  brandishing  his, arms.   
3 He, when  the people  deck him like a docile  king of elephants.   
Sits as a falcon  in the, wood.   
4 So bring  thou hitherward  to us, Indu,  while  thou art purified,   
All treasures  both of heaven  and earth.   
 
HYMN  LVIII.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. SWIFT  runs this giver  of delight,  even  the stream  of flowing  juice:  Swift  runs this giver  of delight.   
2 The Morning  knows  all precious  things,  the Goddess  knows  her grace  to man:   
Swift  runs this giver  of delight.   
3 We have accepted  thousands  from  Dhvasra's  and Purusanti's  hands:   
Swift  runs this giver  of delight.   
4 From  whom  we have  accepted  thus thousands  and three  times  ten beside:   
Swift  runs this giver  of delight.   
 
HYMN  LIX. Soma  Pavamana.  
1. FLOW  onward,  Soma,  winning  kine,  and steeds,  and all that gives  delight:   
Bring  hither  wealth  with progeny.   
2 Flow  onward  from  the waters,  flow,  inviolable,  from  the plants:   
Flow  onward  from  the pressing−boards.   
3 Soma,  as Pavamana,  pass over all trouble  and distress:   
Sit on the sacred  grass,  a Sage.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
4 Thou,  Pavamana,  foundest  light;  thou at thy birth  becamest  great:   
O Indu,  thou art over all.  
 
HYMN  LX. Soma  Pavamana.  
1. SING  forth  and laud with sacred  song  most  active  Pavamana,  laud Indu who sees with thousand  eyes.   
2 Thee  who hast thousand  eyes to see, bearer  of thousand  burthens,  they  
Have  filtered  through  the fleecy  cloth.  
3 He, Pavamana,  hath streamed  through  the fleece  then:  he runs into the jars,  
Finding  his way to Indra's  heart.   
4 That Indra  may be bounteous,  flow,  most  active  Soma,  for our weal:   
Bring  genial  seed with progeny.   
 
HYMN  LXI. Soma  Pavamana.  
1. FLOW onward,  Indu,  with this food for him who in thy wild delight  Battered  the nine−and−ninety  dow
n,  
2 Smote  swiftly  forts,  and gambara,  then Yadu  and that Turvaga,   
For pious  Divodasa's  sake.   
3 Finder  of horses,  pour on us horses  and  
wealth  in kine and gold,  
And,  Indu,  food in boundless  store.   
4 We seek to win thy friendly  love,  even  Pavamana's  flowing  o'er  
The limit  of the cleansing  sieve.   
5 With  those  same  waves  which  in their stream  oyerflow  the purifying  sieve,   
Soma;  be gracious  unto us.  
6 O Soma, being  purified,  bring  us from  all sides,−for  thou canst,−   
Riches  and food with hero sons.   
7 Him here,  the Child  whom  streams  have  borne,  the ten swift  fingers  beautify   
With  the Adityas  is he seen.   
8 With  Indra  and with Vayu  he, effused,  flows  onward  with,the  beams   
Of Surya  to the cleansing  sieve.   
9 Flow  rich in sweets  and lovely  for our Bhaga,  Vayu,  Pusan  flow  
For Mitra  and for Varuna.   
10 High  is thy juice's  birth:  though  set in heaven,  on earth  it hath obtained   
Strong  sheltering  power  and great  renown.   
11 Striving  to win, with him we gain all wealth  from  the ungodly  man,   
Yea, all the glories  of mankind.   
12 Finder  of room  and freedom,  flow for Indra  whom we must  adore,   
For Varuna  and the Marut  host.   
13 The Gods  have  come  to Indu well−descended,  beautified  with milk,   
The active  crusher  of the foe.  
14 Even  as mother  cows  their calf, so let our praise−songs  strengthen  him,  
Yea, him who winneth  Indra's  heart.   
15 Soma,  pour blessings  on our kine,  pour forth  the food that streams  with milk  
Increase  the sea that merits  laud.   
16 From  heaven  hath Pavamana  made,  as 'twere,  the marvellous  thunder,  and  Rig Veda – English Translation  
The lofty  light of all mankind.   
17 The gladdening  and auspicious  juice  of thee,  of Pavamana,  King!   
Flows  o'er the woollen  straining−cloth.   
18 Thy juice,  O Pavamana,  sends  its rays abroad  like splendid  skill,   
Like lustre,  all heaven's  light,  to see.  
19 Flow  onward  with that juice  of thine  most  excellent,  that brings  delight,   
Slaying  the wicked,  dear to Gods.   
20 Killing  the foeman  and his hate,  and winning  booty  every  day,  
Gainer  art thou of steeds  and kine.   
21 Red−hued,  be blended  with the milk that seems  to yield  its lovely  breast,   
Falcon−like  resting  in thine  home.   
22 Flow  onward  thou who strengthenedst  Indra  to slaughter  Vrtra  who  
Compassed  and stayed  the mighty  floods.   
23 Soma  who rainest  gifts,  may we win riches  with our hero sons:   
Strengthen,  as thou art cleansed,  our hymns.   
24 Aided  by thee,  and through  thy grace,  may we be slayers  when  we war:  
 
Watch,  Soma,  at our solemn  rites.   
25 Chasing  our foemen,  driving  off the godless,  Soma  flowcth  on,  
Going  to Indra's  special  place.   
26 O Pavamana,  hither  bring  great  riches,  and destroy  our foes:   
O Indu,  grant  heroic  fame.   
27 A hundred  obstacles  have ne'er  checked   
thee when  fain to give thy boons,   
When,  being  cleansed,  thou combatest.   
28 Indu,  flow on, a mighty  juice;  glorify  us among  the folk:   
Drive  all our enemies  away.   
29 Indu,  in this thy friendship  most  lofty  and glorious  may we  
Subdue  all those  who war with us.  
30 Those  awful  weapons  that thou hast, sharpened  at point  to strike  men down−   
Guard  us therewith  from  every  foe.  
 
HYMN  LXII.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. THESE  rapid  Soma−drops  have  been poured  through  the purifying  sieve  To bring  us all felicities.   
2 Dispelling  manifold  mishap,  giving  the courser's  progeny,   
Yea, and the warrior  steed,  success.   
3 Bringing  prosperity  to kine,  they make  perpetual  Ila flow  
To us for noble  eulogy.   
4 Strong, mountain−born,  the stalk  hath been   
pressed  in the streams  for rapturous  joy:  
Hawk−like  he settles  in his home.   
5 Fair is the God−loved  juice;  the plant  is washed  in waters,  pressed  by men  
The milch−kine  sweeten  it with milk.   
6 As drivers  deck a courser,  so have  they adorned  the meath's  juice  for  
Ambrosia,  for the festival.   
7 Thou,  Indu,  with thy streams  that drop sweet  juices,  which  were  poured  for  Rig Veda – English Translation  
help,   
Hast settled  in the cleansing  sieve.   
8 So flow thou onward  through  the fleece,  for Indra  flow,  to be his drink,   
Finding  thine  home  in vats of wood.   
9 As giving  room  and freedom,  as most  sweet,  pour butter  forth  and milk,   
O Indu,  for the Angirases.   
10 Most  active  and benevolent,  this Pavamana,  sent to us  
For lofty  friendship,  meditates.   
11 Queller  of curses,  mighty,  with strong  sway,  this Pavamana  shall   
Bring  treasures  to the worshipper.   
12 Pour  thou upon  us thousandfold  possessions,  both of kine and steeds,   
Exceeding  glorious,  much−desired.   
13 Wandering  far, with wise designs,  the juice here present  is effused,   
Made  beautiful  by living  men.   
14 For Indra  flows  the gladdening  drink,  the measurer  of the region,  Sage,   
With  countless  wealth  and endless  help.   
15 Born  on the inountain,  lauded  here,  Indu for Indra  is set down,   
As in her sheltering  nest a bird.  
 
16 Pressed  by the men,  as 'twere  to war hath Soma  Pavamana  sped,   
To test with might  within  the vats.  
17 That he may move,  they yoke  him to the three−backed  triple−seated  car  
By the Seven  Rsis'  holy songs.   
18 Drive  ye that Tawny  Courser,  O ye pressers,  on his way to war,  
Swift  Steed  who carries  off the spoil.   
19 Pouring  all glories  hither,  he, effused  and entering  the jar,  
Stands  like a hero mid the kine.   
20 Indu,  the living  men milk out the juice  to make  the rapturous  draught:   
Gods  for the Gods  milk out the meath.   
21 Pour  for the Gods  into the sieve  our Soma  very rich in sweets,   
Him whom  the Gods  most  gladly  hear.   
22 Into his stream  who gladdens  best these  Soma  juices  have  been  poured,   
Lauded  with songs  for lofty fame.   
23 Thou  flowest  to enjoy  the milk,  and bringest  valour,  being  cleansed:   
Winning  the spoil  flow hitherward.   
24 And,  hymned  by Jamadagnis,  let all nourishment  that kine supply,   
And general  praises,  flow to us.  
25 Soma,  as leader  of the song flow onward  with thy wondrous  aids,  
For holy lore of every  kind.   
26 Do thou as leader  of the song,  stirring  the waters  of the sea,  
Flow  onward,  thou who movest  all.  
27 O Soma,  O thou Sage,  these  worlds  stand  ready  to attest  thy might:   
For thy behoof  the rivers  flow.   
28 Like showers  of rain that fall from  heaven  thy streams  perpetually  flow  
To the bright  fleece  spread  under  them.   
29 For potent  Indra  purify  Indu effectual  and strong,   
Enjoyment−giver,  Mighty  Lord.   
30 Soma,  true, Pavamana,  Sage,  is seated  in the cleansing  sieve,   