Rig Veda – English Translation  
Soma  bethinks  him of the Conqueror,  as he knows.   
3 May Indra in his raptures  gain from  him the grasp  that gathers  spoil,   
And,  winning  waters,  wield  the steerstrong  thunderbolt.   
4 Flow  vigilant  for Indra,  thou Soma,  yea, Indu,  run thou on:  
Bring  hither  splendid  strength  that finds  the light of heaven.   
5 Do thou, all−beautiful,  purify  for Indra's  sake the mighty  juice,   
Path−maker  thou,  far seeing,  with a thousand  ways.   
6 Best finder  of prosperity  for us, most  rich in sweets  for Gods,   
Proceed  thou loudly  roaring  on a thousand  paths.   
7 O Indu,  with thy streams , in might,  flow for the banquet  of the Gods:   
Rich  in meath,  Soma,  in our beaker  take thy place.   
8 Thy drops  that swim  in water  have  exalted  Indra  to delight:   
The Gods  have drunk  thee up for immortality.   
9 Stream  opulence  to us, ye drops  of Soma,  press ed and purified,   
Pouring  down  rain from  heaven  in hoods,  and finding  light.   
10 Soma,  while  filtered,  with his wave  flows  through  the long wool  of the sheep,   
Shouting  while  purified  before  the voice  of song.   
11 With  songs  they send the Mighty  forth,  sporting  in wood,  above  the fleece:   
Our psalms  have  glorified  him of the triple  height.   
12 Into the jars hath he been  loosed,  like an impetuous  steed  for war,  
And lifting  up his voice,  while  filtered,  glided  on.  
13 Gold−hued  and lovely  in his course,  througb tangles  of the wool  he flows,   
And pours  heroic  fame  upon  the worshippers.   
14 Flow  thus,  a faithful  votary:  the streams  of meath  have been  effused.   
Thou  comest  to the filter,  singing,  from  each side.  
 
HYMN  CVII.  Soma  Pavamana.  
I., HENCE  sprinkle  forth the juice  effused,.  Soma,  the best of sacred  gifts,   
Who,  friend  of man,  hath run amid  the water−streams.  He hath pressed  Soma  out with stones.   
2 Now,  being  purified,  flow hither  through  the fleece  inviolate  and most  odorous.   
We ladden  thee in water s when  thou art effused,  blending  thee still with juice  and milk.   
3 Pressed  out for all to see, delighting  Gods,  Indu,  Far−sighted  One,  is mental  power.   
4 Cleansing  thee,  Soma,  in thy stream,  thou flowest  in a watery  robe:   
Giver  of wealth,  thou sittest  in the place  of Law,  O God,  a fountain  made  of gold.   
5 Milking  the heavenly  udder  for dear meath,  he hath sat in the ancient  gatheringplace.   
Washed  by the men,  the Strong  Farseeing  One streams  forth  nutriti  us food that all desire.   
6 O Soma,  while  they cleanse  thee,  dear and watchful  in the sheep's  long wool,   
Thou  hast become  a Singer  most  like Angiras:  thou madest  Surya  mount  to heaven.   
7 Bountiful,  best of furtherers,  Soma  floweth  on, Rsi and Singer,  keen  of sight.   
Thou  hast become  a Sage  most  welco me to the Gods:  thou madest  Surya  mount  to heaven.   
8 Pressed  out by pressers,  Soma  goes over the fleecy  backs  of sheep,   
Goes,  even  as with a mare,  in tawnycoloured  stream,  goes in exhilarating  stream.   
9 Down  to the water−Soma,  rich in kine hath flowed  with cows,  with cows  that have been  milked.   
 
They  have  approached  the mixing−vessel  as a sea: the cheerer  streams  for the carouse.   
10 Effused  by stones,  O Soma,  and urged  through  the long wool  of the sheep,   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Thou,  entering  the saucers  as a man the fort, gold−hued  hast settled  in the wood.   
11 He beautifies  himself  through  the sheep's  long fine wool,  like an impetuous  steed  in war,  
Even  Soma  Pavamana  who shall  be the joy of sages  and of holy bards.   
12 O Soma,−for  the feast  of Gods,  river−like  he hath swelled with surge,   
With  the stalk's  juice,  exhilarating,  resting  not, into the vat that drops  with meath.   
13 Like a dear son who must  be decked,  the Lovely  One hath clad him in a shining  robe.   
Men skilful  at their work  drive  him forth,  like a car, into the rivers  from  their bands.   
14 The living  drops  of Soma  juice  pour,  as they flow,  the gladdening  drink,   
Intelligent  drops  above  the basin  of the sea, exhilarating,  finding  light.   
15 May Pavamana,  King  and God,  speed  with his wave  over the sea the lofty  rite:  
May he by Mitra's  and by Varuna's  decree  flow furthering  the lofty  rite.  
16 Far−seeing,  lovely,  guided  by the men,  the God whose  home  is in the sea−  
17 Soma,  the gladdening  juice,  flows  pressed  for Indra  with his Marut  host:   
He hastens  o'er the fleece with all his thousand  streams:  men make  him bright  and beautiful.   
18 Purified  in the bowl  and gendering  the hymn,  wise Soma  joys among  the Gods.   
Robed  in the flood,  the Mighty  One hath clad himself  with milk and settled  in the vats.  
19 O Soma,  Indu,  every  day thy friendship  hath been  my delight.   
Many  fiends  follow  me; help me, thou Tawny−hued;  pass on beyond  these  barriers.   
20 Close  to thy bosom  am I, Soma,  day and night.  O Tawny−hued,  for friendship  sake.   
Surya  himself  refulgent  with his glow  have we o'ertaken  in his course  like birds.   
21 Deft−handcd!  thou when  purified  liftest  thy voice  amid  the sea.  
Thou,  Pavamana,  makest  riches  flow to us, yellow,  abundant,  much−desifed.   
22 Making  thee pure and bright  in the sheep's  long wool,  tbou hast bellowed,  steerlike,  in the wood.   
Thou  flowest,  Soma  Pavamana,  balmed  with milk unto the special  place  of Gods.   
23 Flow  on to win us strength,  flow on to lofty  lore of every  kind.   
Thou,  Soma,  as Exhilarator  wast the first to spread  the sea abroad  for Gods.   
24 Flow  to the realm  of earth,  flow to the realm  of heaven,  O Soma,  in thy righteous  ways.   
Fair art thou whom  the sages,  O Far−seeing  One,  urge onward  with their songs  and hymns.   
25 Over  the cleansing  sieve  have  flowed  the Pavamanas  in a stream,   
Girt by the Maruts,  gladdening,  Steeds  with Indra's  stiength,  for wisdom  and for dainty  food.   
26 Urged  onward  by the pressers,  clad in watery  robes,  Indu is speeding  to the vat.  
He gendering  light,  hath made  the glad Cows  low, while  he takes  them  as his garb of state.   
 
HYMN  CVIII.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. FOR  Indra,  flow thou Soma  on, as gladdening  juice  most  sweet,  intelligent,   
Great,  cheering,  dwelling  most  in heaven.   
2 Thou,  of whom  having  drunk  the Steer  acts like a steer.  drinking  of this that finds  the light,  
He, Excellently  Wise,  is come  to strengthening  food,  to spoil  and wealth  like Etasa.   
3 For, verily,  Pavamana,  thou bast, splendidest,  called  all the generations  of  
The Gods  to immortality.   
4 By whom  Dadhyac  Navagva  opens  fastened  doors,  by whom  the sages  gained  their wish,   
By whom  they won the fame  of lovely  Amrta  in the felicity  of Gods.   
5 Effused,  he floweth  in a stream,  best rapture−giver,  in the long wool  of the sheep,   
Sporting,  as 'twere  the waters'  wave.   
6 He who from  out the rocky  cavern  took with might  the redmrefulgent  watery  Cows,   
Thou  masterest  the stable  full of kine and steeds:  burst  it, brave  Lord,  like one in mail.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
 
7 Press  ye and pour him, like a steed,  laudworthy,  speeding  through  the region  and the flood,   
Who  swims  in water,  roan in wood;   
8 Increaser  of the water,  Steer  with thousand  streams,  dear to the race of Deities;   
Who  born in Law hath waxen  mighty  by the Law,  King,  God,  and lofty  Ordinance.   
9 Make  splendid  glory  shine  on us, thou Lord  of strengthening  food,  God,  as the Friend  of Gods:   
Unclose  the fount  of middle  air.  
10 Roll onward  to the bowls,  O Mighty  One,  effused,  as Prince  supporter  of the tribes.   
Pour  on us rain from  heaven,  send us the waters'  flow:  incite  our thoughts  to win the spoil.   
11 They  have  drained  him the Steer  of heaven,  him with a thousand  streams,  distilling  rapturous  joy,  
Him who brings  all things  excellent.   
12 The Mighty  One was born Immortal,  giving  life, lightening  darkness  with his shine.   
Wcll−praised  by. sages  he hath.  by his wondrous  power assumed  the Threefold  as his robe.   
13 Effused  is he who brings  good  things,  who brings  us bounteous  gifts and sweet  refreshing  food,   
Soma  who brings  us quiet  homes:   
14 He whom  our Indra  and the Marut  host shall  drink,  Bhaga  shall  drink  with Aryarnan ,  
By whom  we bring  to us Mitra  and Varuna  and Indra  for our great  defence.   
15 Soma,  for Indra's  drink  do thou,  led by the men,  well−wcaponcd  and most  gladdening,   
Flow  on with greatest  store  of sweets.   
16 Enter  the Soma−holder,  even  Indra's  heart,  as rivers pass into the sea,  
Acceptable  to Mitra,  Vayu,  Varuna,  the noblest  Pillar  of the heavens.   
 
HYMN  CIX. Soma  Pavamana.  
1. PLEASANT  to Indra's  Mitra's,  Pusan's  Bhaga's  taste,  sped onward,  Soma,  with thy flowing  stream.   
2 Let Indra  drink,  O Soma,  of thy juice  for wisdom,  and all Deities  for strength.   
3 So flow thou on as bright  celestial  juice,  flow to the vast, immortal  dwelling−place.   
4 Flow  onward,  Soma,  as a mighty  sea, as Father  of the Gods  to every  form.   
5 Flow  on, O Soma,  radiant  for the Gods  and Heaven  and Earth  and bless  our progeny.   
6 Thou,  bright  Juice,  art Sustainer  of the sky: flow,  mighty,  in accordance  with true Law.   
7 Soma,  flow splendid  with thy copious  stream  through  the great  fleece  as in the olden  time.   
8 Bom,  led by men,  joyous , and purified,  let the Light−finder  make  all blessings  flow:   
9 Indu,  while  cleansed,  keeping  the people  safe, shall  give us all possessions  for our own.   
10 Flow  on for wisdom,  Soma,  and for power,  as a strong  courser  bathed,  to win the prize.   
11 The pressers  purify  this juice  of thine,  the Soma,  for delight,  and lofty fame   
12 They  deck  the Gold−hued  Infant,  newlyborn,  even  Soma,  Indu,  in the sieve  for Gods.   
13 Fair Indu hath flowed  on for rapturous  joy, Sage  for good  fortune  in the waters'  lap.  
14 He bears  the beauteous  name  of Indra,  that wherewith  he overcame  all demon  foes.   
15 All Deities  are wont  to drink  of him, pressed  by the men and blent  with milk and curds.   
16 He hath flowed  forth  with thousand  streams  effused,  flowed  ihsough  the filter  and the sheep's  long wo
ol.  
17 With  endless  genial  flow the Strong  hath run, purified  by the waters,  blent  with milk.   
18 Pressed  out with stones,  directed  by the men,  go fortli,  O Soma,  into Indra's  throat.   
19 The mighty  Soma  with a thousand  streams  is poured to Indra  through  the cleansing  sieve.   
20 Indu they balm  with pleasant  milky  juice  for Indra,  for the Steer,  for his delight.   
21 Lightly,  for sheen,  they cleanse  thee for the Gods,  gold−coloured,  wearing  water  as thy robe.   
22 Indu to Indra  streams,  yea, downward  streams,  Strong,  flowing  to the floods,  and mingling  −there.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
 
HYMN  CX. Soma  Pavamana.  
1. O'ERPOWERING  Vrtras,  forward  run to win great  strength:  Thou  speedest  to subdue  like one exacting
 debts.   
2 In thee,  effused,  O Soma,  we rejoice  ourselv es for great  supremacy  in fight.   
Thou,  Pavamana,  enterest  into mighty  deeds,   
3 O Pavamana,  thou didst  generate  the Sun, and spread  the moisture  out with power,   
Hasting  to us with plenty  vivified  with milk.   
4 Thou  didst  produce  him, Deathless  God mid mortal men for maintenance  of Law and lovely  Amrta:   
Thou  evermore  hast moved  making  strength  flow to us.  
5 All round about  hast thou with glory  pierced  for us as 'twere  a never−failing  well for men to drink,   
Borne  on thy way in fragments  from  the presser's  arms.   
6 Then,  beautifully  radiant,  certain  Heavenly  Ones,  have sung  to him their kinship  as they looked  thereon ,
  
And Savitar  the God opens  as 'twere  a stall.   
7 Soma,  the men of old whose  grass  was trimmed  addressed  the hymn  to thee for mighty  strength  and for 
renown:   
So, Hero,  urge us onward  to heroic  power.   
8 They  have  drained  forth  from  out the great  depth  of the sky the old primeval  milk of heaven  that claims  
the 
laud:   
They  lifted  up their voice  to Indra  athis  birth.   
9 As long as thou,  O Pavamana,  art above  this earth  and heaven  and all existence  in thy might,   
Thou  standest  like a Bull the chief  amid  the herd.  
10 In the sheep's  wool  hath Soma  Pavamana  flowed,  while  they cleanse  him, like a playful  infant,   
Indu with hundred  powers  and hundred  currents.   
11 Holy  and sweet,  while  purified,  this Indu flows  on, a wave  of pleasant  taste,  to Indra,−   
Strength−wi nner,  Treasure−finder,  Life.  bestower.   
12 So flow thou on, subduing  our assailants,  chasing  the demons  hard to beencountered,   
Well−armed  and conquering  our foes,  O Soma.   
 
HYMN  CXI. Soma  Pavamana.  
1. WITH  this his golden  splendour  purifying  him, he with his own allies  subdues  all enemies,  as Sara with
 his 
own allies.  Cleansing  himself  with stream  of juice  he shines  forth  yellow−hued  and red, when  with the pr
aisers  he 
encompasses  all forms,  with praisers  having  seven  mouths.  2 That treasure  of the Panis  thou discoveredst;
 thou with thy mothers  deckest  thee in thine  abode,  with songs 
of worship  in thine  home.  As 'twere  from  far, the hymn  is heard,  where  holy songs  resound  in joy. He wit
h the ruddy−hued,  threefold 
hath won life−power,  he, glittering,  hath won life−power.  3 He moves  intelligent,  directed  to the East.  Th
e very beauteous  car rivals  the beams  of light,  the beautiful 
celestial  car. Hymns,  lauding  manly  valour,  came,  inciting  Indra  to success,  that ye may be unconquered,  
both thy bolt and thou,  both be unconquered  in the war. Rig Veda – English Translation  
 
HYMN  CXII.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. WE all have various  thoughts  and plans,  and diverse  are the ways  of men.   
The Brahman  seeks  the worshipper,  wright  seeks  the cracked,  and leech  the maimed.  Flow,  Indu,  flow for 
 
Indra's  sake.   
2 The smith  with ripe and seasoned  plants,  with feathers  of the birds  of air,  
With  stones,  and with enkindled  flames,  seeks  him who hath a store  of gold.  Flow,  Indu,  flow for Indra's  
sake.   
3 A bard am I, my dad's  a leech,  mammy  lays corn upon  the stones.   
Striving  for wealth,  with varied  plans,  we follow  our desires  like kine.  Flow,  Indu,  flow for Indra's  sake.   
4 The horse  would  draw  an easy car, gay hosts  attract  the laugh  and jest.  
The male  desires  his mate's  approach,  the frog is eager  for the flood,  Flow,  Indu,  flow for Indra's  sake.   
 
HYMN  CXIII.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. LET Vrtra−slaying  Indra  drink  Soma  by Saryanavan's  side, Storing  up vigour  in his heart,  prepared  to d
o heroic  deeds.  Flow,  Indu,  flow for Indra's  sake.   
2 Lord  of the Quarters,  flow thou on, boon  Soma,  from  Arjika  land,   
Effused  with ardour  and with faith, and the true hymn  of sacrifice.  Flow,  Indu,  flow for Indra's  sake.   
3 Hither  hath Surya's  Daughter  brought  the wild Steer  whom  Parjanya  nursed.   
Gandharvas  have seized  bold of him, and in the Soma  laid the juice.  Flow,  Indu,  flow for Indra's  sake.   
4 Splendid  by Law!  declaring  Law,  truthspeaking,  truthful  in thy works,   
Enouncing  faith,  King  Soma!  thou,  O Soma,  whom  thy maker  decks.  Flow,  Indu,  flow for Indra's  sake.   
5 Together  flow the meeting  streams  of him the Great  and truly  Strong.   
The juices  of the juicy  meet.  Made  pure by prayer,  O Golden−hued,  flow,  Indu,  flow for Indra's  sake.   
6 O Pavamana,  where  the priest,  as he recites  the rhythmic  prayer,   
Lords  it o'er Soma  with the stone,  with Soma  bringing  forth  delight,  flow,  Indu,  flow for Indra's  sake.  
7 O Pavarnana,  place  me in that deathless,  undecaying  world   
Wherein  the light of heaven  is set, and everlasting  lustre  shines.  Flow,  Indu,  flow for Indra's  sake.   
8 Make  me immortal  in that realm  where  dwells  the King,  Vivasvan's  Son,  
Where  is the secret  shrine  of heaven,  where  are those  waters  young  and fresh.  Flow,  Indu,  flow for Indra's  
sake.   
9 Make  me immortal  in that realm  where  they move  even  as they list,  
In the third  sphere  of inmost  heaven  where  lucid  worlds  are full of light.  Flow,  Indu,  flow for Indra's  sake.
  
10 Make  me immortal  in that realm  of eager  wish  and strong  desire,   
The region  of the radiant  Moon,  where  food and full delight  are found.  Flow,  Indu,  flow for Indra's  sake:   
11 Make  me immortal  in that realm  where  happiness  and transports,  where   
Joys and felicities  combine,  and longing  wishes  are fulfilled.  Flow,  Indu,  flow for Indra's  sake.   
 
HYMN  CXIV.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. THE  man who waIket h as the Laws  of Indu Pavamana  bid,−  Men call him rich in children,  him, O Som
a, who hath met thy thought.  Flow,  Indu,  flow for Indra's  sake.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
2 Kasyapa,  Rsi, lifting  up thy voice  with hymn−composers'  lauds,   
Pav reverence  to King  Soma  born the Sovran  Rule r of the plants.  Flow,  Indu,  flow for Indra's  sake.   
3 Seven  regions  have  their several  Suns;  the ministering  priests  are seven;   
Seven  are the Aditya  Deities,−with  these,  O Soma,  guard  thou us. Flow,  Indu,  flow for Indra's  sake.   
4 Guard  us with this oblation which,  King  Soma,  hath been  dressed  for thee.   
Let not malignity  conquer  us, let nothing  evil do us harm.  Flow,  Indu,  flow for Indra's  sake,   
 
RIG VEDA  − BOOK  THE TENTH  
HYMN  I. Agni.  
1. HIGH  hath the Mighty  risen  before  the dawning,  and come  to us with light from  out the darkness.   
Fair−shapen  Agni  with white−shining  splendour  hath filled  at birth  all human  habitations.   
2 Thou,  being  born,  art Child  of Earth  and Heaven,  parted  among  the plants  in beauty,  Agni!   
The glooms  of night  thou,  Brilliant  Babe,  subduest,  and art come  forth,  loud roaring,  from  thy Mothers.   
3 Here,  being  manifested,  lofty  Visnu,  full wise,  protects  his own supremest  station.   
When  they have  offered  in his mouth  their sweet  milk,  to him with one accord  they sing forth  praises .  
4 Thence  bearing  food the Mothers  come  to meet  thee,  with food for thee who givest  food its increase.   
These  in their altered  form  again  thou meetest.  Thou  art Invoking  Priest  in homes  of mortals.   
5 Priest  of the holy rite, with car that glitters,  refulgent  Banner  of each act of worship,   
Sharinging  every  God through  might  and glory,  even  Agni  Guest  of men I summon  hither.   
6 So Agni  stands  on earth's  most  central  station,  invested  in well−decorated  garments.   
Born,  red of hue, where  men pour out libati ons, O King,  as great  High  Priest  bring  the Gods  hither.   
7 Over  the earth  and over heaven,  O Agni,  thou,  Son, hast ever spread  above  thy Parents.   
Come,  Youthfullest!  to those  who long to meet  thee,  and hither  bring  the Gods,  O Mighty  Victor.   
 
HYMN  II. Agni.  
1. GLADDEN  the yearning  Gods,  O thou Most  Youthful:  bring  them,  O Lord  of Seasons,  knowing  seaso
ns,  
With  all the Priests  Celestial,  O Agni.  Best worshipper  art thou of all Invokers.   
2 Thine  is the Herald's,  thine  the Cleanser's  office,  thinker  art thou,  wealth−giver,  true to Order.   
Let us with Svaha  offer  up oblations,  and Agni,  worthy  God,  pay the Gods  worship.   
3 To the Gods'  pathway  have we travelled,  ready  to execute  what  work  we may accomplish.   
Let Agni,  for he knows,  complete  the worship.  He is the Priest:  let him fix rites and seasons.   
4 When  we most  ignorant  neglect  the statutes  of you, O Deities  with whom  is knowledge,   
Wise  Agni  shall  correct  our faults  and failings,  skilled  to assign  each God his fitting  season.   
5 When,  weak  in mind,  of feeble  understanding,  mortals  bethink  them  not of sacrificing,   
Then  shall  the prudent  and discerning  Agni  worship  the Gods,  best worshipper,  in season.   
6 Because  the Father  hath produced  thee,  Leader  of all our solemn  rites,  their brilliant  Banner:   
So win by worship  pleasant  homes  abounding  in heroes,  and rich food to nourish  all men.   
7 Thou  whom  the Heaven  and Earth,  thou whom  the Waters,  and Tvastar,  maker  of fair things,  created,   
Well  knowing,  all along  the Fathers'  pathway,  shine  with resplenden t light,  enkindled,  Agni.   
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  III. Agni.  
1. O KING,  the potent  and terrific  envoy,  kindled  for strength,  is manifest  in beauty.   
He shines,  all−knowing,  with his lotty splendour:  chasing  black  Night  he comes  with white−rayed  Mornin
g.  
2 Having  o'ercome  the glimmering  Black  with beauty,  and bringi ng forth  the dame  the Great  Sire's  Daugh
ter,  
Holding  aloft the radiant  light of Surya,  as messenger  of heaven  he shines  with treasures.   
3 Attendant  on the Blessed  Dame  the Blessed  hath come:  the Lover  followeth  his Sister.   
Agni,  far−spreading  with consp icuous  lustre,  hath compassed  Night  with whitelyshining  garments.   
4 His goings−forth  kindle  as 'twere  high voices  the goings  of the auspicious  Friend  of Agni.   
 
The rays,  the bright  beams  of the strong−jawed,  mighty,  adorable  Steer  are visible  as he comet h. 5 Whos
e radiant  splendours  flow,  like sounds,  about  us, his who is lofty,  brilliant,  and effulgent,  Who  reaches  h
eaven  with best and brightest  lustres,  sportive  and piercing  even  to the summit.  6 His powers,  whose  cha
riot fellies  gleam  and glitter  have  loudly  roared  while,  as with teams,  he hasted.  He, the most  Godlike,  fa
r−extending  envoy,  shines  with flames  ancient,  resonant,  whitely−shining.  7 So bring  us ample  wealth:  s
eat thee as envoy  of the two youthful  Matrons,  Earth  and Heaven.  Let Agni  rapid  with his rapid,  horses,  i
mpetuous  with impetuous  Steeds,  come  hither.  
 
HYMN  IV. Agni.  
1. To thee will send praise  and bring  oblation,  as thou hast merited  lauds  when  we invoked  thee.   
A fountain  in the desert  art thou,  Agni,  O Ancient  King,  to man who fain would  worship,   
2 Thou  unto whom  resort  the gathered  people,  as the kine seek the warm  stall,  O Most  Youthful.   
Thou  art the messenger  of Gods  and mortals,  and goest  glorious  with thy light between  them.   
3 Making  thee grow  as 'twere  some  noble  infant,  thy Mother  nurtures  thee with sweet  affection.   
Over  the desert  slopes  thou passest  longing,  and seekest,  like some  beast  set free, thy fodder.   
4 Foolish  are we, O Wise  and free from  error:  verily,  Agni,  thou dost know  thy grandeur.   
There  lies the form:  he moves  and licks,  and swallows,  and, as House−Lord,  kisses  the Youthful  Maiden.   
5 He rises ever fresh  in ancient  fuel: smoke−bannered,  gray,  he makes  the wood  his dwelling.   
No swimmer,  Steer,  he presses  through  the waters,  and to his place  accordant  mortals bear him.  
6 Like thieves  who risk their lives  and haunt  the forest,  the twain  with their ten girdles  have secured  him.  
This is a new hymn  meant  for thee,  O Agni:  yoke  as it were  thy car with parts  that glitter.   
7 Homage  and prayer  are thine,  O Jatav edas,  and this my song  shall  evermore  exalt  thee.   
Agni,  protect  our children  and descendants,  and guard  with ever−watcliful  care our bodies.   
 
HYMN  V. Agni.  
1. HE only is the Sea, holder  of treasures:  born many  a time he views  the hearts  within  us.  
He hides  him in the secret  couple's  bosom.  The Bird dwells  in the middle  of the fountain.   
2 Inhabiting  one dwelling−place  in common,  strong  Stallions  and the Mares  have  come  together.   
The sages  guard  the seat of Holy  Order,  and keep  the highest  names  concea led within  them.   
3 The Holy  Pair, of wondrous  power,  have  coupled:  they formed  the Infant,  they who bred produced  him.  
The central  point  of all that moves  and moves  not, the while  they wove  the Sage's  thread  with insight   Rig Veda – English Translation  
4 For tracks  of Order  and refres hing viands  attend  from  ancient  times  the goodly  Infant.   
Wearing  him as a mantle,  Earth  and Heaven  grow  strong  by food of pleasant  drink  and fatness.   
5 He, calling  loudly  to the Seven  red Sisters,  hath,  skilled  in sweet  drink,  brought  them  to be looked  on.  
He, born of old, in middle  air hath halted,  and sought  and found  the covering  robe of Pusan.   
6 Seven  are the pathways  which  the wise have  fashioned;  to one of these  may come  the troubled  mortal.   
He standeth  in the dwelling  of the Highest,  a Pillar,  on sure ground  where  paths  are parted.   
7 Not Being,  Being  in the highest  heaven,  in Aditi's  bosom  and in Daksa's  birthplace,   
Is Agni,  our first−born  of Holy  Order,  the Milch−cow  and the Bull in life's  beginning.   
 
HYMN  VI Agni  
1. THIS  is that Agni,  he by whose  protection,  favour,  and help.  the singer  is successful;  Who  with
 the noblest  flames  of glowing  fuel comes  forth  encompassed  with far−spreading  lustre.  2 Agni,  th
e Holy  One,  the everlasting,  who shines  far beaming  with celestial  splendours;   
He who hath come  unto his friends  with friendship,  like a fleet steed  who never  trips or stumbles.   
3 He who is Lord  of all divine  oblation,  shared  by all living  men at break  of morning,   
Agni  to whom  our offerings  are devoted,  in whom  rests he whose  car, through  might,  is scatheless.   
4 Increasing  by his strength.  while  lauds  content  him, with easy flight  unto the Gods  he travels.   
Agni  the cheerful  Priest,  best Sacrificer,  balms  with his tongue  the Gods  with whom  he mingles.   
5 With  songs  and adorations  bring  ye hither  Agni  who stirs himself  at dawn  like Indra,   
Whom  sages  laud with hymns  as Jatavedas  of those  who wield  the sacrificial  ladle.   
6 In whom  all goodly  treasures  meet  together,  even  as steeds  and riders  for the booty.   
Inclining  hither  bring  us help,  O Agni,  even  assistance  most  desired  by Indra.   
7 Yea, at thy birth,  when  thou hadst  sat in glory,  thou,  Agni,  wast the aim of invocations.   
The Gods  came  near,  obedient  to thy sunimons,  and thus attained  their rank as chief  Protectors.   
 
HYMN  VII. Agni.  
1. O AGNI,  shared  by all men living  bring  us good  luck for sacrifice  from  earth  and heaven.   
With  us be thine  intelligence,  WonderWorker!  Protect  us, God,  with thy far−reaching  blessings.   
2 These  hymns  brought  forth  for thee,  O Agni,  laud thee for bounteo us gifts,  with cattle  and with horses.   
Good  Lord,  when  man from  thee hath gained  enjoyment,  by hymns,  O noblyborn,  hath he obtained  it.  
3 Agni  I deem  my Kinsman  and my Father,  count  him my Brother  and my Friend  for ever.   
I honour  as the face of lofty Agni in heaven  the bright  and holy light of Surya.   
4 Effectual,  Agni,  are our prayers  for profit.  He whom,  at home  thou,  Priest  for ever,  guardest   
Is rich in food,  drawn  by red steeds,  and holy:  by day and night  to him shall  all be pleasant.   
5 Men with their arms  have  generated  Agni,  helpful  as some  kind friend,  adorned  with splendours,   
And stablished  as Invoker  mid the people  the ancient  Priest  the sacrifice's  lover.   
6 Worship,  thyself,  O God,  the Gods  in heaven:  what,  void of knowledge,  shall  the fool avail  thee?   
As thou,  O God,  hast worshipped  Gods  by seasons,  so, nobly−born!  to thine  own self pay worship.   
7 Agni,  be thou our Guardian  and Protector  bestow  upon  us life and vital vigour.   
Accept,  O Mighty  One,  the gifts we offer,  and with unceasing  care protect  our bodies.   
 
HYMN  VIII. Agni.  
1. AGNI  advances  with his lofty  banner:  the Bull is bellowing  to the earth  and heavens.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
He hath attained  the sky's  supremest  limits.  the Steer  hath waxen  in the lap of waters.   
2 The Bull,  the youngling  with the hump,  hath frolicked,  the strong  and never−ceasing  Calf hath bellowed
.  
Bringing  our offerings  to the God's  assembly,  he moves  as Chief  in his own dwelling−places.   
3 Him who hath grasped  his Parents'  head,  they stablished  at sacrifice  a wave  of heavenly  lustre.   
In his swift  flight  the red Dawns  borne  by horses  refresh  their bodies  in the home  of Order.   
4 For, Vasu  thou precedest  every  Morning,  and still hast been  the Twins'  illuminator.   
For sacrifice,  seven  places  thou retainest  while  for thine  own self thou engenderest  Mitra.   
5 Thou  art the Eye and Guard  of mighty  Order,  and Varuna  when  to sacrifice  thou comest.   
Thou  art the Waters'  Child  O Jatavedas,  envoy  of him whose  offering  thou acceptest.   
6 Thou  art the Leader  of the rite and region,  to which  with thine  auspicious  teams  thou teadest,   
Thy light−bestowing  head  to heaven  thou liftest,  making  thy tongue  the oblationbearer,  Agni.   
7 Through  his wise insight  Trita  in the cavern,  seeking  as ever the Chief  Sire's  intention,   
Carefully  tended  in his Parents' bosom,  calling  the weapons  kin, goes forth  to combat.   
8 Well−skilled  to use the weapons  of his Father,  Aptya,  urged  on by Indra,  fought  the battle.   
Then  Trita  slew the foe seven−rayed,  three−headed,  and freed  the cattle  of the Son of Tvastar.   
9 Lord of the brave,  Indra  cleft him in pieces  who sought  to gain much  strength  and deemed  him mighty.   
 
He smote  his three  heads  from  his body,  seizing  the cattle  of the oniniform  Son of Tvastar.  
 
HYMN  IX. Waters.  
1. YE, Waters,  are beneficent:  so help ye us to energy  That we may look on great  delight.   
2 Give  us a portion  of the sap, the most  auspicious  that ye have,   
Like mothers  in their longing  love.   
3 To you we gladly  come  for him to whose  abode  ye send us on;  
And,  Waters,  give us procreant  strength.   
4 The Waters.  be to us for drink,  Goddesses  for our aid and bliss:   
Let them  stream  to us health  and strength.   
5 1 beg the Floods  to give us balm,  these  Queens  who rule o'er precious  things,   
And have  supreme  control  of men.   
6 Within  the Waters−Soma  thus hath told me−dwell  all balms  that heal,   
And Agni,  he who blesseth  all.  
7 O Waters,  teem  with medicine  to keep  my body  safe from  harm,   
So that I long may see the Sun.  
8 Whatever  sin is found  in me, whatever  evil I have  wrought,   
If I have  lied or falsely sworn,  Waters,  remove  it far from  me.  
9 The Waters  I this day have  sought,  and to their moisture  have we come:   
O Agni,  rich in milk,  come  thou,  and with thy splendour  cover  me.  
 
HYMN  X.Yama  Yami.  
1. FAIN  would  I win my friend  to kindly  friendship.  So may the Sage,  come  through  the air's wide  ocean,
  
Remembering  the earth  and days to follow,  obtain  a son, the issue  of his father.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
2 Thy friend  loves  not the friendship  which  considers  her who is near in kindred  as stranger.   
Sons  of the mighty  Asura,  the Heroes,  supporters  of the heavens,  see far around  them.   
3 Yea, this the Immortals  seek of thee with longing,  progeny  of the sole existing  mortal.   
Then  let thy soul and mine  be knit together,  and as a loving  husband  take thy consort.   
4 Shall  we do now what  we ne'er  did aforetime?  we who spake  righteously  now talk impurely?   
Gandharva  in the floods,  the Dame  of Waters−such  is our bond,  such our most  lofty kinship.   
5 Even  in the womb  God Tvastar,  Vivifier,  shaping  all forms,  Creator,  made  us consorts.   
None  violates  his holy ordinances:  that we are his the heavens  and earth  acknowledge.   
6 Who  knows  that earliest  day whereof  thou speakest?  Who  hatb beheld  it? Who  can here declare  it?  
Great  is the Law of Varuna  and Mitra.  What,  wanton!  wilt thou say to men to tempt  them?   
7 I, Yami,  am possessed  by love of Yama,  that I may rest on the same  couch  beside  him.  
I as a wife would  yield  me to my husband.  Like car−wheels  let us speed  to meet  each other.   
8 They  stand  not still, they never  close  their eyelids,  those  sentinels  of Gods  who wander  round  us.  
Not me−go  quickly,  wanton,  with another,  and hasten  like a chariot  wheel  to meet  him.  
9 May Sury a's eye with days and nights  endow  him, and ever may his light spread  out before  him.  
In heaven  and earth  the kindred  Pair commingle.  On Yam!  be the unbrotherly  act of Yama.   
10 Sure there  will come  succeeding  times  when  brothers  and sisters  will do acts unmeet  for kinsfolk.   
Not me, O fair one,−seek  another  husband,  and make  thine  arm a pillow  for thy consort.   
11 Is he a brother  when  no lord is left her? Is she a sister  when  Destruction  cometh?   
Forced  by my love these  many  words  I utter.  Come  near,  and hold me in thy close  embraces.   
12 I will not fold mine  arms  about  thy body:  they call it sin when  one comes  near his sister.   
 
Not me,−prepare  thy pleasures  with another:  thy brother  seeks  not this from  thee,  O fair 
one. 13 Alas!  thou art indeed  a weaklin g, Yama  we find in thee no trace  of heart  or spirit
. As round  the tree the woodbine  clings,  another  will cling  albout  thee girt as with a girdl
e. 14 Embrace  another,  Yami;  let another,  even  as the woodbine  rings  the tree, enfold  the
e. Win thou his heart  and let him win thy fancy,  and he shall  form  with thee a blest allian
ce. 
 
HYMN  XI. Agni  
1. THE  Bull hath yielded  for the Bull the milk of heaven:  the Son of Aditi  can never  be deceived.   
According  to his wisdom  Varuna  knoweth  all: may he, the Holy,  hallow  times  for sacrifice.   
2 Gandharvi  spake:  may she, the Lady  of the flood,  amid  the river's  roaring  leave  my heart  untouched.   
May Aditi  accomplish  all that we desire,  and may our eldest  Brother  tell us this as Chief.   
3 Yea, even  this blessed  Morning,  rich in store  of food,  splendid,  with heavenly  lustre,  hath shone  out for 
man,   
Since  they,  as was the wish of yearning  Gods,  brought  forth  that yearning  Agni  for the assembly  as the Pri
est.  
4 And the fleet Falcon  brought  for sacrifice  from  afar this flowing  Drop most  excellent  and keen  of sight,   
Then  when  the Aryan  tribes  chose  as Invoking  Priest  Agni  the Wonder−Worker,  and the hymn  rose up.  
5 Still art thou kind to him who feeds  thee as with grass,  and, skilled  in sacrifice,  offers  thee holy gifts.   
When  thou, having  received  the sage's  strengthening  food with lauds,  after long toil, cornest  with many  m
ore.  
6 Urge  thou thy Parents,  as a lover  ' to delight:  the Lovely  One desires  and craves  it from  his heart.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
The priest  calls out, the sacrificer  shows  his skill, the Asura  tries his strength,  and with the hymn  is stirred
.  
7 Far−famed  is he, the mortal  man,  O Agni,  thou Son of Strength,  who hath obtained  thy favour.   
He, gathering  power,  borne  onward  by his horses,  makes  his days lovely  in his might  and splen dour.   
8 When,  Holy  Agni,  the divine  assembly,  the sacred  synod  mid the Gods,  is gathered,   
And when  thou,  Godlike  One,  dealest  forth  treasures,  vouchsafe  us, too, our portion  of the riches.   
9 Hear  us, O Agni,  in your common  dwelling:  harness  thy rapid  car of Amrta.   
Bring  Heaven  and Earth,  the Deities'  Parents,  hither:  stay with us here,  nor from  the Gods  be distant.   
 
HYMN  XII. Agni  
1. HEAVEN  and Earth,  first by everlasting  Order,  speakers  of truth,  are near enough  to hear us,  
When  the God,  urging  men to worship.  sitteth  as Priest,  assuming  all his vital vigour.   
2 As God comprising  Gods  by Law Eternal,  bear,  as the Chief  who knoweth,  our oblation,   
Smoke−bannered  with the fuel, radiant,  joyous,  better  to praise  and worship,  Priest  for ever.   
3 When  the cow's  nectar  wins  the God completely,  men here below  are heaven's  sustainers.   
All the Gods  came  to this thy heavenly  Yajus  which  from  the motley  Pair milked  oil and water.   
4 1 praise  your work  that ye may make  me prosper:  hear,  Heaven  and Earth,  Twain  Worlds  that drop with 
fatness.   
While  days and nights  go to the world  of spirits,  here let the Parents  with sweet  meath  refresh  us  
5 Hath  the King  siezed  us? How  have  we offended  against  his holy ordinance?  Who  knoweth?   
For even  Mitra  mid the Gods  is angry there  are both song and strength  for those  who come  not.  
6 'Tis hard to understand  the Immortal's  nature,  where  she who is akin becomes  astranger.   
Guard  ceaselessly,  great  Agni,  him who ponders  Yama's  name,  easy to be comprehended.   
7 They  in the syno d where  the Gods  rejoice  them,  where  they are seated  in Vivasvan's  dwelling,   
Have  given  the Moon  his beams,  the Sun his splendour−the  Two unweariedly  maintain  their brightness.   
8 The counsel  which  the Gods  meet  to consider,  their secret  plan,−of  that we have  no knowledge.   
There  let God Savitar,  Aditi,  and Mitra  proclaim  to Varuna  that we are sinless.   
9 Hear  us, O Agni,  in your comninn  dwell  ing: harness  thy rapid  car, the car of Amrta.   
 
Bring  Heaven  and Earth,  the Deities'  Parents,  hither:  stay with us here,  nor from  the Gods  be distant.  
 
HYMN  XIII Havirdhanas.  
1. I YOKE  with prayer  your ancient  inspiration:  may the laud rise as on the prince's  pathway.   
All Sons  of Immortality  shall  hear it, all the possessors  of celestial  natures.   
2 When  speeding  ye came  nigh us like twin sisters,  religious−hearted  votaries  brought  you forward.   
Take  your place,  ye who know  your proper  station:  be near,  be very near unto our Soma.   
3 Five paces  have  I risen  from  Earth.  I follow  her who hath four feet with devout  observance.   
This by the Sacred  Syllable  have  I measured:  I purify  in the central  place  of Order,   
4 He, for God's  sake,  chose  death  to be his portion.  He chose  not, for men's  good,  a life eternal   
They  sacrificed  Brhaspati  the Rsi. Yama  delivered  up his own dear body.   
5 The Seven  flow to the Youth  on whom  the Maruts  wait:  the Sons  unto the Father  brought  the sacrifice.   
Both  these  are his, as his they are the Lords  of both:  both toil; belonging  unto both they prosper  well.   
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  XIV. Yama.  
1. HONOUR  the King with thine  oblations,  Yama,  Vivasvan's  Son, who gathers  men together,   
Who  travelled  to the lofty  heights  above  us, who searcbes  out and shows  the path to many.   
2 Yama  first found  for us a place  to dwell  in: this pasture  never  can be taken  from   
Us.  
Men born on earth  tread  their own paths  that lead them  whither  our ancient  Fathers  have  departed.   
3 Mitali  prospers  there  with Kavyas,  Yama  with Angiras'  sons,  Brhaspati  with Rkvans:   
Exalters  of the Gods,  by Gods  exalted,  some  joy in praise  and some  in our oblation.   
4 Come,  seat thee on this bed of grass,  O Yama,  in company  with Angirases  and Fathers.   
Let texts  recited  by the sages  bring  thee O King,  let this oblation  make  thee joyful.   
5 Come,  Yama,  with the Angirases  the Holy,  rejoice  thee here with children  of Virupa.   
To sit on sacred  grass  at this our worship,  I call Vivasvan,  too, thy Father  hither.   
6 Our Fathers  are Angirases,  Navagvas,  Atharvans,  Bhrgus  who deserve  the Soma.   
May these,  the Holy,  look on us with favour,  may we enjoy  their gracio us loving−kindness.   
7 Go forth,  go forth  upon  the ancient  pathways  whereon  our sires of old have  gone  before  us.  
'Mere  shalt  thou look on both the Kings  enjoying  their sacred  food,  God Varuna  and Yama.   
8 Meet  Yama,  meet  the Fathers,  meet  the merit  of free or ordered  acts, in highest  heaven.   
Leave  sin and evil, seek anew  thy dwelling,  and bright  with glory  wear  another  body.   
9 Go hence,  depart  ye, fly in all directions:  this place  for him the Fathers  have  provided.   
Yama  bestows  on him a place  to rest in adorned  with days and beams  of light and waters.   
10 Run and outspeed  the two dogs,  Sarama's  offspring,  brindled,  four−eyed,  upon  thy happy  pathway.   
Draw  nigh then to the gracious−minded  Fathers  where  they rejoice  in company  with Yama.   
11 And those  two dogs  of thine,  Yama,  the watchers,  four−eyed,  who look on men and guard  the pathway
,−  
Entrust  this man,  O King,  to their protection,  and with prosperity  and health  endow  him.  
12 Dark−hued,  insatiate,  with distended  nostrils,  Yama's  two envoys  roam  among  the People;   
May they restore  to us a fair existence  here and to−day,  that we may see the sunlight.   
13 To Yama  pour the Soma,  bring  to Yama  consecrated  gifts:   
To Yama  sacrifice  prepared  and heralded  by Agni  goes.   
14 Offer  to Yama  holy gifts enriched  with butter,  and draw  near:   
So may he grant  that we may live long days of life among  the Gods.   
15 Offer  to Yama,  to the King,  oblation  very rich in meath:   
Bow  down  before  the Rsis of the ancient  times,  who made  this path in days of old.  
 
16 Into the six Expanses  flies the Great  One in Trkadru
kas. The Gayatri,  the Trstup,  all metres  in Yama  are co
ntained.  
 
HYMN  XV. Fathers.  
1. MAY  they ascend,  the lowest,  highest,  midmost,  the Fathers  who deserve  a share  of Soma−   
May they who have  attained  the life of spirits,  gentle  and righteous,  aid us when  we call them.   
2 Now  let us pay this homage  to the Fathers,  to those  who passed  of old and those  who followe d,  
Those  who have rested  in the earthly  region,  and those  who dwell  among  the Mighty  Races.   
3 1 have  attained  the gracious−minded  Fathers,  I have  gained  son and progeny  from  Visnu.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
They  who enjoy  pressed  juices  with oblation  seated  on sacred  grass,  come  oftenest  hither.   
4 Fathers  who sit on sacred  grass,  come,  help us: these  offerings  have  we made  for you; accept  them.   
So come  to us with most  auspicious  favour,  and give us health  and strength  without  a trouble.   
5 May they,  the Fathers,  worthy  of the Soma,  invited  to their favourite  oblations.   
Laid on the sacred  grass,  come  nigh and listen:  may they be gracious  unto us and bless  us.  
6 Bowing  your bended  knees  and seated  southward,  accept  this sacrifice  of ours with favour.   
Punish  us not for any sin, O Fathers,  which  we through  human  frailty  have  committed.   
7 Lapped  in the bosom  of the purple  Mornings,  give riches  to the man who brings  oblations.   
Grant  to your sons a portion  of that treasure,  and, present,  give them  energy,  ye Fathers.   
8 Our ancient  Fathers  who deserve  the Soma,  who came,  most  noble,  to our Soma  banquet,−   
With  these  let Yama,  yearning  with the yearning,  rejoicing  eat our offerings  at his pleasure.   
9 Come  to us, Agni,  with the gracioug  Fathers  who dwell  in glowing  light,  the very Kavyas,   
Who  thirsted  mid the Gods,  who hasten  hither,  oblation  winners,  theme  of singers'  praises.   
10 Come,  Agni,  come  with countless  ancient  Fathers,  dwellers  in light,  primeval,  God−adorers,   
Eaters  and drinkers  of oblations,  truthful,  who travel  with the Deities  and Indra.   
11 Fathers  whom  Agni's  flames  have  tasted,  come  ye nigh:  ye kindly  leaders,  take ye each your proper  pla
ce.  
Eat sacrificial  food presented  on the grass:  grant  riches  with a multitude  of hero sons.   
12 Thou,  Agni  Jatavedas,  when  entre ated,  didst  bear the offerings  which  thou madest  fragrant,   
And give them  to the Fathers  who did cat them  with Svadha.  Eat, thou God,  the gifts we bring  thee.   
13 Thou,  Jatavedas,  knowest  well the number  of Fathers  who are here and who are absent,   
Of Fathers whom  we know  and whom  we know  not: accept  the sacrifice  wellprepared  with portions.   
14 They  who,  consumed  by fire or not cremated,  joy in their offering  in the midst  of heaven,−   
Grant  them,  O Sovran  Lord,  the world  of spirits  and their own body,  as thy pleasure  wills  it.  
 
HYMN  XVI. Agni.  
1. Burn  him not up, nor quite  consume  him, Agni:  let not his body  or his skin be scattered.   
O Jatavedas,  when  thou hast matured  him, then send him on his way unto the Fathers.   
2 When  thou hast made  him ready,  Jatavedas,  then do thou give him over to the Fathers.   
When  he attains  unto the life that waits  him, he shall  become  the Deities'  controller.   
3 The Sun receive  thine  eye, tne Wind  thy spirit;  go, as thy merit  is, to earth  or heaven.   
Go, if it be thy lot, unto the waters;  go, make  thine  home  in plants  with all thy members.   
4 Thy portion  is the goat:  with heat consume  him: let thy fierce  flame,  thy glowing  splendour,  burn him  
With  thine  auspicious  forms,  o Jatavedas,  bear this man to the region  of the pious.   
5 Again,  O Agni,  to the Fathers  send him who,  offered  in thee,  goes with our oblations.   
Wearing  new life let him increase  his offspring:  let him rejoin  a body,  Jatavedas.   
6 What  wound  soe'er  the dark bird hath inflicted,  the emmet,  or the serpent,  or the jackal,   
May Agni  who devoureth  all things  heal it and Soma  who hath passed  into the Brahmans.   
 
7 Shield  thee with flesh  against  the flames  of Agni,  encompass  thee about  with fat and marrow,   
So will the Bold  One,  eager  to attack  thee with fierce  glow  fail to girdle  and consume  thee.   
8 Forbear,  O Agni,  to upset  this ladle:  the Gods  and they who merit  Soma  love it.  
This ladle,  this which  serves  the Gods  to drink  from,  in this the Immortal  Deities  rejoice  them.   
9 1 send afar flesh  eating  Agni,  bearing  off stains  may he depart  to Yama's  subjects.   
But let this other  Jatavedas  carry  oblation  to the Gods,  for he is skilful.   
10 I choose  as God for Father−worship  Agni,  flesh−eater,  who hath past within  your dwelling,   Rig Veda – English Translation  
While  looking  on this other  Jatavedas.  Let him light flames  in the supreme  assembly.   
11 With  offerings  meet  let Agni  bring  the Fathers  who support  the Law.   
Let him announce  oblations  paid to Fathers  and to Deities.   
12 Right  gladly  would  we set thee down,  right  gladly  make  thee burn and glow.   
Gladly  bring  yearning  Fathers  nigh to cat the food of sacrifice.   
13 Cool,  Agni,  and again  refresh  the spot which  thou hast scorched  and burnt.   
Here  let the water−lily  grow,  and tender  grass  and leafy  herb.   
14 O full of coolness,  thou cool Plant,  full of fresh  moisture,  freshening  Herb,   
Come  hither  with the female  frog:  fill with delight  this Agni  here.   
 
HYMN  XVII.  Various  Deities.  
1. TVASTAR  prepares  the bridal  of his Daughter:  all the world  hears  the tidings  and assembles.   
But Yama's  Mother,  Spou se of great  Vivasvan,  vanished  as she was carried  to her dwelling.   
2 From  mortal  men they hid the Immortal  Lady,  made  one like her and gave her to Vivasvan.   
Saranyu  brought  to him the Asvin  brothers,  and then deserted  both twinned  pairs  of children.   
3 Guard of the world,  whose  cattle  ne'er  are injured,  may Pusan  bear thee hence,  for he hath knowledge.   
May he consign  thee to these  Fathers'  keeping,  and to the gracious  Gods  let Agni  give thee.   
4 May Ayu,  giver  of all life, protect  thee,  and bear thee forward  on the distant  pathway.   
Thither  let Savitar  the God transport  thee,  where  dwell  the pious  who have  passed−before  thee.   
5 Pusan  knows  all these  realms:  may he conduct  us by ways  that are most  free from  fear and danger.   
Giver  of blessings,  glowing,  all−heroic,  may he, thewise  and watchful,  go before  us.  
6 Pusan  was born to move  on distant  pathways,  on the road far from  earth  and far from  heaven.   
To both most  wonted  places  of assembly  he travels  and returns  with perfect  knowledge.   
7 The pious  call Sarasvati,  they worship  Sarasvati  while  sacrifice  proceedeth.   
The pious  called  Sarasvati  aforetime.  Sarasvati  send bliss to him who giveth.   
8 Sarasvati,  who camest  with the Fathers,  with them  rejoicing  thee in our oblations,   
Seated  upon  this sacred  grass  be joyful,  and give us strengthening  food that brings  no sickness.   
9 Thou,  called  on as Sarasvati  by Fathers  who come  right  forward  to our solemn  service,   
Give  food and wealth  to present  sacrificers,  a portion,  worth  a thousand,  of refreshment.   
10 The Mother  Floods  shall  make  us bright  and shining,  cleansers  of holy oil, with oil shall  cleanse  us:  
For, Goddesses,  they bear off all defilement:  I, rise up from  them  purified  and brightened.   
11 Through  days of earliest  date the Drop  descended  on this place and on that which  was before  it.  
I offer  up, throughout  the seven  oblations,  the Drop  which  still to one same  place  is moving.   
12 The Drop  that falls,  thy stalk  which  arms  have  shaken,  which  from  the bosom  of the press  hath fallen,   
Or from  the Adhvary u's purifying  filter,  I offer  thee with heart  and cry of Vasat!   
13 That fallen  Drop  of thine,  the stalk  which  from  the ladle  fell away,   
This present  God Brhaspati  shall  pour it forth  to make  us rich.  
14 The plants  of earth  are rich in milk,  and rich in milk is this my speech;   
And rich in milk the essence  of the Waters:  make  me pure therewith.   
 
HYMN  XVIII.  Various  Deities.  
1. Go hence,  O Death,  pursue  thy special  pathway  apart  from  that which  Gods  are wont  to travel.   
To thee I say it who hast eyes and hearest:  Touch  not our offspring,  injure  not our heroes.   
2 As ye have  come  effacing  Mrtyu's  footstep,  to further  times  prolonging  your existence,   
May ye be rich in children  and possessions.  cleansed,  purified,  and meet  for sacrificing.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
3 Divided  from  the dead  are these,  the living:  now be our calling  on the Gods  successful.   
We have  gone  forth  for dancing  and for laughter,  tofurther  times  prolonging  our existence.   
4 Here  I erect  this rampart  for the living;  let none  of these,  none  other,  reach  this limit.  
May they survive  a hundred  lengthened  autumns,  and may they bury Death  beneath  this mountain.   
5 As the days follow  days in close  succession,  as with the seasons  duly come  the seasons,   
As each successor  fails not his foregoer,  so form  the lives  of these,  O great  Ordainer.   
6 Live your full lives  ap! find old age delightful,  all of you striving  one behind  the other.   
May Tvastar,  maker  of fair things,  be gracious  and lengthen  out the days of your existence.   
7 Let these  unwidowed  dames  with noble  husb ands adorn  themselves  with fragrant  balm  and unguent.   
Decked  with fair jewels,  tearless,  free from  sorrow,  first let the dames  go up to where  he lieth.   
8 Rise,  come  unto the world  of life, O woman:  come,  he is lifeless  by whose  side thou liest.   
Wifehood  with this thy husband  was thy portion,  who took thy hand  and wooed  thee as a lover.   
9 From  his dead  hand  I take the bow be carried,  that it may be our power  and might  and glory.   
There  art thou,  there;  and here with noble  heroes  may we o'ercome  all hosts  that fight  against  us.  
10 Betake  thee to the Iap of Earth  the Mother,  of Earth  far−spreading,  very kind and gracious.   
Young  Dame,  wool−soft  unto the guerdongiver,  may she preserve  tbee from  Destruction's  bosom.   
11 Heave  thyself,  Earth,  nor press  thee downward  heavily:  afford  him easy access,  gently  tending  him.  
Cover  him, as a mother  wraps  her skirt about  her child,  O Earth.   
12 Now  let the heaving  earth  be free from  motion:  yea,−  let a thousand  clods  remain  above  him.  
Be they to him a home  distilling  fatness,  here let them  ever be his place  of refuge.   
13 I stay the earth  from  thee,  while  over thee I place  this piece  of earth.  May I be free from  injury.   
Here  let the Fathers  keep  this pillar  firm for thee,  and there  let Yama  make  thee an abiding−place .  
14 Even  as an arrow's  feathers,  they have  set me on a fitting  day.  
The fit word  have  I caught  and held as 'twere  a courser  with the rein.  
 
HYMN  XIX. Waters  or Cows.  
1. TURN,  go not farther  on your way:  visit us, O ye Wealthy  Ones.  Agni  and Soma,  ye who bring  riches  a
gain,  secure  us wealth.   
2 Make  these  return  to us again,  bring  them  beside  us once  again.   
May.  Indra  give them  back  to us, and Agni  drive  them  hither−ward.   
3 Let them  return  to us again:  under  this herdsman  let them  feed.   
Do thou,  O Agni, keep  them  here,  and let the wealth  we have  remain.   
4 1 call upon  their herdsman,  him who knoweth  well their coming  nigh,   
Their  parting  and their home−return,  and watcheth  their approach  and rest.  
5 Yea, let the herdsman,  too, return,  who marketh  well their driving−forth;   
Marketh  their wandering  away,  their turning  back  and coming  home.   
6 Home−leader,  lead them  home  to us; Indra,  restore  to us our kine:   
We will rejoice  in them  alive.   
7 1 offer  you on every  side butter  and milk and strengthening  food.  
May all the Holy  Deities  pour down  on us a flood  of wealth.   
8 O thou Home−leader,  lead them  home,  restore  them  thou who bringest  home.   
Four  are the quarters  of the earth;  from  these  bring  back to us our kine,   
 
HYMN  XX. Agni.  
1. SEND  unto us a good and happy  mind.  2 1 worship  Agni,  Youthfullest  of Gods,  resistless,  Friend  of laRig Veda – English Translation  
ws;  
Under  whose  guard  and heavenly  light the Spotted  seek the Mother's  breast:   
3 Whom  with their mouth  they magnify,  bannered  with flame  and homed  in light.   
He glitters  with his row of teeth.   
4 Kind,  Furtherer  of men,  he comes,  when  he hath reached  the ends of heaven,   
Sage,  giving  splendour  to the clouds.   
5 To taste man's  offerings,  he, the Strong,  hath risen  erect  at sacrifice:   
Fixing  his dwelling  he proceeds.   
6 Here  are oblation,  worship,  rest: rapidly  comes  his furtherance.   
To sword−armed  Agni  come  the Gods.   
7 With  service  for chief  bliss I seek the Lord  of Sacrifice,  Agni,  whom   
They  call the Living,  Son of Cloud.   
8 Blest  evermore  be all the men who come  from  us, who magnify   
Agni  with sacrificial  gifts.   
9 The path he treads  is black  and white  and red, and striped,  and brown,  crimson,  and glorious.   
His sire begat  him bright  with hues of gold.   
10 Thus  with his thoughts,  O Son of Strength,  O Agni,  hath Vimada,  accordant  with the Immortals,   
Offered  thee hymns,  soliciting  thy favour.  Thou  hast brought  all food,  strength,  a prosperous  dwelling.   
 
HYMN  XXI. Agni.  
1. WITH  offerings  of our own we choose  thee,  Agni,  as Invoking  Priest,  For sacrifice  with trimmed  grass,
−at your glad carouse−piercing  and brightly  shining.  Thou  art waxing  great.   
2 The wealthy  ones adorn  thee,  they who bring  us horses  as their gift:  
The sprinkling  ladle,  Agni,−at  your glad carouse  −and  glowing  offering  taste thee.  Thou  art waxing  great.
  
3 The holy statutes  rest by thee,  as 'twere  with ladles  that o'erflow.   
Black  and white−gleaming  colours,−at  your glad carouse−all  glories  thou assurnest.  Thou  art waxing  grea
t.  
4 O Agni,  what  thou deemest  wealth,  Victorious  and Immortal  One!   
Bring  thou to give us vigour,−at  your glad carouse  −splendid  at sacrifices.  Thou  art waxing  great.   
5 Skilled  in all lore is Agni,  he whom  erst Atharvan  brought  to life.  
He was Vivasvan's  envoy,  at your glad carouse−the  weIl−loved  friend  of Yama,  Thou  art waxing  great.  
6 At sacrifices  they adore  thee,  Agni,  when  the rite proceeds.   
All fair and lovely  treasures−at  your glad carouse−thou  givest  him who offers.  Thou  art waxing  great.   
7 Men,  Agni,  have established  thee as welcome  Priest  at holy rites,   
Thee  whose  face shines  with butter,−at  your glad carouse−bright,  with eyes most  observant.  Thou  art wax
ing 
great.   
8 Wide  and aloft thou spreadest  thee,  O Agni,  with tby brilliant  flame.   
A Bull art thou when  bellowing,−at  your glad carouse−thou  dost impregn  the Sister s. Thou  art waxing  gre
at.  
 
HYMN  XXII.  Indra.  
1. WHERE  is famed  Indra  heard  of? With  what  folk is he renowned  to−day  as Mitra  is,− Who  in the hom
e of Rsis and in secret  is extolled  with song?   Rig Veda – English Translation  
2 Even  here is Indra  famed,  and among  us this day the gloriou s Thunderer  is praised,   
He who like Mitra  mid the folk hath won complete  and full renown.   
3 He who is Sovran  Lord  of great  and perfect  strength,  exerter  of heroic  might,   
Who  bears  the fearless  thunder  as a father  bears  his darling  son.  
4 Harnessing  to thy car, as God,  two blustering  Steeds  Of the Wind−God,  O Thunderer,   
That speed  along  the shining  path,  thou making  ways  art glorified.   
5 Even  to these  dark Steeds  of Wind  thou of thyself  hast come  to ride,  
Of which  no driver  may be found,  none,  be he God or mortal  man.   
6 When  ye approach,  men ask you, thee and Usana:  Why  come  ye to our dwelling−place?   
Why  are ye come  to mortal  man from  distant  realms  of eapth  and heaven?   
7 O Indra,  thou shalt  speak  us fair: our holy prayer  is offered  up.  
We pray to thee for help as thou didst  strike  the monster  Susna  dead.   
8 Around  us is the Dasyu,  riteless,  void of sense,  inhuman,  keeping  alien  laws.   
Baffle,  thou Slayer  of the foe, the weapon  which  this Dasa  wields.   
9 Hero  with Heroes,  thou art ours:  yea, strong  are they whom  thou dost help.   
In many  a place  are thy full gifts,  and men,  like vassals,  sing thy praise.   
10 Urge  thou these  heroes  on to slay the enemy,  brave  Thunderer!  in the fight  with swords.   
Even  when  hid among  the tribes  of Sages  numerous  as stars.  
11 Swift  come  those  gifts of thine  whose  hand  is prompt  to rend and burn,  O Hero  Thunder−armed:   
As thou with thy Companions  didst  destroy  the whole  of SuSnia's  brood.   
12 Let not thine  excellent  assistance  come  to us, O Hero  Indra,  profitless.   
May we, may we enjoy  the bliss of these  thy favours,  Thunderer!   
13 May those  soft impulses  of thine,  O Indra,  be fruitful  and innocent  to us.  
May we know  these  whose  treasures  are like those  of milch−kine,  Thunderer!   
14 That Earth,  through  power  of knowing  things that may be known,  handless  and footless  yet might  thriv
e,  
Thou  slewest,  turning  to the right,  gu;na  for every  living  man.   
15 Drink,  drink  the Soma,  Hero  Indra;  be not withheld  as thou art good,  O Treasure−giver.   
Preserve  the singers  and our libera l princes,  and make  us wealthy  with abundant  riches.   
 
HYMN  XXIII.  Indra.  
1. INDRA,  whose  right  hand  wields  the bolt, we worship,  driver  of Bay Steeds  seeking  sundered  courses.   
Shaking  his beard  with might  he hath arisen,  casting  his weapons  forth  and dealing  bounties.   
2 The treasure  which  his Bay Steeds  found  at sacrifice,−this  wealth  made  opulent  Indra  slayer  of the foe.  
Rbhu,  Rbhuksan,  Vaja−he  is Lord  of Might.  The Dasa's  very name  I utterly  destroy.   
3 When,  with the Princes,  Maghavari,  famed  of old, comes  nigh the thunderbolt  of gold,  and the Controlle
r's 
car  
Which  his two Tawny  Coursers  draw,  then Indra  is the Sovran  Lord  of power  whose  glory  spreads  afar.  
4 With  him too is this rain of his that comes  like herds:  Indra  throws  drops  of moisture  on his yellow  bear
d.  
When  the sweet  juice  is shed he seeks  the pleasant  place,  and stirs the worshipper  as wind  disturbs  the wo
od.  
5 We laud and praise  his several  deeds  of valour  who,  fatherlike,  with power  hath made  us stronger;   
Who  with his voice  slew many  thousand  wicked  ones who spake  in varied  manners  with contemptuous  cr
ies.  Rig Veda – English Translation  
6 Indra,  the Vimadas  have formed  for thee a laud,  copious,  unparalleled,  for thee Most  Bountiful.   
We know  the good  we gain from  him the Mighty  One when  we attract  him as a herdsman  calls the kine.   
7 Ne'er  may this bond  of friendship  be dissevered,  the Rsi Vimada's  and thine,  O Indra.   
We know  thou carest  for us as a brother  with us, O God,  be thine  auspicious  friendship.   
 
HYMN  XXIV.  Indra.  Asvins.  
1. O INDRA,  drink  this Soma, pressed  out in the mortar,  full of sweets.  Send  down  to us great  riches,−at  
your glad carouse−in  thousands,  O Most  healthy.  Thou  art waxing  great.   
2 To thee with sacrifices,  with oblations,  and with lauds  we come.   
Lord  of all strength  and power,  grant−at your glad carouse−the  best choiceworthy  treasure.  Thou  art waxi
ng 
great.   
3 Thou  who art Lord  of precious  boons,  inciter  even  of the churl.   
Guardian  of singers,  Indra,−at  your glad carouse−save  us from  woe and hatred.  Thou  art waxing  great.   
4 Strong , Lords  of Magic  power,  ye Twain  churned  the united  worlds  apart,   
When  ye, implored  by Vimada,  Nasatyas,  forced  apart  the pair.  
5 When  the united  pair were  rent asunder  all the Gods  complained.   
The Gods  to the Nasatyas  cried,  Bring  these  together  once  again.   
6 Sweet  be my going  forth,  and rich in sweets  be my approach  to home.   
So, through  your Deity,  both Gods,  enrich  us with all pleasantness.   
 
HYMN  XXV.  Soma.  
1. SEND  us a good  and happy  mind,  send energy  and mental  power.  Then−at  your glad carouse−let  men j
oy in thy love,  Sweet  juice!  as kine in pasture.  Thou.  art waxing  great.   
2 rn all thy forms,  O Soma,  rest thy powers  that influence  the heart.   
So also these  my longings−at  your glad carouse−spread  themselv es seeking  riches.  Thou  art waxing  great.
  
3 Even  if, O Soma,  I neglect  thy laws through  my simplicity,   
Be gracious−at  your glad carouse−as  sire to son. Preserve  us even  from  slaughter.  T'hou.  art waxing  great.
  
4 Our songs  in concert  go to thee as stream s of water  to the wells.   
Soma,  that we may live, grant−at  your glad carouse−full  powers  of mind,  like beakers.  Thou  art waxing  g
reat.  
5 O Soma,  through  thy might  who art skilful  and strong,  these  longing  men,   
These  sages,  have  thrown  open−at  your glad carouse−the  stall of kine and horses.  Thou  art waxing  great   
6 Our herds  thou guardest,  Soma,  and the moving  world  spread  far and wide.   
Thou  fittest  them  for living,−at  your glad carouse−looking  upon  all beings.  Thou  art waxing  great.   
7 On all sides,  Soma , be to us a Guardian  ne'er  to be deceived.   
King,  drive  away  our foemen−at  your glad carouse:−let  not the wicked  rule us. Thou  art waxing  great.   
8 Be watchful,  Soma,  passing  wise,  to give us store  of vital strength.   
More  skilled  than man to guide  us,−at  your glad carouse−save  us from  harm  and sorrow.  Thou  art waxing  
great.   
9 Chief  slayer  of our foemen,  thou,  Indu,  art Indra's  gracious  Friend,   
When  warriors  invoke  him−at  your glad carouse  −in fight,  to win them  offspring.  Thou  art waxing  great.   
10 Victorious  is this gladdening  drink:  to Indra  dear it grows  in strength.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
This−at  your glad carouse  −enhanced  the mighty  hymn  of the great  sage Kaksivan.  Thou  art waxing  great
.  
11 This to the sage who offers  gifts brings  power  that comes  from  wealth  in kine.   
This,  better  than the seven,  hath−at  your glad carouse−furthered  the blind,  the cripple.  Thou  art waxing  gr
eat.  
 
HYMN  XXVI.  Pusan.  
1. FORWARD  upon  their way proceed  the ready  teams,  the lovely  s
ongs.  Further  them  glorious  Pusan  with yoked  chariot,  and the Might
y Twain!  2 With  sacred  hymns  let this man here,  this singer,  win the 
God to whom  Belong  this majesty  and might.  He hath observed  our e
ulogies.   
3 Pusan  the Strong  hath knowledge  of sweet  praises  even as Indu hath.  He dews  our corn with moisture,  h
e bedews  the pasture  of our kine.  4 We will bethink  ourselves  of thee,  O Pusan,  O thou God,  as One.  Who
 brings  fulfilment  of our hymns,  and stirs the singer  and the sage.  5 joint−sharer  of each sacrifice,  the driv
er of the chariot  steeds;  The Rsi who is good to man,  the singer's  Friend  and faithful  Guard.  6 One who is 
Lord  of Suca,  Lord  of Suca  caring  for herself:  Weaving  the raiment  of the sheep  and making  raiment  beau
tiful.  7 The mighty  Lord  of spoil  and wealth,  Strong  Friend  of all prosperity;  He with light movement  sha
kes his beard,  lovely  and ne'er to be deceived.  8 O Pusan,  may those  goats  of thine  turn hitherward  thy ch
ariot−pole.  Friend  of all suppliants;  art thou,  born in old time,  and arm and sure.  9 May the majestic  Pusan
 speed  our chariot  with his power  and might.  May he increase  our store  of wealth  and listen  to this call of 
ours.  
 
HYMN  XXVII.  Indra.  
1. THIS,  singer,  is my firm determination,  to aid the worshipper  who pours  the Soma.   
I slay the man who brings  no milkoblation,  unrighteous,  powe rful, the truth's  perverter.   
2 Then  Will I, when  I lead my friends  to battle  against  the radiant  persons  of the godless,   
Prepare  for thee at home  a vigorous  bullock,  and pour for thee the fifteen−fold  strong  juices.   
3 I know  not him who sayeth  and decla reth that he hath slain  the godless  in the battle.   
Soon  as they see the furious  combat  raging,  men speak  forth  praises  of my vigorous  horses.   
4 While  yet my deeds  of might  were  unrecorded,  all passed  for Maghavans  though  I existed.   
The potent  one who dwelt in peace  I conquered,  grasped  by the foot and slew him on the mountain.   
5 None  hinder  me in mine  heroic  exploits,  no, not the mountains  when  I will and purpose.   
Even  the deaf will tremble  at my roaring,  and every  day will dust be agitated.   
6 To see the Indraless  oblation−drinkers,  mean  offerers,  o'ertaken  by destruction!   
Then  shall  the fellies  of my car pass over those  who have blamed  my joyous  Friend  and scorned  him.  
7 Thou  wast,  thou grewest  to full vital vigour:  an earlier  saw, a later one shall  see thee.   
Two canopies,  as 'twere,  are round  about  him who reacheth  to the limit  of this region.   
8 The freed  kine eat the barley  of the pious.  1 saw them  as they wandered  with the herdsman.   
The calling  of the pious  rang around  them.  What  portion  will these kine afford  their owner?   
9 When  we who cat the grass  of men are gathered  I am with barley−eaters  in the corn−land.   
There  shall  the captor  yoke  the yokeless  bullock,  and he who hath been  yoked  seek one to loose  him.  
10 There  wilt thou hold as true my spoken  purpose,  to bring  together  quadrupeds.  and bipeds.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
I will divide,  without  a fight,  his riches  who warreth  here,  against  the Bull,  with women.   
11 When  a man's  daughter  hath been  ever eyeless,  who,  knowing,  will be wroth  with her for blindness?   
Which of the two will loose  on him his anger−the  man who leads  her home  or he who woos  her?  
12 How  many  a maid  is pleasing  to the suitor  who fain would  marry  for her splendid  riches?   
If the girl be both good  and fair of feature,  she finds,  herself,  a friend among  the people.   
13 His feet have  grasped:  he eats the man who meets  him. Around  his head  he sets the head  for shelter.   
Sitting  anear  and right  above  he smites  us, and follows  earth  that lies spread  out beneath  him.  
14 High,  leafless,  shadowless,  and swift  is Heaven:  the Mother  stands,  the Youngling,  loosed,  is feeding.   
Loud  hath she lowed,  licking  Another's  offspring.  In what  world  hath the Cow  laid down  her udder?   
15 Seven  heroes  from  the nether  part ascended,  and from  the upper  part came  eight  together.   
Nine  from  behind  came  armed  with winnowing−baskets:  ten from  the front  pressed  o'er the rock's  high 
ridges.   
16 One of the ten, the tawny,  shared  in common,  they send to execute  their final purpose.   
 
The Mother  carries  on her breast  the Infant  of noble  form  and soothes  it while  it knows  not.  
17 The Heroes  dressed  with fire the fatted  wether:  the dice were  thrown  by way of sport  and gaming.   
Two reach  the plain  amid  the heavenly  waters,  hallowing  and with means  of purifying.   
18 Crying  aloud  they ran in all directions:  One half of them  will cook,  and not the other.   
To me hath Savitar,  this God,  declared  it: He will perform,  whose  food is wood  and butter.   
19 I saw a troop  advancing  from  the distance  moved,  not by wheels  but their own God−like  nature.  
The Friendly  One seeks  human  generations,  destroying,  still new bands  of evil beings.   
20 These  my two Bulls,  even  Pramara's,  are harnessed:  drive  them  not far; here let them  often  linger.   
The waters  even  shall  aid him to his object,  and the all−cle ansing  Sun who is above  us.  
21 This is the thunderbolt  which  often  whirleth  down  from  the lofty misty  realm  of Surya.   
Beyond  this realm  there  is another  glory  so through  old age they pass and feel no sorrow.   
22 Bound  fast to,every  tree the cow is lowing , and thence  the man−consuming  birds  are flying,   
Then  all this world,  though  pressing  juice  for Indra  and strengthening  the Rsi, is affrighted.   
23 In the Gods'  mansion  stood  the first−created,  and from  their separation  came  the later.   
Three  warm  the Earth while  holding  stores  of water,  and Two of these  convey  the murmuring  moisture.   
24 This is thy life: and do thou mark  and know  it. As such,  hide not thyself  in time of battle.   
He manifests  the light and hides  the vapour:  his foot is never  free from  robes that veil it.  
 
HYMN  XXVIII.  Indra.  Vasukra.  
1. Now  all my other  friends  are here assembled:  my Sire−in−law  alone  hath not come  hither.   
So might  he eat the grain  and drink  the Soma,  and, satisfied,  return  unto;  his dwelling.   
2 Loud  belloweth  the Bull whose  horns  are sharpened:  upon  the height  above  earth's  breadth  he standeth.   
That man I guard  and save in all his troubles  who fills my flanks  when  he hath shed the Soma.   
3 Men with the stone  press  out for thee,  O Indra,  strong,  gladdening  Soma,  and thereof  thou drinkest.   
Bulls  they dress  for thee,  and of these  thou eatest  when,  Maghavan,  with food thou art invited.   
4 Resolve  for me, O singer,  this my riddle:  The rivers  send their swelling  water  backward:   
The fox steals  up to the approaching  lion: the jackal  drives  the wild−boar  from  the brushwood.   
5 How  shall  I solve  this riddle,  I, the simple,  declare  the thought  of thee the Wise  and Mighty?   
Tell us, well knowing,  as befits  the season:  Whitherward  is thy prosperous  car advancing?   
6 Thus  do they magnify  me, me the mighty  higher  than even  high heaven  is my car−pole.   
I all at once  demolish  many  thousands:  my Sire begot  me with no foe to match  me.  
7 Yea, and the Gods  have known  me also, Indra,  as mighty,  fierce  and strong  in every  exploit.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Exulting  with the bolt I slaughtered  Vrtra,  and for the offerer  oped  with might  the cow−stall.   
8 The Deities  approached,  they carried  axes;  splitting  the wood  they came  with their attendants.   
They  laid good  timber  in the fire−receivers,  and burnt  the grass  up where  they found  it growing.   
9 The hare hath swallowed  up the opposing  razor:  I sundered  with a clod the distant  mountain.   
The great  will I make  subject  to the little:  the calf shall wax in strength  and cat the bullock.   
10 There  hath the strong−winged  eagle  left his talon,  as a snared  lion leaves  the trap that caught  him.  
Even  the wild steer  in his thirst  is captured:  the leather  strap  still holds  his foot entangled.   
11 So may the leather  strap  their foot entangle  who fatten  on the viands  of the Brahman.   
They  all devour  the bulls  set free to wander,  while  they themselves  destroy  their bodies'  vigour.   
12 They  were  well occupied  with holy duties  who sped in person  with their lauds  to Soma.   
Speaking  like man,  mete  to us wealth  and booty:  in heaven  thou hast the name  and fame  of Hero.   
 
HYMN  XXIX.  Indra.  
1. As sits the young  bird on the tree rejoicing,  ye, swift  Pair, have  been  roused  by clear  laudation,   
Whose  Herald−Priest  through  many  days is Indra,  earth's  Guardian,  Friend  of men,  the best of Heroes.   
2 May we, when  this Dawn  and the next dance  hither,  be thy best servants,  most  heroic  Hero!   
Let the victorious  car with triple  splendour  bring  hitherward  the hundred  chiefs  with Kutsa.   
3 What  was the gladdening  draught  that pleased  thee,  Indra?  Speed  through  our doors  to songs,  for thou ar
t 
mighty.   
Why  comest  thou to me, what  gift attracts  thee?  Fain would  I bring  thee food most  meet  to offer.   
4 Indra,  what  fame  hath one like thee mid heroes?  With  what  plan wilt thou act? Why hast thou sought  us
?  
As a true Friend,  Wide−Strider!  to sustain  us, since  food absorbs  the thought  of each among  us.  
5 Speed  happily  those,  as Surya  ends his journey,  who meet  his wish  as bridegrooms  meet  their spouses;   
Men who present,  O Indra  stron g by nature,  with food the many  songs  that tell thy praises.   
6 Thine  are two measures,  Indra,  wide−wellmeted,  heaven  for thy majesty,  earth  for thy wisdom.   
Here  for thy choice  are Somas  mixed  with butter:  may the sweet  meath  be pleasant  for thy drinking.   
7 They  have  poured  out a bowl  to him, to Indra,  full of sweet  juice,  for faithful  is his bounty.   
O'er earth's  expanse  hath he grown  great  by wisdom,  the Friend  of man,  and by heroic  exploits.   
8 Indra  hath conquered  in his wars,  the Mighty:  men strive  in multitudes  to win his friendship.   
Ascend  thy chariot  as it were  in battle,  which  thou shalt  drive  to us with gracious  favour.   
 
HYMN  XXX.  Waters.  
1. As 'twere  with swift  exertion  of the spirit,  let the priest  speed  to the celestial  Waters,   
The glorio us food of Varuna  and Mitra.  To him who spreadeth  far this laud I offer.   
2 Adhvaryus,  he ye ready  with oblations,,  and come  with longing  to the longing  Waters,   
Down  on which  looks  the. purple−tinted  Eagle.  Pour  ye that flowing  wave  this day, deft−handed.   
3 Go to the reservoir,  O ye Adhvaryus  worship  the Waters'  Child  with your oblations.   
A consecrated  wave  he now will give you, so press  for him the Soma  rich in sweetness.   
4 He who shines  bright  in floods,  unfed  with fuel, whom  sages  worship  at their sacrifices:   
Give  waters  rich in sweets,  Child  of the Waters,  even  those  which  gave heroic  might  to Indra:   
5 Those  in which  Soma  joys and is delighted,  as a young  man with fair and pleasant  damsels.   
Go thou unto those  Waters,  O Adhvaryu,  and purify  with herbs what  thou infusest.   
6 So maidens  bow before  the youthful  gallant  who comes  with love to them  who yearn  to meet  him.  Rig Veda – English Translation  
In heart  accordant  and in wish  one−minded  are the Adhvaryus  and the heavenly  Waters.   
7 He who made  room  for you when  fast imprisoned,  who freed  you from  the mighty  imprecation,−   
Even  to that Indra  send the meath−rich  current,  the wave  that gratifies  the Gods,  O Waters.   
8 Send  forth  to him the meath−rich  wave,  O Rivers,  which  is your offspring  and a well of sweetness,   
Oil−balmed,  to be implored  at sacrifices.  Ye wealthy  Waters,  hear mine  invocation.   
9 Send  forth  the rapture−giving  wave,  O Rivers,  which  Indra  drinks,  which  sets the Twain  in motion;   
The well that springeth  from  the clouds,  desirous,  that wandereth  triple−formed,  distil ling transport.   
10 These  winding  Streams  which  with their double  current,  like cattle−raiders,  seek the lower  pastures,−   
Waters  which  dwell  together,  thrive  together,  Queens,  Mothers  of the world,  these,  Rsi, honour.   
11 Send  forth  our sacrifice  with holy worship  send forth  the hymn  and prayer  for gain of riches.   
For need  of sacrifice  disclose  the udder.  Give  gracious  hearing  to our call, O Waters.   
12 For, wealthy  Waters,  ye control  all treasures:  ye bring  auspicious  intellect  and Amrta.   
Ye are the Queens of independent  riches  Sarasvati  give full life to the singer!   
13 When  I behold  the Waters  coming  hither,  carrying  with them  milk and mcath  and butter,   
Bearing  the well−pressed  Soma  juice  to Indra,  they harmonize  in spirit  with Adhvaryus.   
14 Rich,  they are come  with wealth  for living  beings,  O friends,  Adhvaryus,  seat them  in their places.   
 
Seat them  on holy grass,  ye Soma−bringers  in harmony  with the Offspring  of the Waters.  
15 Now  to this grass  are come  the longing  Waters:  the Pious  Ones  are seated  at our worsh
ip. Adbvaryus,  press  the Soma  juice  for Indra  so will the service  of the Gods  be easy.  
 
HYMN  XXXI.  Visvedevas.  
1. MAY  benediction  of the Gods  approach  us, holy,  to aid us with all rapid  succours.   
Therewith  may we be happily  befriended,  and pass triumphant  over all our troubles.   
2 A man should  think  on wealth  and strive  to win it by adoration  on the path of Order,   
Counsel  himself  with his own mental  insight,  and grasp  still nobler  vigour  with his spirit.   
3 The hymn  is formed,  poured  are the allotted  portions:  as to a ford friends  come  unto the Wondrous.   
We have  obtained  the power  of case and comfort,  we haVe  become  acquainted,  with Immortals.   
4 Pleased  be the Eternal  Lord  who loves  the household  with this man whom  God Savitar  created.   
May Bhaga  Aryaman  grace  him with cattle:  may he appear  to him, and be, delightful.   
5 Like the Dawns'  dwelling−place  be this assembly,  where  in their might  men rich in food have gathered.   
Striving  to share  the praises  of this singer.  To us come  strengthenin g and effectual  riches!   
6 This Bull's  most  gracious  far−extended  favour  existed  first of all in full abundance.   
By his support  they are maintained  in common  who in the Asura's  mansion  dwell  together.   
7 What  was the tree, what  wood,  in sooth,  produced  it, from  which  they fashioned  forth  the Earth  and 
Heaven?   
These  Twain  stand  fast and wax not old for ever:  these  have  sung  praise  to many  a day and morning.   
8 Not only here is this: more  is beyond  us. He is the Bull,  the Heaven's  and Earth's  supporter.   
With power  divine  he makes  his skin a filter,  when  the Bay Coursers  bear him on as Surya.   
9 He passes  o'er the broad  earth  like a Stega:  he penetrates  the world  as Wind  the mist−cloud.   
He, balmed  with oil, near Varuna  and Mitra,  like Agni  in the wood,  hath shot forth  splendour.   
10 When  suddenly  called  the cow that erst was barren,  she, self−protected,  ended  all her troubles.   
Earth,  when  the first son sprang  from  sire and mother,  cast up the gami,  that which  men were  seeking.   
11 To Nrsad's  son they gave  the name  of Kainva,  and he the brown−hued  courser  won the treasure.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
For him dark−coloured  streamed  the shining  udder:  none  made  it swell  for him. Thus  Order  willed  it.  
 
HYMN  XXXII.  Indra.  
1. FORTH  speed  the Pair to bring  the meditating  God,  benevolent  with boons  sent in return  for boons.   
May Indra  graciously  accept  both gifts from  us, when  he hath knowledge  of the flowing  Soma  juice.   
2 Thou  wanderest  far, O Indra,  through  the spheres  of light and realms  of earth,  the region,  thou whom  m
any 
praise!   
Let those  who often  bring  their solemn  rites conquer  the noisy  babblers  who present  no gifts.   
3 More  beautiful  than beauty  must  this seem  to me, when  the son duly careth  for his parents'  line.  
The wife attracts  the husband:  with a shout  of joy the man's  auspicious  marriage  is performed  aright.   
4 This beauteous  place  of meeting  have  I looked  upon,  where,  like milch−cows,  the kine order  the marria
ge 
train;   
Where  the Herd's  Mother  counts  as first and best of all, and round  her are the seven−toned  people  of the 
choir.   
5 The Pious  One hath reached  your place  before  the rest: One only moves  victorious  with the Rudras'  ban
d.  
To these  your helpers  pour our meath,  Immortal  Gods,  with whom  your song  of praise  hath power  to win 
their gifts.   
6 He who maintains  the Laws of God informed  me that thou wast lying  hidden  in the waters.   
Indra,  who knoweth  well,  beheld  and showed  thee.  By him instructed  am I come,  O Agni.   
 
7 The stranger  asks the way of him who knows  it: taught  by the skilful  guide  he travels  onward.   
This is, in truth,  the blessing  of instruction:  he finds  the path that leads  directly  forward.   
8 Even  now he breathed:  these  days hath he remembered.  Concealed,  he sucked  the bosom  of his Mother.   
Yet in his youth  old age hath come  upon  him: he hath grown  gracious,  good,  and free from  anger.   
9 O Kalasa,  all these  blessings  will we bring  them,  O Kurusravana,  who give rich presents.   
May he, O wealthy  princes,  and this Soma  which  I am bearing  in my heart,  reward  you.  
 
HYMN  XXXIII.  Various  Deities.  
1. THE  urgings of the people  have  impelled  me, and by,the  nearest  way I bring  you Pusan.   
The Universal  Gods  have  brought  me safely.  The cry was heard,  Behold,  Dubsasu  cometh!   
2 The ribs that compass  me give pain and trouble  me like rival wives.   
Indigence,  nakedne ss, exhaustion  press  me sore:  my mind  is fluttering  like a bird's.   
3 As rats eat weavers'  threads,  cares  are consuming  me, thy singer,  gatakratu,  me.  
Have  mercy  on us once,  O Indra,  Bounteous  Lord:  be thou a Father  unto us.  
4 I the priests'  Rsi chose  as prince  most  liberal  Kurusravana,   
The son of Trasadasyu's  son,  
5 Whose  three  bays harnessed  to the car bear me straight  onward:  I will laud  
The giver  of a thousand  meeds,   
6 The sire of Upamasravas,  even  him whose  words  were  passing  sweet,   
As a fair field is to its lord.  
7 Mark,  Upamasravas,  his son, mark,  grandson  of Mitratithi:   
I am thy father's  eulogist.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
8 If I controlled  Immortal  Gods,  yea, even  were  I Lord  of men,   
My liberal  prince  were  living  still.  
9 None  lives,  even  had he hundred  lives,  beyond  the statute  of the Gods   
So am I parted  from  my friend.   
 
HYMN  XXXIV.  Dice,  Etc.  
1. SPRUNG  from  tall trees  on windy  heights,  these  rollers  transport  me as they turn upon  the table.   
Dearer  to me the die that never  slumbers  than the deep  draught  of Mujavan's  own Soma.   
2 She never  vexed  me nor was angry  with me, but to my friends  and me was ever gracious.   
For the die's sake,  whose  single  point  is final,  mine  own devoted  wife I alienated.   
3 My wife holds  me aloof,  her mother  hates  me: the wretched  man finds  none  to give him comfort.   
As of a costly  horse  grown  old and feeble,  I find not any profit  of the gamester.   
4 Others  caress  the wife of him whose  riches  the die hath coveted,  that rapid  courser:   
Of him speak  father,  mother,  brothers  saying,  We know him not: bind him and take him with you.  
5 When  I resolve  to play with these  no longer,  my friends  depart  from  me and leave  me lonely.   
When  the brown  dice,  thrown  on the board,  have  rattled,  like a fond girl I seek the place  of meeting.   
6 The gamest er seeks  the gambling−house,  and wonders,  his body  all afire,  Shall  I be lucky?   
Still do the dice extend  his eager  longing,  staking  his gains  against  his adversary.   
7 Dice,  verily,  are armed  with goads  and driving−hooks,  deceiving  and tormenting,  causing  grievous  woe.
  
They  give frail gifts and then destroy  the man who wins,  thickly  anointed  with the player's  fairest  good.   
8 Merrily  sports  their troop,  the three−and−fifty,  like Savitar  the God whose  ways  are faithful.   
They  bend  not even  to the mighty's  anger:  the King  himself  pays homage  and reveres  them.   
9 Downward  they roll, and then spring  quickly  upward,  and, handless,  force  the man with hands  to serve  
them.   
 
Cast on the board,  like lumps  of magic  charcoal,  though  cold themselves  they bum the heart  to ashes.   
10 The gambler's  wife is left forlorn  and wretched:  the mother  mourns  the son who wanders  homeless.   
In constant  fear, in debt,  and seeking  riches,  he goes by night  unto the home  of others.   
11 Sad is the gambler  when  he sees a matron,  another' s wife,  and his well−ordered  dwelling.   
He yokes  the brown  steeds  in the early  morning,  and when  the fire is cold sinks  down  an outcast.   
12 To the great  captain  of your mighty  army,  who hath become  the host's  imperial  leader,   
To him I show  my ten extende d fingers:  I speak  the truth.  No wealth  am I withholding.   
13 Play not with dice:  no, cultivate  thy corn−land.  Enjoy  the gain,  and deem  that wealth  sufficient.   
There  are thy cattle  there  thy wife,  O gambler.  So this good  Savitar  himself  hath told me.  
14 Make  me your friend:  show  us some  little mercy.  Assail  us not with your terrific  fierceness.   
Appeased  be your malignity  and anger,  and let the brown  dice snare  some  other  captive.   
 
HYMN  XXXV.  Visvedevas.  
1. THESE  fires associate  with Indra  are awake,  bringing  their light when  first the Dawn  begins  to shine.   
May Heaven  and Earth,  great  Pair, observe  our holy work.  We claim  for us this day the favour  of the God
s.  
2 Yea, for ourselves  we claim  the grace  of Heaven  and Earth,  of Saryanavan,  of the Hills  and Mother  
Streams.   
For innocence  we pray to Surya  and to Dawn.  So may the flowing  Soma  bring  us bliss to−day.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
3 May the great  Twain,  the Mothers,  Heaven  and Earth,  this day preserve  us free from  sin for peace  and 
happiness.   
May Morning  sending  forth  her light drive  sin afar. We pray to kindled  Agni  for felicity.   
4 May this first Dawn  bring  us the host of gracious  Gods:  rich, may it richly  shine  for us who strive  for 
wealth.   
The wrath  of the malignant  may we keep  afar. We pray to kindled  Agni  for feilici ty.  
5 Dawns,  who come  forward  with the bright  beams  of the Sun, and at your earliest  flushing  bring  to us th
e 
light,   
Shine  ye on us to−day  auspicious,  for renown.  We pray to kindled  Agni  for felicity.   
6 Free from  all sickness  may the Mornings  come  to us, and let our fires mount  upward  with a lofty  blaze.   
The Asvin  Pair have  harnessed  their swift−moving  car. We pray to kindled  Agni  for felicity.   
7 Send  us to−day  a portion  choice  and excellent,  O Savitar,  for thou art he who dealeth  wealth.   
I cry to Dhisana,  Mother  of opulence.  We pray to kindled  Agni  for felicity.   
8 Further  me this declaring  of Eternal  Law,  the Law of Gods,  as we mortals  acknowledge  it!  
The Sun goes up beholding  all the rays of morn.  We pray to kindled  Agni  for felicity.   
9 This day we pray with innocence  in strewing  grass,  adjusting  pressing−stones,  and perfecting  the hymn.
  
Thou  in the Adityas'  keeping  movest  restlessly.  We pray to kindled  Agni  for felicity.   
10 To our great  holy grass  I bid the Gods  at morn  to banquet,  and will seat them  as the seven  priests,−   
Varuna,  Indra,  Mitra,  Bhaga  for our gain.  We pray to kindled  Agni  for felicity.   
11 Come  hither,  O Adityas,  for our perfect  weal:  accordant  help our sacrifice  that we may thrive.   
Pusan,  Brhaspati,  Bhaga,  both Asvins,  and enkindled  Agni  we implore  for happiness.   
12 Adityas,  Gods,  vouchsafe  that this our home  may be praise−worthy,  prosperous,  our heroes'  sure defen
ce,  
For cattle,  for our sons,  for progeny,  for life. We pray to kindled  Agni  for felicity.   
13 This day may all the Maruts,  all he near us with aid: may all our fires be well enkindled.   
May all Gods  come  to us with gracious  favour.  May spoil  and wealth  he ours,  and all possessions.   
14 He whom  ye aid, O Deities,  in battle,  whom  ye protect  and rescue  from  affliction,   
Who  fears  no danger  at your milk−libation,  −such  may we be to feast  the Gods,  ye Mighty.   
 
HYMN  XXXVI.  Visvedevas.  
1. THERE  are the Dawn  and Night,  the grand  and beauteous  Pair, Earth,  Heaven,  and Varuna,  Mitra,  and 
Aryaman.   
Indra  I call, the Maruts,  Mountains,  and the Floods,  Adityas,  Heaven  and Earth,  the Waters,  and the Sky.  
2 May Dyaus  and Prthivi,  wise,  true to Holy  Law,  keep  us in safety  from  distress  and injury.   
Let not malignant  Nirrti  rule over us. We crave  to−day  this gracious  favour  of the Gods.   
3 Mother  of Mitra  and of opulent  Varuna,  may Aditi  preserve  us safe from  all distress.   
May we obtain  the light of heaven  without  a foe. We crave  this gracious  favour  of the Gods  to−day.   
4 May ringing  press−stones  keep  the Raksasas  afar, ill dream,  and Nirrti,  and each voracious  fiend.   
May the Adityas  and the Maruts  shelter  us. We crave  this gracious  favour  of the Gods  to−day.   
5 Full flow libations;  on our grass  let Indra  sit; Brhaspati  the singer  laud with Sama  hymns!   
Wise  be our hearts'  imagini ngs that we may live. We crave  this gracious  favour  of the Gods  to−day.   
6 Ye Asvins,  make  our sacrifice  ascend  to heaven,  and animate  the rite that it may send us bliss,   
Offered  with holy oil, with forward−speeding  rein. We crave  the gracious  favour  of the Gods  to−day.   
7 Hither  I call the band  of Maruts,  swift  to hear,  great,  purifying,  bringing  bliss,  to he our Friends.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
May we increase  our wealth  to glorify  our name.  We crave  this graciousfavour  of the Gods  to−day.   
8 We bring  the Stay of Life,  who makes the waters  swell,  swift−hearing,  Friend  of Gods,  who waits  on 
sacrifice.   
May we control  that Power,  Soma  whose  rays are bright.  We crave  this gracious  favour  of the Gods  to−da
y.  
9 Alive  ourselves,  with living  sons,  devoid  of guilt,  may we win this with winners  by fair means  to win.  
Let the prayer−haters  bear our sin to every  side. We crave  this gracious  favour  of the Gods  to−day.   
10 Hear  us, O ye who claim  the worship  of mankind,  and give us, O ye Gods,  the gift for which  we pray,   
Victorious  wisdom,  fame  with heroes  and with wealth.  We crave  to−day  this gracious  favour  of the Gods.
  
11 We crave  the gracious  favour  of the Gods  to−day,  great  favour  of great  Gods,  sublime  and free from  fo
es,  
That we may gain rich treasure  sprung  from  hero sons.  We crave this gracious  favour  of the Gods  to−day.
  
12 In great  enkindled  Agni's  keeping,  and, for bliss,  free from  all sin before  Mitra  and Varuna.   
May we share  Savitar's  best animating  help.  We crave  this gracious  favour  of the Gods  to−day.   
13 All ye, the Gods  whom  Savitar  the Father  of truth,  and Varuna  and Mitra  govern,   
Give  us prosperity  with hero children,  and opulence  in kine and various  treasure.   
14 Savitar,  Savitar  from  cast and westward,  Savitar,  Savitar  from  north  and southward,   
Savitar  send us perfect health  and comfort,  Savitar  let our days of life be lengthened!   
 
HYMN  XXXVII.  Surya.  
1. Do homage  unto Varuna's  and Mitra's  Eye: offer  this solemn  worship  to the Mighty  God,   
Who  seeth  far away,  the Ensign,  born of Gods.  Sing praises  unto Surya,  to the Son of Dyaus.   
2 May this my truthful  speech  guard  me on every  side wherever  heaven  and earth  and days are spread  abr
oad.  
All else that is in motion  finds  a place  of rest: the waters  ever flow and ever mounts  the Sun.  
3 No godless  man from  time remot est draws  thee down  when  thou art driving  forth  with winged  dappled  
Steeds.   
One lustre  waits  upon  thee moving  to the cast, and, Surya,  thou arisest  with a different  light.   
4 O Surya,  with the light whereby  thou scatterest  gloom,  and with thy ray impelles t every  moving  thing,   
Keep  far from  us all feeble,  worthless  sacrifice,  and drive  away  disease  and every  evil dream.   
5 Sent forth  thou guardest  well the Universe's  law, and in thy wonted  way arisest  free from  wrath.   
When  Surya,  we address  our prayers  to thee to−day,  may the Gods  favour  this our purpose  and desire.   
6 This invocation,  these  our words  may Heaven  and Earth,  and Indra  and the Waters  and the Maruts  hear.   
Ne'er  may we suffer  want  in presence  of the Sun, and, living  happy  lives,  may we attain  old age.  
7 Cheerful  in spirit,  evermore,  and keen  of sight,  with store  of children,  free from  sickness  and from  sin,  
 
Long−living,  may we look,  O Surya,  upon  thee uprising  day by day, thou great  as Mitra  is!  
8 Surya,  may we live long and look upon  thee still, thee,  O Far−seeing  One,  bringing  the glorious  light,   
The radiant  God,  the spring  of joy to every  eye, as thou art mounting  up o'er the high shining  flood.   
9 Thou  by whose  lustre  all the world  of life comes  forth,  and by thy beams  again  returns  unto its rest,  
O Surya  with the golden  hair, ascend  for us day after day, still bringing  purer  innocence.   
10 Bless  us with shine,  bless  us with perfect  daylight,  bless  us with cold,  with fervent  heat and lustre.   
Bestow  on us, O Surya,  varied  riches,  to bless us in our home  and when  we travel.   
11 Gods,  to our living  creatures  of both kinds  vouchsafe  protection,  both to bipeds  and to quadrupeds,   Rig Veda – English Translation  
That they may drink  and eat invigorating  food.  So grant  us health  and strength  and perfect  innocence.   
12 If by some grievous  sin we have  provoked  the Gods,  O Deities,  with the tongue  or thoughtlessness  of 
heart,   
That guilt,  O Vasus,  lay upon  the Evil One,  on him who ever leads  us into deep  distress.   
 
HYMN  XXXVIII.  Indra.  
1. O INDRA,  in this battle  great  and glorious,  in this loud din of war help us to victory,   
Where  in the strife  for kine among  bold ring−decked  men arrows  fly all around  and heroes  are subdued.   
2 At home  disclose  to us opulence  rich in food,  streaming  with milk,  O Indra,  meet  to be renowned.   
Sakra, may we be thine,  the friendly  Conqueror's:  even  as we desire,  O Vasu,  so do thou.   
3 The godless  man,  much−lauded  Indra,  whether  he be Dasa  or be Arya,  who would  war with us,−  
Easy  to conquer  he for thee,  with us, these  foes:  with thee may we subdue  them  in the clash  of fight.   
4 Him who must  be invoked  by many  and by few, who standeth  nigh with comfort  in the war of men,   
Indra,  famed  Hero,  winner  in the deadly  strife,  let us bring  hitherward  to−day  to favour  us.  
5 For, Indra,  I have  heard  thee called Self. capturer,  One,  Steer!  who never  yields,  who urges  even  the chu
rl.  
Release  thyself  from  Kutsa  and come  hither.  How  shall  one like thee sit still bound  that he may not move?
  
 
HYMN  XXXIX.  Asvins.  
1. As 'twere  the name  of father,  easy to invoke,  we all assembled  here invoke  this Car of yours,   
Asvins,  your swiftly−rolling  circumambient  Car which  he who worships  must  invoke  at eve and dawn.   
2 Awake  all pleasant  strains  and let the hymns  flow forth:  raise  up abundant  fulness:  this is our desire.   
Asvins,  bestow  on us a glorious  heritage,  and give our princes  treasure  fair as Soma  is.  
3 Ye are the bliss of her who groweth  old at home,  and helpers  of the slow  although  he linger  last.  
Men call you too, Nasatyas,  healers  of the blind,  the thin and feeble, and the man with broken  bones.   
4 Ye made  Cyavana,  weak  and worn  with length  of days,  young  again,  like a car, that he had power  to mo
ve.  
Ye lifted  up the son of Tugra  from  the floods.  At our libations  must  all these  your acts be praised.   
5 We will declare  among  the folk your ancient  deeds  heroic;  yea, ye were  Physicians  bringing  health.   
You,  you who must  be lauded,  will we bring  for aid, so that this foe of ours,  O Asvins,  may believe.   
6 Listen  to me, O Asvins;  I have  cried  to you. Give  me−your  aid as sire and mother  aid their son.  
Poor,  without  kin or friend  or ties of blood  am I. Save  me before  it be too late, from  this my curse.   
7 Ye, mounted  on your chariot  brought  to Vimada  the comely  maid  of Purumitra  as a bride.   
Ye, came  unto the calling  of the weakling's  dame,  and granted  noble  offspring  to the happy  wife.   
8 Ye gave a ain the vigour  of his youthful  life to tge sage Kali when  old age was coming  nigh.   
Ye rescued  Vandana  and raised  him from  the pit, and in a moment  gave Vispala  power  to move.  
9 Ye Asvins  Twain,  endowed  with manly  strength,  brought  forth  Reblia  when  hidden  in the cave and 
well−nigh  dead,   
Freed  Saptavadliri,  and for Atri caused  the pit heated  with fire to be a pleasant  resting−place.   
10 On Pedu  ye bestowed,  Asvins,  a course r white,  mighty  with nine−and−ninety  varied  gifts of strength,   
 
A horse  to be renowned,  who bore his friend  at speed,  joy−giving,  Bhaga−like  to be invoked  of men.   
11 From  no side, ye Two Kings  whom  none  may check  or stay, doth grief,  distress,  or danger  come  u on t
he Rig Veda – English Translation  
man  
Whom,  Asvins  swift  to hear,  borne  on your glowing  path,  ye with your Consort  make  the foremost  in the 
race.   
12 Come  on that Chariot  which  the Rbhus  wrought  for you, the Chariot,  Asvins,  that is speedier  than thou
ght,  
At harnessing  wher eof Heaven's  Daughter  springs  to birth,  and from  Vivasvan  come  auspicious  Night  and 
Day.   
13 Come,  Conquerors  of the sundered  mountain,  to our home,  Asvins  who made  the cow stream  milk for 
Sayu's  sake,   
Ye who delivered  even  from  the wolf's  deep  throat  and set again  at liberty  the swallowed  quail.   
14 We have prepared  this laud for you, O Asvins,  and, like the Bhrgus,  as a car have framed  it,  
Have  decked  it as a maid  to meet  the bridegroom,  and brought  it as a son, our stay for ever.   
 
HYMN  XL. Asvins.  
1. YOUR  radiant  Chariot−whither  goes it on its way?−who  decks  it for you, Heroes,  for its happy  course,   
Starting  at daybreak,  visiting  each morning  every  house,  borne  hitherward  through  prayer  unto the sacrific
e?  
2 Where  are ye, Asvins,  in the evening,  where at morn?  Where  is your haltingplace,  where  rest ye for the 
night?   
Who  brings  you homeward,  as the widow  bedward  draws  her husband's  brother,  as the bride  attracts  the 
groom?   
3 Early  ye sing forth  praise  as with a herald's  voice,  and, meet  for worship , go each morning  to the house.   
Whom  do ye ever bring  to ruin?  Unto  whose  libations  come  ye, Heroes,  like two Sons  of Kings?   
4 Even  as hunters  follow  two wild elephants,  we with oblations  call you down  at morn  and eve.  
To folk who pay you offierings  at appointed  times,  Chiefs,  Lords  of splendour,  ye bring  food to strengthe
n 
them.   
5 To you, O Asvins,  came  the daughter  of a King,  Ghosa,  and said, O Heroes,  this I beg of you:  
Be near me in the day, he near me in the night:  help me to gain a car−borne  chieftain rich in steeds.   
6 O Asvins,  ye are wise:  as Kutsa  comes  to men,  bring  your car nigh the folk of him who sings  your prais
e.  
The bee, O Asvins,  bears  your honey  in her mouth,  as the maid  carries  it purified  in her hand.   
7 To Bhujyu  and to Vasa  ye come near with help,  O Asvins,  to Sinjara  and to Usana.   
Your  worshipper  secures  your friendship  for himself.  Through  your protection  I desire  felicity.   
8 Krsa  and Sayu  ye protect,  ye Asvins  Twain:  ye Two assist  the widow  and the worshipper;   
And ye throw  open, Asvins,  unto those  who win the cattle−stall  that thunders  with its serenfold  mouth.   
9 The Woman  hath brought  forth,  the Infant  hath appeared,  the plants  of wondrous  beauty  straightway  ha
ve 
sprung  up.  
To him the rivers  run as down  a deep  descent,  and he this day becomes  their master  and their lord.  
10 They  mourn  the living,  cry aloud,  at sacrifice:  the men have  set their thoughts  upon  a distant  cast.  
A lovely  thing  for fathers  who have  gathered  here,−a  joy to husbands,−are  the wives  their arms  shall  clasp
  
11 Of this we have  no knowledge.  Tall it forth  to us, now the youth  rests within  the chambers  of the bride.
  
Fain would  we reach  the dwelling  of the vigorous  Steer  who loves  the kine,  O Asvins:  this is our desire.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
12 Your  favouring  grace  hath come , ye Lords  of ample  wealth:  Asvins,  our longings  are stored  up within  
your hearts.   
Ye, Lords  of splendour,  have become  our twofold  guard:  may we as welcome  friends  reach  Aryaman's  ab
ode.  
13 Even  so, rejoicing  in the dwelling−place  of man,  give hero sons and riches  to the eloquent.   
Make  a ford,  Lords  of splendour,  where  men well may drink:  remove  the spiteful  tree−stump  standing  in t
he 
path.   
14 O Asvins,  Wonder−Workers,  Lords  of lustre,  where  and with what  folk do ye delight  yourselves  to−da
y?  
 
Who  hath detained  them  with him?  Whither  are they gone?  Unto  what  sage's  or what  worshipper's  abode?
 
 
HYMN  XLI. Asvins.  
1. THAT  general  Car of yours,  invoked  by many  a man,  that comes  to our libations,  three−wheeled,  meet  
for 
lauds,   
That circumambient  Car, worthy of sacrifice,  we call with our pure hymns  at earliest  flush  of dawn.   
2 Ye, O Nasatyas,  mount  that early−harnessed  Car, that travels  early,  laden  with its freight  of balm,   
Wherewith  ye, Heroes,  visit clans  who sacrifice,  even  the poor man's  worship  where the priest  attends.   
3 If to the deft Adhvaryu  with the meath  in hand,  or to the Kindler  firm in strength,  the household  friend,   
Or to the sage's  poured  libations  ye approach,  come  thence,  O Asvins,  now to drink  the offered  meath.   
 
HYMN  XLII.  Indra.  
1. EVEN  as an archer  shoots  afar his arrow,  offer  the laud to him with meet  adornment.   
Quell  with your voice  the wicked's  voice,  O sages.  Singer,  make  Indra  rest beside  the Soma.   
2 Draw  thy Friend  to thee like a cow at milking:  O Singer,  wake  up Indra  as a lover.   
Make  thou the Hero  haste  to give us riches  even  as a vessel  filled  brimful  with treasure.   
3 Why,  Maghavan,  do they call thee Bounteous;  Giver?  Quicken  me: thou,  I hear,  art he who quickens.   
Sakra,  let my intelligence  be active,  and bring  us luck that finds  great  wealth,  O Indra.   
4 Standing,  in battle  for their rights,  together,  the people,  Indra,  in the fray invoke  thee.   
Him who brings  gifts the Hero  makes  his comrade:  with him who pours  no juice  he seeks  not friendship.   
5 Whoso  with plente ous food for him expresses  strong  Somas  as much  quickly−coming  treasure,   
For him he overthrows  in early  morning  his swift  well−weaponed  foes,  and slays  the tyrant.   
6 He unto whom  we offer  praises,  Indra,  Maghavan,  who hath joined  to ours his wishes,−   
Before him even  afar the foe must  tremble:  low before  him must  bow all human  glories.   
7 With  thy fierce  bolt, O God invoked  of many,  drive  to a distance  from  afar the foeman.   
O Indra,  give us wealth  in corn and cattle,  and make  thy singer's  prayer  gain strength  and riches.   
8 Indra,  the swallower  of strong  libations  rich in the boons  they bring,  the potent  Somas,   
He, Maghavan,  will not restrict  his bounty  he brings  much  wealth  unto the Soma−presser.   
9 Yea, by superior  play he wins  advantage,  when  he, a gambler,  piles  his gains  in season.   
Celestial−natured,  he o'erwhelms  with riches  the devotee  who keeps  not back his treasure.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
10 O Much−invoked,  may we subdue  all famine  and evil want  with store  of grain  and cattle.   
May we allied,  as first in rank,  with princes  obtain  possessions  by our own exertion.   
11 Brhaspati  protect  us from  the rearward,  and from  above,  and from  below,  from  sinners!   
May Indra  from  the front,  and from  the centre,  as Friend  to friends,  vouchsafe  us room  and freedom.   
 
HYMN  XLIII.  Indra.  
1. IN perfect  unison  all yearning  hymns  of mine  that find the light of heaven  have  sung  forth  Indra's  prais
e.  
As wives  embrace  their lord, the comely  bridegroom,  so they compass  Maghavan  about  that he may help.   
2 Directed  unto thee my spirit  never  strays,  for I have  set my hopes  on thee,  O Much−invoked!   
Sit, Wonderful!  as King  upon  the sacred  grass,  and let thy drinking−place  be by the Soma  juice.   
3 From  indigence  and hunger  Indra  turns  away:  Maghavan  hath dominion  over precious  wealth.   
These  the Seven  Rivers  flowing  on their downward  path increase  the vital vigour  of the potent  Steer.   
4 As on the fair−leafed  tree rest birds,  to Indra  flow the gladdening  Soma  juices  that the bowls  contain.   
Their  face that glows  with splendour  through  their mighty  power  hath found  the shine  of heaven  for man,  
the 
 
Aryas'  light.   
5 As in the game  a gambler  piles  his winnings,  so Maghavan,  sweeping  all together,  gained  the Sun  
This mighty  deed  of thine  none  other  could  achieve,  none,  Maghavan,  before  thee,  none  in recent  time.   
6 Maghavan  came  by turns  to all the tribes  of men:  the Steer  took notice  of the people's  songs  of praise.   
The man in whose  libations  Sakra  hath delight  by means  of potent  Somas  vanquisheth  his foes.   
7 When  Soma  streams  together  unto Indra  flow like waters  to the river,  rivulets  to the lake,   
In place  of sacrifice  sages  exalt  his might,  as the rain swells  the corn by moisture  sent from  heaven.   
8 He rushes  through  the region  like a furious  Bull,  he who hath made  these  floods  the dames  of worth y lor
ds.  
This Maghavan  hath found  light for the man who brings  oblation,  sheds  the juice,  and promptly  pours  his 
gifts.   
9 Let the keen  axe come  forth  together  with the light:  here be,.as  erst, the teeming  cow of sacrifice.   
Let the Red God shine  bright  with his refulgent  ray, and let the Lord  of heroes  glow  like heaven's  clear  sh
een.  
10 O Much−invoked,  may we subdue  all famine  and evil want  with store  of grain  and cattle.   
May we allied,  as first in rank,  with princes  obtain  possessions  by our own exerti on.  
11 Brhaspati  protect  us from  the rearward,  and from  above,  and from  below,  from  sinners.   
May Indra  from  the front,  and from  the centre,  as Friend  to friends,  vouchsafe  us room  and freedom.   
 
HYMN  XLIV.  Indra.  
1. MAY  Sovran  Indra  come  to the carousa l, he who by Holy  Law is strong  and active,   
The overcomer  of all conquering  forces  with his great  steer−like  power  that hath no limit.   
2 Firm−seated  is thy car, thy Steeds  are docile;  thy hand,  O King,  holds,  firmly  grasped,  the thunder.   
On thy fair path,  O Lord  of men,  come  quickly:  we will incre ase thy powers  when  thou hast drunken.   
3 Let strong  and mighty  Steeds  who bear this Mighty  Indra,  the Lord  of men,  whose  arm wields  thunder,   
Bring  unto us, as sharers  of our banquet,  the Steer  of conquering  might,  of real vigour.   
4 So like a Bull thou rushest  to the Lord  who loves  the trough,  the Sage,  the prop of vigour,  in the vat,  
Prepare  thine  energies,  collect  them  in thyself:  be for our profit  as the Master  of the wise.   