Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
990 
 dividing it into three; these worlds are three; verily he  makes these worlds of even 
strength; at this height he offers [3], then at this, then at this; these worlds are 
three; verily he appeases him for these worlds. Three further libations he offers; 
they make up six, the seasons are six; verily with the seaso ns he appeases him. If 
he were to offer while wandering round, he would make Rudra come within (the 
sacrifice). Or rather they say, 'In what quarter is Rudra or in what?' He should offer 
them while wandering round; verily he appeases him completely [4]. Th e highest 
(bricks) are the heavenly deities; over them he makes the sacrificer speak; verily by 
them he makes him attain the world of heaven; he should throw (the leaf) down in 
the path of the cattle of him whom he hates; the first beast that steps upon it  goes to 
ruin. 
 
v. 4. 4.  
'The strength on the stone', (with these words) he moistens (the fire), and so 
purifies it; verily also he delights it; it delighted attends him, causing him neither 
hunger nor pain in yonder world; he rejoices in offspring, in ca ttle who knows 
thus. 'That food and strength, do ye, O Maruts, bounteously bestow on us', he says; 
strength is food, the Maruts are food; verily he wins food. 'In the stone is thy 
hunger; let thy pain reach N.  
N. [1], whom we hate', he says; verily he aff licts him whom he hates with its 
hunger and pain. He goes round thrice, moistening; the fire is threefold; verily he 
calms the pain of the whole extent of the fire. Thrice again he goes round; they 
make up six, the seasons are six; verily with the seasons he calms its pain. The reed 
is the flower of the waters, the Avaka is the cream of the waters [2]; he draws over 
(it) with a branch of reeds and with Avaka plants; the waters are appeased; verily 
with them appeased he calms his pain. The beast that first s teps over the fire when 
piled, it is liable to burn it up with its heat. He draws over (it) with a frog; this of 
animals is the one on which one does not subsist, for neither among the 
domesticated nor the wild beasts has it a place; verily he afflicts it with pain. With 
eight (verses) he draws across [3]; the Gayatri has eight syllables, the fire is 
connected with the Gayatri; verily he calms the pain of the whole extent of the fire. 
(He draws) with (verses) containing (the word) 'purifying', the purifying  (one) is 
food; verily by food he calms its pain. The fire is death; the black antelope skin is 
the form of holy power; he puts on a pair of black sandals; verily by the holy Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
991 
 power he shuts himself away from death. 'He shuts himself away from death, and 
away from eating food', they say; one he puts on, the other not; verily he shuts 
himself away [4] from death and wins the eating of food. 'Honour to thy heat, thy 
blaze', he says, for paying honour they wait on a richer man; 'may thy bolts afflict 
another th an us', he says; verily him whom he hates he afflicts with its pain; 'be 
thou purifying and auspicious to us', he says; the purifying (one) is food; verily he 
wins food. With two (verses) he strides over (it), for support; (with two) containing 
(the word) 'water', for soothing. 
 
v. 4. 5.  
'To him that sits in man hail!' (with these words) he pours butter on; verily with the 
Pankti and the offering he takes hold of the beginning of the sacrifice. He pours on 
butter transversely; therefore animals move their limbs transversely, for support. If 
he were to utter the Vasat cry, his Vasat cry would be exhausted; if he were not to 
utter the Vasat cry, the Raksases would destroy the sacrifice; Vat he says; verily, 
mysteriously he utters the Vasat cry; his Vasat, cry  is not exhausted, the Raksases 
do not destroy the sacrifice. Some of the gods eat the offerings [1], others do not; 
verily he delights both sets by piling up the fire. 'Those gods among gods', (with 
these words) he anoints (it) with curds mixed with honey ; verily the sacrificer 
delights the gods who eat and those who do not eat the offerings; they delight the 
sacrificer. He delights those who eat the offerings with curds, and those who do not 
with honey; curds is a food of the village, honey of the wild; i n that he anoints with 
curds mixed with honey, (it serves) to win both. He anoints with a large handful (of 
grass); the large handful is connected with Prajapati [2]; (verily it serves) to unite it 
with its birthplace; with two (verses) he anoints, for sup port. He anoints going 
round in order; verily he delights them completely. Now he is deprived of the 
breaths, of offspring, of cattle who piling the fire steps upon it. 'Giver of expiration 
art thou, of inspiration', he says; verily he bestows on himself t he breaths; 'giver of 
splendour, giver of wide room', he says; splendour is offspring; wide room is 
cattle; verily he bestows on himself offspring and cattle. Indra slew Vrtra; him 
Vrtra [3] slain grasped with sixteen coils; he saw this libation to Agni of  the front; 
he offered it, and Agni of the front, being delighted with his own portion, burnt in 
sixteen places the coils of Vrtra; by the offspring to Viçvakarman he was set free 
from evil; in that he offers a libation to Agni of the front, Agni of the fr ont, Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
992 
 delighted with his own portion, burns away his evil, and he is set free from his evil 
by the offering to Viçvakarman. If he desire of a man, 'May he be set free slowly 
from evil' [4], he should offer one by one for him; verily, slowly he is set free f rom 
evil; if he desire of a man, 'Swiftly may he be set free from evil', he should run 
over all of them for him and make one offering; swiftly is he set free from evil. Or 
rather he sacrifices separately with each hymn; verily severally he places strength 
in the two hymns; (verily they serve) for support. 
 
v. 4. 6.  
'Do thou lead him forward', (with these words) he puts on the kindling -sticks; that 
is as when one provides hospitality for one who has come on a visit. He puts down 
three; the fire is threefold ; verily he provides his portion for the whole extent of the 
fire. They are of Udumbara wood, the Udumbara is strength; verily he gives him 
strength. 'May the All -gods thee', he says; the All -gods are the breaths; verily with 
the breaths [1] he raises him up; I bear up with their thoughts, O Agni', he says; 
verily he unites him with the thought for which he lifts him up. 'May the five 
regions divine aid the sacrifice, the goddesses', he says, for he moves forward 
along the quarters. 'Driving away poverty an d hostility', he says, for smiting away 
the Raksases. 'Giving to the lord of the sacrifice increase of wealth,' he says; 
increase of wealth is cattle [2]; verily he wins cattle. He takes (him) with six 
(verses); the seasons are six; verily with the seasons  he takes him; two have (the 
word) 'embracing', for the smiting away of the Raksases. 'With the rays of the sun, 
with tawny hair, before us', he says, for instigation. 'Then let our pure invocations 
be accepted', he says; the pure (one) is food; verily he wins food. The gods and the 
Asuras were in conflict; the gods saw the unassailable (hymn) and with it they 
conquered the Asuras [3]; that is why the unassailable (hymn) has its name. In that 
the second Hotr recites the unassailable (hymn) the sacrificer co nquers his foes 
therewith unassailably; verily also he conquers what has not been conquered. (The 
hymn) has ten verses; the Viraj has ten syllables, by the Viraj are kept apart these 
two worlds; (verily it serves) to keep apart these two worlds. Again the Viraj has 
ten syllables, the Viraj is food; verily he finds support in the Viraj, in eating food. 
The atmosphere is as it were unreal; the Agnidh's altar is as it were the atmosphere; 
on the Agnidh's altar [4] he puts down a stone, for reality; with two (v erses), for 
support. 'As measurer, he standeth in the midst of the sky', he says; verily with this Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
993 
 he measures; 'in the middle of the sky is the dappled stone set down', he says; the 
dappled is food; verily he wins food. With four (verses) he goes up to th e tail; the 
metres are four; verily (he goes) with the metres. 'All have caused Indra to wax', he 
says; verily he attains increase. 'True lord and lord of strength' [5], he says; 
strength is food; verily he wins food. 'Let the sacrifice invoke favour, and bring the 
gods', he says; favour is offspring and cattle; verily be bestows on himself 
offspring and cattle. 'Let the god, Agni, offer and bring to us the gods', he says, to 
make the cry, Godspeed! 'He hath seized me with the impulse of strength, with 
'elevation', he says; elevation is yonder sun in rising; depression is it when setting; 
verily with holy power he elevates himself, with holy power he depresses his foe. 
 
v. 4. 7.  
'Along the eastern quarter do thou advance, wise one', he says; verily with thi s 
(verse) he moves to the world of heaven. 'Mount ye, with Agni, to the vault', he 
says; verily with this he mounts these worlds. 'From earth have I mounted to the 
atmosphere,' he says; verily with it he mounts these worlds. 'Going to the heaven 
they look not away', he says; verily he goes to the world of heaven. 'O Agni, 
advance [1] first of worshippers', he says; verily with it he bestows eyesight upon 
both gods and men. He steps upon (the altar) with five (verses); the sacrifice is 
fivefold; verily he go es to the world of heaven with the full extent of the sacrifice. 
'Night and dawn', he recites as the Puronuvakya, for preparation. O Agni, of a 
thousand eyes', he says; Prajapati is of a thousand; (verily it serves) to obtain 
Prajapati. 'To thee as such le t us pay honour; to strength hail!' he says; strength is 
food; verily he wins food [2]. He offers on the naturally perforated brick (a ladle) 
of Udumbara wood filled with curds; curds are strength, the Udumbara is strength, 
the naturally perforated is yond er (sky); verily he places strength in yonder (sky); 
therefore we live on strength coming hitherward from yonder. He puts (it) in place 
with three (verses); the fire is threefold; verily be makes the whole extent of the 
fire attain support. 'Enkindled, O A gni, shine before us', (with these words) he 
takes (the kindling -stick) of Udumbara wood; this is a pipe with projections; by it 
[3] the gods made piercings of hundreds of the Asuras; in that he takes up the 
kindling -stick with this (verse), the sacrificer  hurls the hundred -slaying (verse) as a 
bolt at his enemy, to lay him low without fail. 'Let us pay homage to thee in thy 
highest birth, O Agni ', (with these words) he takes up (the kindling -stick) of 
Vikankata wood; verily he wins radiance. 'That various  of Savitr, the adorable', Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
994 
 (with these words) be takes up (the kindling -stick) of Çami wood, for soothing. 
The fire milks the piler -up of the fire; the piler -up, milks the fire; 'that [4] various 
of Savitr, the adorable', he says; this is the milking of th e fire. This of it Kanva 
Çrayasa knew, and with it he was wont to milk it; in that be takes up the kindling -
stick with the verse, the piler -up of the fire milks the fire. 'Seven are thy kindling -
sticks, O Agni, seven tongues'; verily he delights seven seve ns of his. With a full 
(ladle) he offers, for Prajapati is as it were full, to obtain Prajapati [5]. He offers 
with a half -filled (ladle), for from the half -filled Prajapati created creatures, for the 
creation of offspring. Agni departed from the gods; he entered the quarters; he who 
sacrifices should think in his mind of the quarters; verily from the quarters he wins 
him; with curds he offers at first, with butter afterwards; verily he bestows upon 
him brilliance and power in accord. There is (an offering)  to Vaiçvanara on twelve 
potsherds; the year has twelve months, Agni Vaiçvanara is the year; verily 
straightway [6] he wins Vaiçvanara. If he were to offer the fore - and after -
sacrifices, there would be a bursting of the sacrifice; he offers an oblation wi th a 
ladle, for the support of the sacrifice. Vaiçvanara is the kingly power, the Maruts 
the people; having offered the offering to Vaiçvanara, he offers those to the 
Maruts; verily he attaches the people to the kingly power. He utters aloud (the 
direction  to the Agnidh) for Vaiçvanara, he offers the offerings of the Maruts 
muttering; therefore the kingly power speaks above the people. (The offerings) are 
for the Maruts; the people of the gods are the Maruts; verily he wins for him by the 
people of the gods  the people among men. There are seven; the Maruts are in seven 
troops; verily in troops he wins the people for him; running over troop by troop he 
offers; verily he makes the people obedient to him. 
 
v. 4. 8.  
He offers the stream of wealth; 'May a stream  of wealth be mine', (with this hope) 
is the offering made; this stream of ghee waits upon him in yonder world, swelling 
up. He offers with butter; butter is brilliance, the stream of wealth is brilliance; 
verily by brilliance he wins brilliance for him. A gain the stream of wealth is 
desires; verily he wins desires. If he desire of a man, 'May I separate his breaths 
and his eating of food' [1], he should offer separately for him; verily he separates 
his breaths and his eating of food; if he desire of a man,  'May I continue his breaths 
and his eating of food', he should offer for him in a continuous stream; verily he Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
995 
 continues his breaths and his eating of food. Twelve sets of twelve he offers; the 
year has twelve months; verily by the year he wins food for h im. 'May for me food, 
for me freedom from hunger', he says; that [2] is the form of food; verily he wins 
food. 'May for me fire, for me the waters', be says; this is the birthplace of food; 
verily he wins food with its birthplace. He offers those where Ind ra, is half; verily 
he wins the deities; since Indra is half of all and a match, therefore Indra is the 
most appropriating of gods; he says Indra later; verily he places strength in him at 
the top. He offers the weapons of the sacrifice; the weapons of the  sacrifice are the 
sacrifice [3]; verily he wins the sacrifice. Again this is the form of the sacrifice; 
verily he wins the sacrifice by its form. 'May for me the final bath and the cry of 
Godspeed!' he says, to utter Godspeed! 'May the fire for me, the ca uldron', he says; 
that is the form of splendour; verily by the form he wins splendour. 'May the Rc for 
me, the Saman', he says [4]; that is the form of the metres; verily by the form he 
wins the metres. 'May the embryo for me, the calves', he says; that is  the form of 
cattle; verily by the form he wins cattle. He offers the orderers, to order the 
disordered. He offers the even and the odd, for pairing; they are in ascending ratio, 
for ascent. 'May one for me, three', he says; one and three are the metres of  the 
gods [51, four and eight the metres of men; verily he wins both the metres of gods 
and men. Up to thirty -three he offers; the gods are three and thirty; verily he wins 
the gods; up to forty -eight he offers, the Jagati has forty eight syllables, cattle  are 
connected with the Jagati: verily by the Jagati he wins cattle for him. 'Strength, 
instigation', (with these words) he offers a set of twelve; the year has twelve 
months; verily he finds support in the year. 
 
v. 4. 9.  
Agni departed from the gods, des iring a portion; the gods said to him, 'come back 
to us, carry the oblation for us.' He said, 'Let me choose a born; let them offer to 
me the Vajaprasaviya'; therefore to Agni they offer the Vajaprasaviya. In that he 
offers the Vajaprasaviya, he unites Agn i with his own portion; verily also this is his 
consecration. He offers with fourteen (verses); there are seven domesticated, seven 
wild [ 1] animals; (verily it serves) to win both sets. He offers of every kind of 
food, to win every kind of food. He offer s with an offering -spoon of Udumbara 
wood; the Udumbara is strength, food is strength; verily by strength he wins for 
him strength and food. Agni is the consecrated of gods, the piler of the fire of men; 
therefore when it rains a piler of the fire should n ot run, for he has thus obtained Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
996 
 food; rain is as it were food; if he were to run he would be running from food. He 
should go up to it; verily be goes up -to food [2]. 'Night and dawn', (with these 
words) he offers with the milk of a black cow with a white  calf; verily by the day 
he bestows night upon him, by night day; verily day and night being bestowed 
upon him milk his desire and the eating of food. He offers the supporters of the 
kingly power; verily he wins the kingdom. He offers with six (verses); th e seasons 
are six; verily he finds support in the seasons. 'O lord of the world', (with these 
words) he offers five libations at the chariot mouth; the chariot is a thunderbolt; 
verily with the thunderbolt he conquers the quarters [3]. In yonder world the wind 
blows over the piler of the fire; he offers the names of the winds; verily over him in 
yonder world the wind blows; three he offers, these worlds are three; verily from 
these worlds he wins the wind. 'Thou art the ocean, full of mist', he says; that i s the 
form of the wind; verily by the form he wins the wind. He offers with his clasped 
hands, for not other wise can the oblation of these be accomplished. 
 
v. 4. 10.  
The chariot of the gods is yoked for the world of heaven, the chariot of man for 
wherev er his intention is fixed; the fire is the chariot of the gods. 'Agni I yoke with 
glory, with ghee', he says; verily he yokes him; he, yoked, carries him to the world 
of heaven. If he were to yoke with all five together, his fire yoked would fall away, 
the libations would be without support, the Stomas without support, the hymns 
without support. He strokes (the fire) with three (verses) at the morning pressing; 
the fire is threefold [1]; verily he yokes the full extent of the fire; that is as when 
something  is placed on a yoked cart; the oblations find support, the Stomas find 
support, the hymns find support. He strokes with two (verses) in the Stotra of the 
Yajñayajñiya; the sacrifice is as great as is the Agnistoma; a further extension is 
performed over an d above it; verily he mounts at the end the whole extent of the 
sacrifice. (He strokes) with two (verses), for support; when it is not completed by 
one (verse), then [2] does he stroke; the rest of the sacrifice resorts to him; (verily 
it serves) for conti nuity. He who piles up the fire falls away from this world; his 
libation cannot be performed in a place without bricks; whatever libation he offers 
in a place without bricks, it runs away, and with its running away the sacrifice is 
ruined, with the sacrifi ce the sacrificer; in that he piles up a second piling, (it is) to 
support the libations; the libations find support [3], the sacrifice is not ruined, nor Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
997 
 the sacrificer. He puts down eight; the Gayatri has eight syllables; verily he piles it 
with the Gaya tri metre; if eleven, with the Tristubh, if twelve with the Jagati verily 
he piles it with the metres. The fire that is re -piled is called the descendant; he who 
knowing thus re -piles the fire eats food up to the third generation. The re -piling is 
like the  re-establishment of the fire; he who does not succeed through the 
establishment of the fire [4] re -establishes it; he who does not succeed by the piling 
up of the fire re -piles it. In that he piles up the fire, (it is) for prosperity. Or rather 
they say, 'one should not pile it up.' The fire is Rudra, and it is as if one stirs up a 
sleeping lion. But again they say, 'One should pile it up.' It is as if one awakens a 
richer man with his due portion. Manu piled the fire; with it he did not prosper; he 
saw th is re-piling, he piled it, with it he prospered; in that he piles the re -piling, (it 
is) for prosperity. 
 
v. 4. 11.  
He who desires cattle should pile a piling with the metres; the metres are cattle; 
verily he becomes rich in cattle. He should pile in hawk  shape who desires the sky; 
the hawk is the best flier among birds; verily becoming a hawk he flies to the 
world of heaven. He should pile in heron form who desires, 'May I be possessed of 
a head in yonder world'; verily he becomes possessed of a head in y onder world. 
He should pile in the form of an Alaja bird, with four furrows, who desires support; 
there are four quarters; verily he finds support in the quarters. He should pile in the 
form of a triangle, who has foes [1]; verily he repels his foes. He sh ould pile in 
triangle form on both sides, who desires, 'May I repel the foes I have and those I 
shall have'; verily he repels the foes he has and those he will have. He should pile 
in the form of a chariot wheel, who has foes; the chariot is a thunderbolt;  verily he 
hurls the thunderbolt at his foes. He should pile in the form of a wooden trough 
who desires food; in a wooden trough food is kept; verily he wins food together 
with its place of birth. He should pile one that has to be collected together, who 
desires cattle; verily he becomes rich in cattle [2]. He should pile one in a circle, 
who desires a village; verily he becomes possessed of a village. He should pile in 
the form of a cemetery, who desires, 'May I be successful in the world of the 
fathers'; verily he is successful in the world of the fathers. Viçvamitra and 
Jamadagni had a feud with Vasistha; Jamadagni saw these Vihavya (bricks); he put 
them down, and with them he appropriated the power and strength of Vasistha; in Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
998 
 that he puts down the Vihav yas, the sacrificer with them appropriates the power 
and strength of his foe. He puts down on the altar of the Hotr; the Hotr is the abode 
of the sacrificer [3]; verily in his abode he wins for him power and strength. 
Twelve he puts down; the Jagati has tw elve syllables, cattle are connected with the 
Jagati; verily with the Jagati he wins cattle for him. Eight each he puts down in the 
other altars; cattle have eight half hooves; verily he wins cattle. (He puts down) six 
on the Marjaliya; the seasons are six , the gods, the fathers, are the seasons; verily 
he delights the seasons, the gods, the fathers.  
The Horse Sacrifice (continued) 
 
v. 4. 12.  
'Be 'pure for the winning of strength', this is the Anustubh strophe; three Anustubhs 
make four Gayatris; in that there are three Anustubhs, therefore the horse when 
standing stands on three feet; in that there are four Gayatri is, therefore he goes 
putting down all four feet. The Anustubh is the highest of metres, the fourfold 
Stoma is the highest of Stomas, the thre e-night sacrifice the highest of sacrifices, 
the horse the highest of animals; verily by the highest he makes him go to the 
highest state. It is the twenty -onefold day [1], on which the horse is slain, there are 
twelve months, five seasons; these worlds ar e three; the twenty -onefold (Stoma) is 
yonder sun; this is Prajapati, the horse is connected with Prajapati; verily he wins it 
straightway. The Prstha (Stotra) is of Çakvari verses to make the horse complete, 
there are various metres, different sets of ani mals are offered, both domesticated 
and wild; in that the Prstha is of Çakvari verses, (it is) to complete the horse. The 
Saman of the Brahman is that of Prthuraçmi; by the rein the horse is restrained [2], 
a horse unrestrained and unsupported is liable to  go to the furthest distance; (verily 
it serves) to restrain and support the horse. The Achavaka's Saman is the Samkrti; 
the horse sacrifice is an extensive sacrifice; 'who knows', they say, 'if all of it is 
done or not?' In that the Achavaka's Saman is th e Samkrti, (it serves) to make the 
horse whole, to win it entirely, to prevent interference. The last day is an Atiratra 
with all the Stomas, to obtain all, to conquer all; verily he obtains all, he conquers 
all with it. 
 Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
999 
 PRAPATHAKA V  
The Piling of the Fire Altar (continued)  
v. 5. 1.  
In that he completes (the sacrifice) with one animal, (it is) for the continuity of the 
sacrifice and to avoid cutting it in two. The male animals belong to Indra; in that 
being Indra's they are offered to the fires, he cau ses strife among the deities. He 
should use Tristubh verses, appertaining to Agni, for the Yajyas and Anuvakyas; in 
that they appertain to Agni, (the verses) are Agni's, in that they are Tristubhs (they 
are) Indra's; (verily they serve) for prosperity; he does not cause strife among the 
deities. To Vayu of the team he offers a hornless (animal); Vayu is the brilliance of 
Agni; it is offered to brilliance; therefore wheresoever the wind [1] blows, the fire 
burns; verily it follows its own brilliance. If he w ere not to offer to him of the 
team, the sacrificer would go mad; (an offering) is made to him of the team, to 
prevent the sacrificer going mad. The Yajya and the Anuvakya, contain (the 
words) 'wind' and 'white', to secure brilliance. 'The golden germ firs t arose', (with 
these words) he pours out the butter portion; the golden germ is Prajapati; (verily it 
serves) for likeness to Prajapati. This (animal) is slain to make up all forms of 
animals; its hairs are [2] the form of man, its lack of horns that of h orses, the 
possession of one set of incisors only that of cows, the sheep -like hooves that of 
sheep, that it is a goat, that is the form of goats. The wind is the abode dear to 
cattle; in that it is offered to Vayu, in accord cattle wait upon him. 'Should an 
animal be offered to Vayu, or to Prajapati?' they say; if he were to offer it to Vayu, 
he would depart from Prajapati; if he were to offer it to Prajapati, he would depart 
from Vayu [3]; in that the animal is offered to Vayu, therefore he does not depar t; 
in that a cake is offered to Prajapati, therefore he does not depart from Prajapati; in 
that it is offered on twelve potsherds, therefore he does not depart from 
Vaiçvanara. When about to consecrate himself, he offers to Agni and Visnu on 
eleven potsher ds; all the deities are Agni; the sacrifice is Visnu; verily he lays hold 
of the deities and the sacrifice; Agni is the lowest of the deities, Visnu the highest; 
in that he offers to Agni and Visnu on eleven potsherds, the sacrificer envelops the 
gods [4] on both sides and wins them. By the cake the gods prospered in yonder 
world, by the oblation in this; he who desires, 'May I prosper in yonder world', 
should offer a cake; verily he prospers in yonder world. In that it is offered on eight 
pot sherds, it is  connected with Agni, in that it is offered on three potsherds, it is Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
1000  
 connected with Visnu; (verily it serves) for prosperity. He who desires, 'May I 
prosper in the world', should offer an oblation; the ghee belongs to Agni, the rice 
grains to Visnu, there fore [5] an oblation should be offered; verily he prospers in 
this world. It is (an offering) to Aditi; Aditi is this (earth); verily he finds support in 
this (earth); verily also be extends the sacrifice over this. He who piles the fire 
without keeping it  in the pan for a year -(it is with him) as when an embryo is 
dropped prematurely would go to ruin; he should offer before (the others) on 
twelve potsherds to Vaiçvanara; Agni Vaiçvanara is the year; even as (an embryo) 
attaining a year's growth [61 is born  when the due season' is come, so he having 
obtained the year when the due season is come, piles the fire; he goes not to ruin. 
Vaiçvanara is the form dear to Agni; verily he wins the form dear to him. These 
offerings are three; these worlds are three; (ve rily they serve) for the mounting of 
these worlds. 
 
v. 5. 2.  
Prajapati after creating creatures in affection entered into them; from them he 
could not emerge; he said, 'He shall prosper who shall pile me again hence.' The 
gods piled him; then they prosper ed; in that they piled him, that is why the piling 
has its name. He who knowing thus piles the fire is prosperous. 'For what good is 
the fire piled?' they say. 'May I be possessed of the fire' [1], (with this aim) is the 
fire piled; verily be becomes posse ssed of the fire. 'For what good is the fire piled?' 
they say. 'May the gods know me', (with this hope) is the fire piled; the gods know 
him. 'For what good is the fire piled?' they say. 'May I have a house', (with this 
hope) is the fire piled; verily he b ecomes possessed of a house. 'For what good is 
the fire piled?' they say. 'May I be rich in cattle', (with this hope) is the fire [2] 
piled; verily he becomes rich in cattle. 'For what good is the fire piled?' they say. 
'May the seven men live upon me', (w ith this hope) is the fire piled; three before, 
three behind, the self the seventh; so many live upon him in yonder world. 
Prajapati desired to pile the fire; to him spake earth; 'Thou shalt not pile the fire on 
me; thou wilt burn me excessively, and I bei ng burned excessively will shake you 
apart [3]; thou wilt fall into a sorry state.' He replied, 'So shall I act that it will not 
burn thee excessively.' He stroked it, (saying), 'May Prajapati seat thee; with that 
deity, in the manner of Angiras, do thou s it firm'; verily making this a brick he put 
it down, to prevent excessive burning. That on which he is to pile the fire he should Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
1001  
 stroke, (saying), 'May Prajapati seat thee; with that deity in the manner of Angiras, 
do thou sit firm' [4]; verily making thi s a brick he sets it down to prevent excessive 
burning. Prajapati desired, 'Let me be propagated', he saw this (fire) in the pan, he 
bore it for a year, then was he propagated. Therefore for a year must it be borne, 
then is he propagated. To him the Vasus said, 'Thou hast been propagated; let us be 
propagated.' He gave it to the Vasus, they bore it for three days, thereby [5] they 
created three hundred, three and thirty; therefore should it be borne for three days; 
verily is he propagated. To them the Rudra s said, 'Ye have been propagated, let us 
be propagated.' They gave it to the Rudras; they bore it for six days, thereby they 
created three hundred, three and thirty; therefore should it be borne for six days; 
verily is he propagated. To them the Adityas sa id, 'Ye have been propagated; let us 
[6] be propagated'. They gave it to the Adityas, they bore it for twelve days, 
thereby they created three hundred, three and thirty; therefore should it be borne 
for twelve days; verily is he propagated. Thereby they cr eated a thousand, the pan 
being the thousandth; he who knows thus the pan as the thousandth obtains a 
thousand cattle. 
 
v. 5. 3.  
'With a Yajus it is made, with a Yajus it is cooked, with a Yajus it is set loose, this 
pan; it is therefore exhausted, it can not be used again', they say. 'O Agni, yoke thy 
(steeds)', 'Yoke them that best invoke the gods', (with these words) he offers in the 
pan; verily he yokes it again and thereby is it not exhausted. He, who yokes Agni 
where the yoking is to be performed, yok es him (best) among those who are 
yoking. 'O Agni [1], yoke thy (steeds)', 'Yoke them that best invoke the gods', he 
says;' this is the yoking of Agni; verily he yokes him, and yokes him (best) among 
those who are yoking. The theologians say, 'Should the f ire be piled up with face 
down, or face upwards?' Now the fire is piled in the likeness of birds; if he were to 
pile it face downward, the libations would reach it behind; if upwards, it could not 
fly, it would not be heavenly for him; he puts down the hum an head towards the 
east, face upwards [2]; verily the libations reach it in the mouth; he does not pile it 
face upwards; verily it is heavenly for him. He offers with (a verse) addressed to 
Surya; verily he bestows sight upon it; twice he offers, for ther e are two eyes; he 
offers with the same verse, for sight is the same, for prosperity. The gods and the 
Asuras were in conflict, they deposited their desirable wealth; the gods Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
1002  
 appropriated it by means of the Vamabhrt (brick); that is why the Vamabhrt 
(supp orting the desirable) has its name. In that he puts down the Vamabhrt, the 
sacrificer by it appropriates the desirable wealth of his foe. It has a head of gold; 
gold is light, the desirable is light; verily by light he appropriates the desirable 
which is l ight; there are two Yajuses, for support. 
 
v. 5. 4.  
The waters were the wives of Varuna; Agni longed for them, he had union with 
them; his seed fell away, it became this (earth); what second fell away became 
yonder (sky); this is the Viraj, yonder the Sva raj; in that he puts down two Viraj 
(bricks) he puts down these two (worlds). Now the seed which yonder (sky) 
impregnates, finds support in this (earth), it is propagated, it becomes plants [1] 
and shoots; them the fire eats. He who knows thus is propagate d, and becomes an 
eater of food. If a man be full of seed, one should put both down in the first layer 
for him; verily these in accord pour seed for him; if a man have poured his seed, he 
should put one in the first layer for him and one in the last; veril y he encloses by 
the two (worlds) the seed he has impregnated. For a year to no man [2] should he 
descend in honour; for these two (worlds) descend in honour for no man; that is 
their rule. He who piles the fire without a head, becomes headless in yonder w orld, 
he who piles it with a head becomes possessed of a head in yonder world. 'To 
thought I offer with mind, with ghee, that the gods may come hither, delighting in 
the offerings, increasing holy order; on the path of the moving ocean I offer all the 
days to Viçvakarman the undying oblation', (with these words) he puts down the 
naturally perforated brick and offers [3]; that is the head of the fire; verily he piles 
the fire with its head. He becomes possessed of a head in yonder world who know 
thus. The fi re is piled for the world of heaven; whatever is done out of order, that is 
not heavenly; the fire is heavenly; having put down the layer he should stroke it, 
(saying), 'May the wise discern wisdom and folly, like backs straight and crooked, 
like men; for wealth and good offspring, O god, grant us freedom, and keep 
bondage from us.' Verily he puts it down in order. He piles (the fire) facing east; it 
becomes heavenly for him. 
 
v. 5. 5.  Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
1003  
 Viçvakarman, lord of the quarters, may he protect our cattle, may he pr otect us, to 
him homage! Prajapati; Rudra; Varuna; Agni; lord of the quarters; may he protect 
our cattle, may he protect us, to him homage!' These are the deities, overlords of 
these animals; to them he is cut off who puts down the heads of the animals. He  
puts down the gold bricks; verily he pays honour to these deities. The theologians 
[1] say, 'In the fire he places the domesticated animals, with pain he afflicts the 
wild animals; what then does he leave?' In that he puts down the golden bricks, and 
gold is immortality, by immortality he makes healing for the domesticated animals, 
he hurts them not. The first naturally perforated brick is expiration, the second 
cross -breathing, the third inspiration. Having put down the first naturally 
perforated brick h e should breathe out along it; verily he unites expiration with 
expiration; having put down the second [2] he should breathe across; verily he 
unites cross -breathing with cross -breathing; having put down the third, he should 
breathe in; verily he unites in spiration with inspiration; verily he kindles him with 
the breaths. 'Bhuh, Bhuvah, Suvar', (with these words) he puts down the naturally 
perforated bricks; the naturally perforated bricks are these worlds; with these 
exclamations Prajapati was propagated; in that he puts down the naturally 
perforated bricks with these exclamations, he puts down these worlds, and over 
these [3] worlds he is propagated. For expiration, for cross -breathing, for 
inspiration; for speech thee; for sight thee; with that deity, in the manner of 
Angiras, do thou sit firm. By Agni the gods sought to go to the world of heaven, 
with him they could not fly; they saw these four naturally perforated bricks, they 
put them down in the quarters, with him with eyes on all sides they went to th e 
world of heaven. In that he puts down four naturally perforated bricks in the 
quarters, the sacrificer with Agni with eyes on all sides goes to the world of 
heaven. 
 
v. 5. 6.  
a O Agni, come to enjoy', he says; verily he summons him.  
b 'Agni we choose as  envoy', he says; verily having called he chooses him.  
c 'By Agni Agni is kindled', he says; verily he kindles him.  
d 'May Agni slay the foes', he says; verily he confers power on him when kindled.  
e 'O Agni, we exalt the praise', he says; verily he exalts  him. 
These are the forms of the days [1]; verily each day he piles him, and wins the Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
1004  
 forms of the days. The theologians say, 'For what reason are other bricks 
exhausted, the space -filler not?' 'Because it is connected with Indra and Agni and 
with Brhaspat i', he should say, for Indra and Agni and Brhaspati are those among 
the gods who are not exhausted.  
It has a follower to avoid monotony. He follows it with an Anustubh; the space 
filler is the body, the Anustubh the breath; therefore breath comes through all the 
limbs. 'They of him, streaming with milk' [2], he says; therefore there is sap in 
every joint; 'the dappled mix the Soma', he says; the dappled (cow) is food; verily 
he wins food; Agni is praise, food is praise; verily he wins food; 'the clans in t he 
birthplace of the gods, in the three realms of sky', he says; verily he makes these 
worlds full of light for him. He who knows the support of the bricks finds support. 
'With that deity, in the manner of Angiras, do thou sit firm,' he says; this is the 
support of the bricks; he who knows thus finds support. 
 
v. 5. 7.  
The fire is piled up for the world of heaven; the set of eleven stakes is a 
thunderbolt; if he were to set up eleven stakes in the fire, he would shut it off from 
the world of heaven with th e thunderbolt; if he were not to set it up, he would sever 
the animals from the chips; one stake he sets up; verily he does not shut it off from 
the world of heaven, nor sever the animals from the chips. He who piling the fire 
steps down on it is deprived of power and strength; he should, with a verse 
addressed to Indra [1], put down a brick opposite his step; verily he is not deprived 
of power and strength. The fire is Rudra, his are three missiles, one that comes 
straight on, one that strikes transversely , and one that follows up. To them he is cut 
off who piles the fire; having piled the fire he should give (a bow) with three 
arrows to a Brahman, unasked; verily to them he pays homage, and also he 
ransoms himself from them.  
The bow of thine, O Rudra, in the east [2], may the wind blow after it for thee, to 
thee, O Rudra, with the year I pay homage. The bow of thine, O Rudra, on the 
south, may the wind blow after it for thee, to thee, O Rudra, with the full year I pay 
homage. The bow of thine, O Rudra, on the west, may the wind blow after it for 
thee, to thee, O Rudra, with the Ida year I pay homage. The bow of thine, O Rudra, 
on the north, may the wind blow after it for thee [3], to thee, O Rudra, with the Idu 
year I pay homage. The bow of thine, O Rudra, above, may the wind blow after it Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
1005  
 for thee, to thee, O Rudra, with the year I pay homage.  
Agni is Rudra; just as a tiger stands in anger, so he also (stands); when piled with 
these he reverences him; verily with homage he soothes him.  
The fires [4] of th e dust  
That have entered within the earth,  
Of them thou art the highest;  
Do thou instigate us to life.  
 
'Thee, O Agni, with the mind have I obtained; thee, O Agni, with the fervour have 
I obtained; thee, O Agni, with the consecration have I obtained; thee,  O Agni, with 
the observances have I obtained; thee, O Agni, with the pressing -day have I 
obtained; thee, O Agni, with the sacrificial fees have I obtained; thee, O Agni, with 
the concluding bath have I obtained; thee, O Agni, with the barren cow have I 
obtained; thee, O Agni, with the cry of Godspeed I have I obtained', he says; I this 
is the obtaining of Agni verily therewith he obtains him. 
 
v. 5. 8.  
He pays reverence in front with the Gayatra (Saman); verily he confers breath upon 
him. (He reverences) the wings with the Brhat and the Rathantara; verily he 
confers might upon him. (He reverences) the tail with the seasonal Yajñayajñiya; 
verily he finds support in the seasons. He pays reverence with the Prstha (Stotras); 
the Prsthas are brilliance; verily he confers brilliance upon him. Prajapati created 
Agni; he, created, went away from him; him he checked ( avarayata ) by the 
Varavantiya, and that is why the Varavantiya has it name. By the Çyaita he 
congealed him, and that is why the Çyaita has its name [1] . In that he reverences, 
with the Varavantiya, he restrains him, and by the Çyaita he congeals him. At the 
joinings of the wings he reverences with the heart of Prajapati; verily he attains his 
affection.  
With the eastern quarter I place thee, with the Ga yatri metre, with Agni as the 
deity; with the head of Agni I put down the head of Agni. With the southern Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
1006  
 quarter I place thee, with the Tristubh metre, with Indra as the deity; with the wing 
of Agni I put down the wing of Agni. With the western quarter I place thee [2], 
with the Jagati metre, with Savitr as the deity; with the tail of Agni I put down the 
tail of Agni. With the northern quarter I place thee, with the Anustubh metre, with 
Mitra and Varuna as the deity; with the wing of Agni I put down the wi ng of Agni. 
With the upright quarter I place thee, with the Pankti metre, with Brhaspati as the 
deity, with the back of Agni I put down the back of Agni.  
He who piles the fire without its body is without a body in yonder world; he who 
piles it with its bo dy is with his body in yonder world. He puts down the body 
bricks; this is the body of the fire; verily he piles the fire with its body; he has his 
body in yonder world who knows thus. 
 
v. 5. 9.  
a O Agni, the ocean, thy arrow called the young, with it be gentle to us; homage to 
this of thine; may we prosper, living on this of thine. b O Agni, the boisterous; c 
the abysmal; d the strong; e the desirable; thy arrow called young, with it be gentle 
to us; homage to this of thine; may we prosper, living on this  of thine.  
f The layers are the five Agnis, the first is the ocean by name, the second the 
boisterous [1], the third the abysmal, the fourth the strong, the fifth the desirable; if 
he were not to offer libations to them they would burn the Adhvaryu and th e 
sacrificer; in that he offers these libations, verily he soothes them with their proper 
portion; neither Adhvaryu nor sacrificer goes to ruin.  
g May speech be mine in the mouth, breath in the nostrils, sight in the eyes, 
hearing in the ears, might in th e arms, force in the thighs, may all my members be 
uninjured; may thy body [2] be with my body; homage to thee; harm me not.  
h The breaths depart from him who piling the fire steps down on it; 'May speech be 
mine in the mouth, breath in the nostrils', he says; verily he bestows the breaths on 
himself.  
i The Rudra in the fire, in the waters, in the plants, the Rudra that hath entered all Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
1007  
 beings, to that Rudra be homage.  
k Some Rudras have shares in the libations ( ahuti ), others have shares in the 
oblation s (havis ) [3]; having offered the Çatarudriya, he should put down on the 
last brick an oblation of Gavidhuka; verily he soothes him with his portion. 'For 
him indeed is the Çatarudriya offered in truth', they say, 'for whom this (oblation) 
is made on the f ire.'  
l May the Vasus, with the Rudras, protect thee on the east; may the Pitrs whose 
lord is Yama, with the Pitrs, protect thee on the south; may the Adityas, with the 
All-gods, protect thee on the west; may Dyutana Maruta, with the Maruts, protect 
thee on the north [4]; may the gods, whose chief is Indra, protect thee from below 
and from above.  
m It is not purified, nor made worthy of sacrifice, nor really anointed, if it is 
anointed before this point; in that he anoints it with ghee after it has been p iled, 
thereby is it purified, made worthy of sacrifice and really anointed. 
 
v. 5. 10.  
a Thou art the eastern quarter, the favourable by name; of thee as such Agni is the 
overlord, the black (snake) the guardian; the overlord and the guardian, to them 
homage; may they be gentle to us; him whom we hate and who hateth us I place 
within the jaws of you two. Thou art the southern quarter, the mighty by name; of 
thee as such Indra is the overlord, the scorpion, &c. Thou art the western quarter, 
the forward by n ame; of thee as such [1] Soma is the overlord, the viper, &c. Thou 
art the northern quarter, the stable by name; of thee as such Varuna is overlord, the 
striped snake, &c. Thou art the great quarter, the lady paramount by name; of thee 
as such Brhaspati is  overlord, the white, &c. Thou art this quarter, the powerful by 
name; of thee as such Yama is the overlord, the spotted necked (snake) the 
guardian; the overlord and the guardian, to them homage; may they be gentle to us; 
him whom we hate and [2] who hate th us I place within the jaws of you two.  
b These deities guard the fire when kindled; if he were not to offer libations to 
them, they would suck the Adhvaryu and the sacrificer; in that he offers these Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
1008  
 libations he soothes them with their proper portion;  neither Adhvaryu nor sacrificer 
goes to ruin.  
c Ye are missiles by name; your houses are in the east; your arrows are Agni; the 
water, &c. Ye are smearers by name [3]; your houses are in the south, your arrows 
are the fathers; the ocean, &c. Ye are the b earers of the bolt by name; your houses 
are in the west, your arrows are sleep; the cleft, &c. Ye are the stable by name; 
your houses are in the north; your arrows are the waters; the sea, &c. Ye are 
overlords by name; your houses are above; your arrows ar e the rain; the helper, 
&c. Ye are the raw -flesh eaters by name, of the earth; your houses are bore [4]; 
your arrows are food; winking is the name of the wind; to you homage; be ye 
gentle to us; him whom we hate and who hateth us I put in your jaws.  
d Som e gods eat the offerings, others do not; verily the piler of the fire delights 
both sets. He offers these libations with curds mixed with honey; verily he delights 
them with their proper portion. Or rather they say, 'The gods who eat not the 
oblations are the bricks' [5]. He offers going round in order; verily he delights them 
completely.  
e Suck this mighty breast of the waters, Filled in the midst of the flood, O Agni; 
Rejoice in the spring of sweetness, O ocean, Enter thy seat of the sea.  
f If one havin g yoked the fire does not set it free, then just as a horse yoked and not 
set free in hunger is overcome, so his fire is overcome, and with it being overcome 
the sacrificer is overcome; he having piled the fire becomes aheat [6]; 'Suck this 
mighty breast o f the waters', (with these words) he offers a ladle full of butter; this 
is the freeing of the fire; verily setting it free he gives it food. Therefore they say, 
both he who knows and he who knows not. 'A horse well loaded carries well'; the 
horse is Agni;  verily he delights him, he delighted delights him; he becomes richer.  
The Horse Sacrifce (continued) 
 
v. 5. 11.  
To Indra, the king, a boar; to Varuna, the king, a black (antelope); to Yama, the 
king, a deer; to the bull, the king, a Gayal; to the tiger,  the king, a Bos Gavaeus; to Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
1009  
 the king of men a monkey; for the swift falcon a quail; for the Nilangu (snake) a 
worm; for Soma, the king, a gazelle; for the ocean a crocodile; for the snowy 
mountain an elephant. 
 
v. 5. 12.  
The ape is for Prajapati; the owl , the Haliksna the cat, are for Dhatr; to Sarasvati 
the white starling, of human speech; the wild goat, the ichneumon, the Çaka, these 
are for Pusan; the curlew to speech. 
 
v. 5. 13.  
To the offspring of waters a fish; the crocodile, the dolphin, the Kulik aya are for 
the ocean; to speech the Paingaraja; to Bhaga the sea -crow; the swan, the Vahasa, 
the woodpecker, these are for Vayu; to the quarters the Cakravaka. 
 
v. 5. 14.  
To might, a boa -constrictor; the mole, the Srjaya, the lizard, these are for Mitra;  to 
death the dark (serpent); to wrath the viper; the pot -nosed, the lotus -sitter, the 
copper snake, these are for Tvastr; to the echo the Vahasa. 
 
v. 5. 15.  
The human beast to the moon; the lizard, the Kalaka, the woodpecker, these are for 
the trees; the  dappled (deer) to day; the black (antelope) to night; the cuckoo, the 
Ksvinka, the black -headed, these are (to be offered) to Aryaman; the crab for 
Dhatr. 
 
v. 5. 16.  
For the sun the crane; the deer, the peacock, the hawk, these are for the Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
1010  
 Gandharvas; fo r the Vasus the francolin partridge; for the Rudras the partridge; the 
red doe, the Kundrnaci, the Golattika, these are for the Apsarases; to the wood the 
Srmara. 
 
v. 5. 17.  
The dappled (deer) is for the All -gods; the Pitva, Nyanku, the Kaça, these are (t o 
be offered) to Anumati; the cuckoo is for the half months; the tortoise for the 
months; the Kvayi, the Kutaru, the gallinule, these are (to be offered) to Sinivali; to 
Brhaspati the cat. 
 
v. 5. 18.  
The Çaka, is for earth; the field -rat, the Kaça, the fl ying fox, these are for the 
fathers; the pole -cat for the seasons; the quail to the year; the pigeon, the owl, the 
hare, these are for Nirrti; the cock for Savitr. 
 
v. 5. 19.  
The deer for Rudra; the chameleon, the bird, the Pippaka, these are (to be offer ed) 
to the arrow shot; the gazelle for the Maruts; the Çarga to the Brahman; the hyena, 
the black (deer), the dog of four eyes, the ass, these are for other men; to Agni the 
crow. 
 
v.5.20.  
The Alaja is for the atmosphere; the otter, the diver, the swimme r, these for the 
waters; to Aditi the Hansasaci; to Indrani the Kirça; the vulture, the white -breasted, 
the Vardhranasa, these are for the sky; the hedgehog is for sky and earth. 
 Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
1011  
 v. 5. 21.  
The eagle for Parjanya; the swan, the wolf, the cat, these are fo r Indra; the otter for 
the waters; the jackal is (to be offered) to Aryaman; the lion, the ichneumon, the 
tiger, these are (to be offered) to great Indra; the rhinoceros to desire. 
 
v. 5. 22.  
For Agni the black -necked; for Sarasvati the ewe; the brown one  for Soma; the 
dark for Pusan; the white -backed for Brhaspati; the variegated for the All -gods; the 
ruddy one for Indra; the speckled one for the Maruts; the mixed one for Indra and 
Agni; the one spotted below for Savitr; the ram for Varuna. 
 
v. 5. 23.  
The horse, the hornless one, the Gayal, these are for Prajapati; for Agni the two 
with black necks; for Tvastr the two with hairy thighs; the two white -backed for 
Brhaspati; to Dhatr the speckled bellied one; for the sun the white ram. 
 
v. 5. 24.  
To Agni of  the front the red -limbed ox; the two spotted below for Savitr; the two 
rednavelled for Pusan; the two hornless tawny ones for the All -gods; the speckled 
for the Maruts; the black goat for Agni the ewe for Sarasvati; the black ram with 
one white foot for Varuna. 
 Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
1012  
 PRAPATHAKA VI  
The Piling of the Fire Altar (continued)  
v. 6. 1.  
a Golden of colour, pure, purifying,  
In which was born Kaçyapa, in which Indra,  
They have conceived Agni as a germ, of varied forms;  
May these waters be gentle and kindly to us.  
b Those in whose midst Varuna doth go,  
Gazing on the truth and falsehood of men,  
Dripping honey, pure, purifying;  
 
May these waters be gentle and kindly to us.  
c Those of which in the sky the gods make their food,  
Those that are in many places in the sky,  
Those that inundate the earth with their sap [1], the pure ones  
May these waters be gentle and kindly to us.  
d With auspicious eye gaze on me, O waters;  
With auspicious body, do ye touch my skin;  
I invoke all you Agnis that sit in the waters;  
Do ye confer u pon me radiance and might and force.  
e When as ye went below  
Ye cried ( ánadata ) on the slaying of the serpent,  
Therefore are yo criers ( nadyáh ) by name;  
These are your names, O streams.  
When instigated by Varuna  
Ye wallowed speedily [2],  
Then Indra obtaine d (apnot ) you as ye went  
Therefore ye are waters ( ápah ). 
g As ye glided against his will,  
He stayed ( ávivarata ) your courses,  
Indra with his might, O goddesses;  
Therefore your name is water ( váh). 
h One god stepped upon them,  
As they glided, according to h is will,  Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
1013  
 (Saying) 'The great ones have breathed forth ( úd) 
Therefore they are called water.  
i The waters are kindly, the waters were ghee;  
These waters bear Agni and Soma;  
The bitter sap of those dispensing sweetness [3], the satisfying,  
Hath come to me wi th breath, with radiance.  
k I behold, or I hear;  
The cry cometh to me, the voice of them to us;  
I consider that I have enjoyed the ambrosia then,  
When I delighted you, O ye of golden hue.  
l Ye, waters, are healing;  
Further us to strength,  
To see great joy.  
m The most auspicious flavour that is yours,  
Accord to us here,  
Like eager mothers.  
n To him may we come with satisfaction,  
To whose dwelling ye quicken us,  
 
O waters, and propagate us.  
O Arise to the sky, aim at the atmosphere, be united with the earth;  
thou art splendour; for splendour thee!  
 
v. 6. 2.  
He draws cups of water; the cups are the royal consecration; the fire is the 
consecration; the royal consecration is the consecration of Varuna; (the fire) to be 
piled is Agni's consecration; verily by the m is he consecrated; verily also he 
conquers both the worlds, that of him who has offered the royal consecration and 
that of the piler of the fire. There are waters; the waters are foes of Agni; in that he 
puts the waters down below the fire, (they serve) to overcome his foe; he prospers 
himself, his foe is defeated. The waters are ambrosia [1]; therefore they sprinkle 
with water him who is faint; he does not go to ruin, he lives all his life, for whom 
these are put down, and who knows them thus. The waters  are food, the waters are 
cattle, cattle are food; an eater of food and rich in cattle he becomes, for whom 
these are put down, and who knows them thus. They are twelve; the year has Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
1014  
 twelve months; verily by the year he wins food for him [2]; there are ves sels used; 
in a vessel is food eaten; verily he wins food with its birthplace; up to the twelfth 
generation he eats food; moreover, he is not cut off from his vessel for whom these 
are put down, nor he who knows them thus. The pots and the pans make pairs,  for 
the propagation of pairing; with offspring, with cattle, with pairings is he 
propagated for whom these are put down and he who [3] knows them thus. Agni is 
pain; he afflicts the Adhvaryu, the sacrificer, and offspring with pain; in that he 
puts down w ater, he soothes his pain; neither Adhvaryu nor sacrificer goes to ruin; 
offspring are soothed where these are put down. The waters are the hearts of the 
waters; in that he puts these down, he unites these with (the waters) of the sky; 
Parjanya becomes lik ely to rain [4]. He who knows their home and their 
arrangement becomes possessed of a home, things go in order for him. Along the 
furrows he puts (them) down; this is their home, their arrangements; he who knows 
thus becomes possessed of a home, and things  go in order for him. The others he 
puts down in pairs, but four in the middle, for support. The bricks are food, this 
oblation is food in very presence; in that he puts down this oblation, verily 
straightway [5] he wins food for him; in the middle he puts  (them) down; verily he 
bestows food on him in the middle; therefore in the middle is food eaten. It is 
offered to Brhaspati; Brhaspati is the holy power of the gods: verily by holy power 
he wins food for him. 'Thou art splendour; for splendour thee!' he s ays; brilliant 
and resplendent does he become, for whom these are put down, and he who knows 
it thus. 
 
v. 6. 3.  
He puts down the bricks of being; in every place is death born; wherever death is 
born, thence he removes it by sacrifice; therefore the piler of the fire lives all his 
life, for all deaths are removed by him; therefore the piler of the fire is not to be 
practised against; his witchcraft turns upon him (who does so) and lays him low. 
He who piles the fire is consecrated; these are the offerings o f the divine 
consecrators; so many are the consecrations of the gods, and they [1] confer 
consecrations upon him; they consecrate him, the fire is consecration; the royal 
consecration is the consecration of Varuna; (the fire) to be piled is the consecratio n 
of holy power. 'On the instigation of the god Savitr, thee', he says; verily instigated 
by Savitr he consecrates him with holy power, with the deities. He pours down 
every sort of food, to win every sort of food. He pours down over him from the Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
1015  
 front fac e to face; for from the front face to face is food eaten. He pours down from 
the head, for from the head is food eaten; he causes (the water) to flow over up to 
the mouth [2]; verily on the mouth he bestows food -eating upon him. 'With the 
lordship of Agni I consecrate thee', he says; this is the consecration of Agni; verily 
he consecrates him with it. 'With the lordship of Brhaspati I consecrate thee', he 
says; Brhaspati is the holy power of the gods; verily with holy power he 
consecrates him. 'With the lor dship of Indra I consecrate thee', he says; verily he 
confers power from above upon him. That [3] is the form of the royal consecration. 
He who knowing thus piles the fire conquers both the worlds, that of him who has 
offered the royal consecration and tha t of the piler of the fire. When Indra had been 
consecrated, his power and strength fell away in ten places; the gods brought it 
together with the Sautramani; he who piles the fire is consecrated; having piled the 
fire he should sacrifice with the Sautrama ni; verily collecting power and strength 
he places them in himself. 
 
v. 6. 4.  
The year in unison with the Ayavans the dawn in unison with the ruddy (cows); 
Surya in unison with the steed; the Açvins in unison with the wondrous works. 
Agni Vaiçvanara in un ison with the food offerings; with ghee; hail!  
The year is the year, the Ayavas are the months, the red one the dawn, the steed 
Surya, the Açvins these two (worlds), Agni Vaiçvanara the year, the food offerings 
cattle, ghee cattle. With the year cattle ar e born; verily with the year he produces 
cattle for him. He offers on a blade of Darbha grass [1]; the Darbhas are the 
ambrosia, the strength of the (earth); he offers on it; verily he is propagated. An 
eater of food he becomes for whom they offer thus. Th ese deities are the foremost 
portions of Agni; verily he delights them; verily too he places the eye of Agni in 
front; he becomes not blind who knows thus. Waters were the world at first, the 
Moving ocean; Prajapati, becoming wind, rocked about on a lotus leaf; he [2] 
could find no support; he saw that nest of the waters, on it he piled the fire, that 
became this (earth), then indeed did he find support. (The brick) which he put 
down in front became the head, that is the eastern quarter; (the brick) which h e put 
down on the right became the right side, that is the southern quarter; (the brick) 
which he put down behind became the tail, that is the western quarter; (the brick) Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
1016  
 which he put down on the left [3] became the left side, that is the northern quarter ; 
(the brick) which he put down above became the back, that is the zenith. Agni of 
the five bricks is this (earth); therefore when they dig in it they knock up against 
the brick, against gravel. Now all this (earth) in the eyes of the birds shines at 
night , therefore birds do not at night rest upon it. He who knowing this piles a fire 
finds support, and conquers all the quarters. The Brahman is connected with Agni, 
therefore the Brahman finds prosperity in all the quarters; verily every quarter he 
goes to i s his own. The fire is the nest of the waters; therefore waters draw the fire; 
verily they enter their own birthplace. 
 
v. 6. 5.  
Having kept the fire in the pan for a year in the second year he should offer on 
eight potsherds to Agni, to Indra on eleven p otsherds, to the All -gods on twelve 
potsherds, to Brhaspati an oblation, to Visnu on three potsherds; in the third year 
he should sacrifice with the Abhijit (offering). In that there is (an offering) on eight 
potsherds, the Gayatri has eight syllables, and  the morning pressing is connected 
with Agni and the Gayatri, verily he supports by it the morning pressing and the 
Gayatri metre. In that there is (an offering) on eleven potsherds, the Tristubh has 
eleven syllables, and the midday pressing is connected w ith Indra and the Tristubh, 
verily he supports by it the midday pressing and the Tristubh [1] metre. In that 
there is (an offering) on twelve potsherds, the Jagati has twelve syllables, and the 
third pressing is connected with the All -gods and the Jagati, verily he supports by it 
the third pressing and the Jagati metre. In that there is an oblation to Brhaspati, and 
Brhaspati is the holy power of the gods, verily he supports by it holy power. In that 
there is (an offering) to Visnu on three potsherds, and V isnu is the sacrifice, verily 
he supports by it the sacrifice. In that he sacrifices with the Abhijit in the third 
year, (it serves) for conquest. In that he keeps the fire in the pan for a year, he [2] 
saves this world by it; in that he piles the fire in the second year, he saves the 
atmosphere by it; in that he sacrifices in the third year, he saves yonder world by it. 
This (fire) Para Atnara, Kaksivant Auçija, Vitahavya Çrayasa, and Trasadasyu 
Paurukutsya piled, being desirous of offspring; then indeed d id they win thousands 
each of children; he is extended with offspring, with cattle, that measure he attains 
which they attained, who knowing thus piles the fire. Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
1017  
  
v. 6. 6.  
a Prajapati piled the fire; it kept being razor -edged; the gods in terror did not 
approach it; they, clothing themselves in the metres, approached it, and that is why 
the metres have their name. The metres are holy power; the black antelope skin is 
the form of holy power; he puts on a pair of black antelope skin shoes; verily 
clothing hi mself with the metres he approaches the fire, to prevent injury to 
himself. b The fire is put down as a treasure of the gods [1]. Now a treasure 
unguarded others find, or he cannot recollect where it is; he steps on the fire -pan; 
verily he makes himself it s overlord, for guardianship. Or rather they say, 'It should 
not be stepped on'; the pan is connected with Nirrti; if he were to step on it, he 
would hand himself over to Nirrti; therefore it should not be stepped on. He puts 
down the human head, for guard ianship; and moreover this is just as if one should 
say, 'Guard that for me' [2]. c Atharvan is Prajapati; Dadhyañc Atharvana is the 
fire, his bones are the bricks; as to that the seer says, 'Indra with the bones of 
Dadhyañc'. In that he piles the fire wit h the bricks, he piles up the fire with itself; 
he has his own self in yonder world who knows thus. d (The fire) to be piled is the 
body of Agni, Vaiçvanara is the self; in that he offers to Vaiçvanara after the 
piling, he prepares its [3] body and mounts it; the sacrificer thus prepares his body, 
in that he piles the fire; in that he offers to Vaiçvanara after the piling, verily 
having pre pared his body he mounts it with the self; therefore they do not cut off 
from it; verily living he goes to the gods. e  He puts on dust with a verse addressed 
to Vaiçvanara; Agni Vaiçvanara is this (earth), the dust is its piling; verily he piles 
Agni Vaiçvanara; Vaiçvanara is the form dear to Agni; verily he wins the form 
dear to him. 
 
v. 6. 7.  
The gods obtained the bril liance ( virájam ) of Agni by means of the 
consecration; for three nights should he be consecrated; the Viraj has three feet, he 
obtains the Viraj. For six nights should he b consecrated; the year consists of six 
seasons; the Viraj is the year, he obtains th e Viraj. For ten nights should he be 
consecrated; the Viraj has ten syllables; he obtains the Viraj. For twelve nights 
should he be consecrated; the year has twelve months; the Viraj is the year; he 
obtains the Viraj. He should be consecrated for thirteen nights; the year has Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
1018  
 thirteen months [1]; the Viraj is the year; he obtains the Viraj. For fifteen nights 
should he be consecrated; the nights of the half -month are fifteen; the year is made 
up by the half -months; the Viraj is the year; he obtains the Vira j. For seventeen 
nights should he be consecrated; the year has twelve months and seven seasons; the 
Viraj is the year; he obtains the Viraj. For twenty -four nights should he be 
consecrated; the year has twenty -four half -months; the Viraj is the year; he ob tains 
the Viraj. For thirty nights should he be consecrated [2]; the Viraj has thirty 
syllables; he obtains the Viraj. For a month should he be consecrated; the year is 
the month; the Viraj is the year; he obtains the Viraj. For four months should he be 
consecrated; for four months the Vasus bore him, they conquered the earth, the 
Gayatri metre; for eight the Rudras, they conquered the atmosphere, the Tristubh 
metre; for twelve the Adityas, they conquered the sky, the Jagati metre; then they 
attained distin ction, supremacy over the gods. Therefore after keeping the fire for 
twelve months, should one pile it up; the year has twelve months, the fire to be 
piled is the year, the bricks are days and nights; he piles him with the bricks 
obtained; verily also he a ttains distinction, supremacy over his equals. 
 
v. 6. 8.  
a Agni is piled for the world of heaven; if he were not to mount after him the 
sacrificer would be excluded from the world of heaven. 'I have mounted on the 
earth; let not breath forsake me'; 'I hav e mounted on the atmosphere; let not 
offspring forsake me'; 'I have mounted on the sky, we have attained the light', he 
says; this is the mounting after Agni verily by it he mounts after him, to attain the 
world of heaven. b If he were to set up (the eleve n posts) commensurate with the 
wings [1], he would make the sacrificial rite too small, his offspring would be 
worse off than himself. He sets (it) up commensurate with the altar; verily he 
makes the sacrificial rite larger, his offspring does not become w orse than himself. 
e He should pile (the fire) of a thousand (bricks) when first piling (it); this world is 
commensurate with a thousand; verily he conquers this world. He should pile (it) 
of two thousand when piling a second time; the atmosphere is commen surate with 
two thousand; verily be conquers the atmosphere. He should pile (it) of three 
thousand when piling for the third time [2]; yonder world is commensurate with 
three thousand; verily he conquers yonder world. d Knee deep should he pile (it), 
when piling for the first time; verily with the Gayatri he mounts this world; navel Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
1019  
 deep should he pile (it) when piling for the second time; verily with the Tristubh he 
mounts the atmosphere; neck deep should he pile (it) when piling for the third 
time; verily  with the Jagati he mounts yonder world. e After piling the fire he 
should not have intercourse with a woman of pleasure, thinking, 'I shall deposit 
seed in that which is no womb'; nor after piling for the second time should he have 
intercourse with the wi fe of another [3], nor after piling for a third time should he 
have intercourse with any woman whatever. In that he piles the fire, he deposits 
seed; if he were to have intercourse. he would be deprived of seed. Or rather they 
say, 'If he were not to have intercourse, there would be no offspring.' In that he 
puts down the two Retahsic (bricks), they support the seed of the sacrificer; 
therefore he should have intercourse, for the non -spilling of seed.' f Three seeds are 
there, father, son, grandson [4]; if he were to put down two Retahsic (bricks), he 
would cleave his seed; three he puts down, for the continuity of seed; the first 
Retahsic is this (earth), this (earth) is speech, therefore they see this (earth), they 
see speech speaking; the second is the at mosphere, the atmosphere is breath, 
therefore they see not the atmosphere, nor breath; the third is yonder (sky), yonder 
(sky) is the eye, therefore they see yonder (sky), they see the eye. With a Yajus he 
sets down this one [5] and yonder one, but with mi nd only the middle, to arrange 
these worlds, and also the breaths. g 'The sacrifice offered by the Bhrgus, the 
Vasus, accord our desires; of thee thus offered, enjoyed, may I here enjoy wealth,' 
he says; verily he milks thereby the song and the recitation.  h 'Father Matariçvan, 
bestow flawless abodes; the flawless abodes the Uçijs have made; let Soma, all 
knowing, the leader, be leader; let Brhaspati recite hymns and rejoicing,' he says; 
that is Agni's hymn, and with it he recites after him. 
 
v. 6. 9.  
a That fire which is kept in the pan is consecrated of fires; if he were to put it down 
their embryos would be liable to abortion, and that would be like descending after 
consecration. He sets it on a throne, to support and prevent the falling of embryos, 
and he makes thus a consecration. b (The fire) in the pan is an embryo, the sling is 
the womb; if he were to remove the pan from the sling, he would strike the embryo 
from the womb; the sling has six ropes; man is sixfold [1], the body, the head, four 
limbs; v erily in himself he bears it. c The fire is Prajapati, his breasts are the pan 
and the mortar; his offspring live on them; in that he puts down the pan and the 