Rig Veda – English Translation  
So quickly,  mid the Gods,  ye gained  immortal  life. Vajas  and Rbhus,  your great  work  must  be extolled.   
5 Wealth  from  the Rbhus  is most  glorious  in renown,  that which  the Heroes,  famed  for vigour,  have 
produced.   
In synods  must  be sung the car which  Vibhvan  wrought:  that which  ye favour,  Gods!  is famed  among  
mankind.   
6 Strong  is the steed,  the man a sage in eloquence,  the bowman  is a hero hard to beat in fight,   
Great  store  of wealth  and manly  power  hath he obtained  whom  Vaja,  Vibhv an, Rbhus  have  looked  kindly  
on.  
7 To you hath been  assigned  the fairest  ornament,  the hymn  of praise:  Vajas  and Rbhus,  joy therein;   
For ye have  lore and wisdom  and poetic  skill:  as such,  with this our prayer  we call on you to come.   
8 According  to the wishes  of our hearts  may ye, who have  full knowledge  of all the delights  of men,   
Fashion  for us, O Rbhus,  power  and splendid  wealth,  rich in high courage,  excellent,  and vital strength.   
9 Bestowing  on us here riches  and offspring,  here fashion  fame  for us befitting  heroes.   
Vouchsafe  us wealth  of splendid  sort, O Rbhus,  that we may make  us more  renowned  than others.   
 
HYMN  XXXVII.  Rbhus.  
1. COME  to our sacrifice,  Vajas,  Rbhuksans,  Gods,  by the paths  which  Gods  are wont  to travel,   
As ye, gay Gods,  accept  in splendid  weather  the sacrifice  among  these  folk of Manus.   
2 May these  rites please  you in your heart  and spirit;  may the drops  clothed  in oil this day approach  you.  
May the abundant  juices  bear you onward  to power  and strength,  and, when  imbibed,  delight you.  
3 Your  threefold  going  near is God−appointed,  so praise  is given  you, Vajas  and Rbhuksans.   
So, Manus−like,  mid younger  folk I offer,  to you who are aloft in heaven,  the Soma.   
4 Strong,  with fair chains  of gold and jaws of iron, ye have  a splen did car and well−fed  horses.   
Ye Sons  of Strength,  ye progeny  of Indra,  to you the best is offered  to delight  you.  
5 Rbhuksans!  him, for handy  wealth,  the mightiest  comrade  in the fight,   
Him,  Indra's  equal,  we invoke,  most  bounteous  ever,  rich in steeds.   
6 The mortal  man whom,  Rbhus,  ye and Indra  favour  with your help,   
Must  be successful,  by his thoughts,  at sacrifice  and with the steed.   
7 O Vajas  and Rbhuksans,  free for us the paths  to sacrifice,   
Ye Princes,  lauded,  that we may press  forward  to each point  of heaven.   
8 O Vajas  and Rbhuksans,  ye Nasatyas,  Indra,  bless  this wealth,   
And,  before  other  men's,  the steed,  that ample  riches  may be won.   
 
HYMN  XXXVIII.  Dadhikris.  
1. FROM  you two came  the gifts in days aforetime  which  Trasadasyu  granted  to the Purus.   
Ye gave the winner  of our fields  and plough−lands,  and the strong  smiter  who subdued  the Dasytis.   
2 And ye gave mighty  Dadhikras,  the giver  of many  gifts,  who visiteth  all people,   
Impetuous  hawk,  swift  and of varied  colour,  like a brave  King  whom each true man must  honour.   
3 Whom,  as 'twere  down  a precipice,  swift  rushing,  each Puru  praises  and his heart  rejoices,−   
Springing  forth  like a hero fain for battle,  whirling  the car and flying  like the tempest.   
4 Who  gaineth  precious  booty  in the combats  and moveth,  winning  spoil,  among  the cattle;   
Shown  in bright  colour,  looking  on the assemblies,  beyond  the churl,  to worship  of the living.   
5 Loudly  the folk cry after him in battles,  as 'twere  a thief who steals  away  a garment;   
Speeding  to glory , or a herd of cattle,  even  as a hungry  falcon  swooping  downward.   
6 And,  fain to come  forth  first amid  these  armies,  this way and that with rows  of cars he rushes,   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Gay like a bridesman,  making  him a garland,  tossing  the dust,  champing  the rein that holds  him.  
 
7 And that strong  Steed,  victorious  and faithful,  obedient  with his body  in the combat,   
Speeding  straight  on amid  the swiftly  ressing,  casts  o'er his brows  the dust he tosses  upward.   
8 And at his thunder,  like the roar of heaven,  those  who attack  tremble  and are affrighted;   
For when  he fights  against  embattled  thousands,  dread  is he in his striving;  none  may stay him.  
9 The people  praise  the overpowering  swiftness  of this fleet Steed  who giveth  men abundance.   
Of him they say when  drawing  back  from battle.  Dadhikras  hath sped forward  with his thousands.   
10 Dadhikras  hath o'erspread  the Fivefold  People  with vigour,  as the Sun lightens  the waters.   
May the strong  Steed  who winneth  bundreds,  thousands,  requite  with sweetness  these  my words  and prais
es.  
 
HYMN  XXXIX  Dadhikras.  
1. Now  give we praise  to Dadhikras  the rapid,  and mention  in our laud the Earth  and Heaven.   
May the Dawns  flushing  move  me to exertion,  and bear me safely  over every  trouble.   
2 I praise  the mighty  Steed  who fills my spirit,  the Stallion  Dadhikravan  rich in bounties,   
Whom,  swift  of foot aind shining  bright  as Agni,  ye, Varuna  and Mitra,  gave to Purus.   
3 Him who hath honoured,  when  the flame  is kindled  at break  of dawn,  the Courser  Dadhikrivan,   
Him,  of one mind  with Varuna  and Mitra  may Aditi  make  free from  all transgression.   
4 When  we remember  mighty  Dadhikravan  our food and strength,  then the blest  name  of Maruts,   
Varuna,  Mitra,  we invoke  for welfare,  and Agni,  and the thunder−wielding  Indra.   
5 Both  sides  invoke  him as they call on Indra  when  they stir forth  and turn to sacrificing.   
To us have  Varuna  and Mitra  granted  the Courser  Dadhikris,  a guide for mortals.   
6 So have  I glorified  with praise  strong  Dadhikravan,  conquering  Steed.   
Sweet  may he make  our mouths;  may he prolong  the days we have  to live.  
 
HYMN  XL. Dadhikravan.  
1. LET us recite  the praise  of Dadhikravan:  may all the Mornings  move  me to exertion;   
Praise  of the Lord  of Waters,  Dawn,  and Agni,  Brhaspati  Son of Angiras,  and Surya.   
2 Brave,  seeking  war and booty,  dwelling  with the good  and with the swift,  may he hasten  the food of Da
wn.  
May he the true, the fleet,  the lover  of the course,  the bird−like  Dadhikravan,  bring  food,  strength,  and lig
ht.  
3 His pinion,  rapid  runner,  fans him m his way,  as of a bird that hastens  onward  to its aim,  
And,  as it were  a falcon's  gliding  through  the air, strikes  Dadhikravan's  side as he speeds  on with might.   
4 Bound  by the neck and by the flanks  and by the mouth,  the vigorous  Courser  lends  new swiftness  to his 
speed.   
Drawing  himself  together,  as his strength  allows,  Dadhikras  springs  along  the windings  of the paths.   
5 The Hamsa  homed  in light,  the Vasu  in mid−air,  the priest  beside  the altar,  in the house  the guest,   
Dweller  in noblest  place,  mid men,  in truth,  in sky, born of flood,  kine,  truth,  mountain,  he is holy Law.   
 
HYMN  XLI. Indra−Varuna.  
1. WHAT  laud,  O Indra−Varuna,  with oblation,  hath like the Immortal  Priest  obtained  your favour?   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Hath  our effectual  laud,  addressed  with homage,  touched  you, O Indra−Varuna,  in spirit?   
2 He who with dainty  food hath won you, Indra  and Varuna,  Gods,  as his allies  to friendship,   
Jayeth  the Vrtras  and his foes in battles,  and through  your mighty  favours  is made  famous.   
3 Indra  and Varuna  are most  liberal  givers  of treasure  to the men who toil to serve  them,   
When  they,  as Friends  inclined  to friendship,  honoured  with dainty  food,  delight  in flowing  Soma.  
4 Indra  and Varuna,  ye hurl, O Mighty,  on him your strongest  flashing  bolt of thunder   
Who  treats  us ill, the robber  and oppressor:  measure  on him your overwhelming  vigour.   
5 O Indra−Varuna,  be ye the lovers  of this my song,  as steers  who love the milch−Cow.   
Milk  may it yield  us as, gone  forth  to pasture,  the great  Cow  pouring  out her thousand  rivers.   
 
6 For fertile  fields,  for worthy  sons and grandsons,  for the Sun's  beauty  and for steer−like  vigour,   
May Indra−Varuna  with gracious  favours  work  marvels for us in the stress  of battle.   
7 For you, as Princes,  for your ancient  kindness,  good  comrades  of the man who seeks  for booty,   
We choose  to us for the dear bond  of friendship,  most  liberal  Heroes  bringing  bliss like parents.   
8 Showing  their streng th, these  hymns  for grace,  Free−givers  I have  gone  to you, devoted,  as to battle.   
For glory  have  they gone,  as milk to Soma,  to Indra−Varuna  my thoughts  and praises.   
9 To Indra  and to Varuna,  desirous  of gaining  wealth  have these  my thoughts  proceeded.   
They  have  come  nigh to you as treasurelovers,  like mares,  fleet−footed,  eager  for the glory.   
10 May we ourselves  be lords  of during  riches,  of ample  sustenance  for car and hones.   
So may the Twain  who work  with newest  succours  bring  yoked  teams  hitherward  to us and riches.   
11 Come  with your mighty  succours,  O ye Mighty;  come,  Indra−Varuna,  to us in battle.   
What  time the flashing  arrows  play in combat,  may we through  you be winners  in the contest.   
 
HYMN  XLIL  Indra−Varuna.  
1. I AM the royal  Ruler,  mine  is empire,  as mine  who sway  all life are all Immortals.   
Varuna's  will the Gods  obey  and follow.  I am the King  of men's  most  lofty  cover.   
2 I am King  Varuna.  To me were  given  these  first existinghigh  celestial  powers.   
Varuna's  will the Gods  obey  and follow. I am the King  of men's  most  lofty  cover.   
3 I Varuna  am Indra:  in their greatness,  these  the two wide  deep  fairly−fashioned  regions,   
These  the two world−halves  have  I, even  as Tvastar  knowing  all beings,  joined  and held together.   
4 I made  to flow the moisture−shedding  waters,  and set the heaven  firm in the scat of Order.   
By Law the Son of Aditi,  Law Observer,  hath spread  abroad  the world  in threefold  measure.   
5 Heroes  with noble  horses,  fain for battle,  selected  warriors,  call on me in combat.   
I Indra Maghavan,  excite  the conflict;  I stir the dust,  Lord  of surpassing  vigour.   
6 All this I did. The Gods'  own conquering  power  never  impedeth  me whom  none  opposeth.   
When  lauds  and Soma  juice  have  made  me joyful,  both the unbounded  regions  are affrighted .  
7 All beings  know  these  deeds  of thine  thou tellest  this unto Varuna,  thou great  Disposer!   
Thou  art renowned  as having  slain  the Vrtras.  Thou  madest  flow the floods  that were  obstructed.   
8 Our fathers  then were  these,  the Seven  his, what  time the son of Durgaha  was captive.   
For her they gained  by sacrifice  Trasadasyu,  a demi−god,  like Indra,  conquering  foemen.   
9 The spouse  of Purukutsa  gave oblations  to you, O Indra−Varuna,  with homage.   
Then  unto her ye gave King  Trasadasyu,  the demi−god,  the slayer  of the foeman.   
10 May we, possessing  much,  delight  in riches,  Gods  in oblations  and the kine in pasture;   
And that Milch−cow  who ahrinks  not from  the milking,  O Indra−Varuna,  give to us daily.   
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  XLIII.  Asvins.  
1. WHO  will hear,  who of those  who merit worship,  which  of all Gods  take pleasure  in our homage?   
On whose  heart  shall  we lay this laud celestial,  rich with fair offerings,  dearest  to Immortals?   
2 Who  will be gracious?  Who  will come  most  uickly  of all the Gods?  Who  will  
bring  liss most  largely?  
What  car do they call swift  with rapid  coursers?  That which  the Daughter  of the Sun elected.   
3 So many  days do ye come  swiftly  hither,  as Indra  to give help in stress  of battle.   
Descended  from  the sky, divine,  strong−pinioned,  by which  of all your powers  are ye most  mighty?   
4 What  is the prayer  that we should  bring  you, Asvins,  whereby  ye come  to us when  invocated?   
Whether  of you confronts  e'en great  betrayal?  Lovers  of sweetness,  Dasras,  help and save us.  
5 In the wide  space  your chariot  reachet h heaven,  what  time it turneth  hither  from  the ocean.   
Sweets  from  your sweet  shall  drop,  lovers  of sweetness!  These  have they dressed  for you as dainty  viands
.  
6 Let Sindhu  with his wave  bedew  your horses:  in fiery glow  have  the red birds  come  hither.   
 
Observed  of all was that your rapid  going,  whereby  ye were  the Lords  of Siirya's  Daug
hter. 7 Whene'er  I gratified  you here together,  your grace  was given  us, O ye rich in bo
oty. Protect,  ye Twain,  the singer  of your praises:  to you, Nasatyas,  is my wish  directed
. 
 
HYMN  XLIV.  Asvins.  
1. WE will invoke  this day your car, farspreading,  O Asvins,  even  the gathering,  of the sunlight,−   
Car praised  in hymns,  most  ample,  rich in treasure,  fitted  with seats,  the car that beareth  Surya.   
2 Asvins,  ye gained  that glory  by your Godhead,  ye Sons  of Heaven,  by your own might  and power.   
Food  followeth  close  upon  your bright  appearing  when  stately  horses  in your chariot  draw  you.  
3 Who  bringeth  you to−day  for help with offered  oblation,  or with hymns  to drink  the juices?   
Who,  for the sacrifice's  ancient  lover,  turneth  you hither,  Asvins,  offering  homage?   
4 Borne  on your golden  car, ye omnipresent!  come  to this sacrifice  of ours,  Nasatyas.   
Drink  of the pleasant  liquor  of the Soma  give riches  to the people  who adore  you.  
5 Come  hitherward  to us from earth,  from  heaven,  borne  on your golden  chariot  rolling  lightly.   
Suffer  not other  worshippers  to stay you here are ye bound  by earlier  bonds  of friendship.   
6 Now  for us both,  mete  out, O WonderWorkers,  riches  exceeding  great  with store  of heroes,   
Because  the men have  sent you praise,  O Asvins,  and Ajamilhas  come  to the laudation.   
7 Whene'er  I gratified  you here together,  your grace  was given  us, O ye rich in booty.   
Protect,  ye Twain,  the singer  of your praises:  to you, Nasatyas,  is my wish  directed .  
 
HYMN  XLV.  Asvins  
1. YONDER  goes up that light:  your chariot  is yoked  that travels  round  upon  the summit  of this heaven.   
Within  this car are stored  three  kindred  shares  of food,  and a skin filled  with meath  is rustling  as the fourt
h.  
2 Forth  come  your viands  rich with store  of pleasant  meath,  and cars and horses  at the flushing  of the daw
n,  
Stripping  the covering  from  the surrounded  gloom,  and spreading  through  mid−air  bright  radiance  like the Rig Veda – English Translation  
Sun.  
3 Drink  of the meath  with lips accustomed  to the draught;  harness  for the meath's  sake the chariot  that ye 
love.   
Refresh  the way ye go, refresh  the paths  with meath:  hither,  O Asvins,  bring  the skin that holds  the meath.
  
4 The swans  ye have  are friendly,  rich in store  of mcath,  gold−pinioned,  strong  to draw,  awake  at early  m
orn,  
Swimming  the flood,  exultant,  fain for draughts  that cheer:  ye come  like flies to our libations  of−the  meat
h.  
5 Well  knowing  solemn  rites and rich in meath,  the fires sing to the morning  Asvins  at the break  of day,  
When  with pure hands  the prudent  energetic  priest  hath with the stones  pressed  out the Soma  rich in meat
h.  
6 The rays advancing  nigh,  chasing  with day the gloom,  spread  through  the firmament  bright  radiance  like
 the 
Sun;  
And the Sun harnessing  his horses  goeth  forth: ye through  your Godlike  nature  let his paths  be known.   
7 Devout  in thought  I have  declared,  O Asvins,  your chariot  with good  steeds,  which  lasts for ever,   
Wherewith  ye travel  swiftly  through  the regions  to the prompt  worshipper  who brings  oblation.   
 
HYMN  XLVI.  Vayu.  Indra−Vayu  
1. DRINK  the best draught  of Soma−juice,  O Vayu,  at our holy rites:  For thou art he who drinketh  first.  
2 Come,  team−drawn,  with thy hundred  helps,  with Indra,  seated  in the car,  
Vaya,  and drink  your fill of juice.   
3 May steeds a thousand  bring  you both,  Indra.  and Vayu,  hitherward   
To drink  the Soma,  to the feagt.   
4 For ye, O Indra−Vayu,  mount  the goldenseated  car that aids  
 
The sacrifice,  that reaches  heaven.   
5 On far−refulgent  chariot  come  unto the man who offers  gifts:  
Come,  Indra−Vayu,  hitherward.   
6 Here,  Indra−Vayu,  is the juice:  drink  it, accordant  with the Gods,   
Within  the giver's  dwelling−place.   
7 Hither,  O Indra−Vayu,  be your journey  here unyoke  your steeds,   
Here  for your draught  of Soma  juice.   
 
HYMN  XLVIL  Vayu.  Indra−Vayu.  
1. Vayu,  the bright  is offered  thee,  best of the meath  at holy rites.  Come  thou to drink  the Soma  juice,  Go
d, longed−for,  on thy team−drawn  car.  
2 O Vayu,  thou and Indra  are meet  drinkers  of these  Soma−draughts,   
For unto you the drops  proceed  as waters  gather  to the vale.   
3 O Indra−Vayu,  mighty  Twain,  speeding  together,  Lords  of Strength,   
Come  to our succour  with your team,  that ye may drink  the Soma  juice.   
4 The longed−for  teams  which  ye possess,  O Heroes,  for the worshipper,   
Turn  to us, Indra−Vayu,  ye to whom  the sacrifice  is paid.   
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  XLVIII.  Vayu.  
1. TASTE  offerings  never  tasted  yet, as bards  enjoy  the foeman's  wealth.   
O Vayu,  on refulgent  car come  to the drinking  of the juice.   
2 Removing  curses,  drawn  by teams,  with 1ndra, seated  by thy side,  
O Vayu,  on refulgent  car come  to the drinking  of the juice.   
3 The two dark treasuries  of wealth  that wear   
all beauties  wait on thee.   
O Vayu,  on refulgent  car come  to the drinking  of the juice.   
4 May nine−and−ninety  harnessed  steeds who yoke  them  at thy will bring  thee.   
O Vayu,  on refulgent  car come  to the drinking  of the juice.   
5 Harness,  O Vayu,  to thy car a hundred  well−fed  tawny  steeds,   
Yea, or a thousand  steeds,  and let thy chariot  come  to us with might.   
 
HYMN  XLIX.  Indra−Brhaspati.  
1. DEAR  is this offering  in your mouth,  O Indra  and Brhaspati:  Famed  is the laud,  the gladdening  draught
.  
2 This lovely  Soma  is effused,  O Indra  and Brhaspati,   
For you, to drink  it and rejoice.   
3 As Soma−drinkers  to our house  come,  Indra  and Brhaspati−and  Indra−to  drink  Soma  juice.   
4 Vouchsafe  us riches  hundredfold,  O Indra,  and Brhaspati,   
With  store  of horses,  thousandfold.   
5 O Indra.  and Brhaspati,  we call you when  the meath  is shed,   
With  songs,  to drink  the Soma  juice.   
6 Drink,  Indra and Brhaspati,  the Soma  in the giver's  house:   
Delight  yourselves  abiding  there.   
 
HYMN  L. Brhaspati.  
1. Him who with might  hath propped  earth's  ends,  who sitteth  in threefold  seat, Brhaspati,  with thunder,   
Him of the pleasant  tongue  have  ancient  sages, deep−thinking,  holy singers,  set before  them.   
2 Wild  in their course,  in well−marked  wise rejoicing  were  they,  Brhaspati,  who pressed  around  us.  
Preserve  Brhaspati,  the stall uninjured,  this company's  raining,  ever−moving  birthplace.   
3 Brhaspati,  from thy remotest  distance  have  they sat down  who love the law eternal.   
For thee were  dug wells  springing  from  the mountain,  which  murmuring  round  about  pour streams  of 
sweetness.   
4 Brhaspati,  when  first he had his being  from  mighty  splendour  in supremest  heaven,   
Strong,  with his sevenfold  mouth,  with noise  of thunder,  with his seven  rays,  blew  and dispersed  the 
darkness.   
5 With  the loud−shouting  band  who sang his praises,  with thunder,  he destroyed  obstructive  Vala.   
Brhaspati  thundering  drave  forth  the cattle,  the lowing  cows  who make  oblations  ready.   
6 Serve  we with sacrifices,  gifts,  and homage  even  thus the Steer  of all the Gods,  the Father.   
Brhaspati,  may we be lords  of riches,  with noble  progeny  and store  of heroes.   
7 Surely  that King  by power  and might  heroic  hath made  him lord of all his foes' posses−ions,   
Who  cherishes  Brhaspati  well−tended,  adorns  and worships  him as foremost  sharer.   
8 In his own house  he dwells  in peace  and comfort:  to him for ever holy food flows  richly.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
To him the people  with free will pay homage−the  King  with whom  the Brahman  hatb precedence.   
9 He, unopposed,  is master  of the riches.of  his own subjects  and of hostile  people.   
The Gods  uphold  that King  with their protection  who helps  the Brahman  when  he seeks  his favour.   
10 Indra,  Brhaspati,  rainers  of treasure,  rejoicing  at this sacrifice  drink  the Soma.   
Let the abundant  drops  sink deep  within  you: vouchsafe  us riches  with full store  of heroes.   
11 Brhaspati  and Indra,  make  us prosper  may this be your benevolence  to usward.  
Assist  our holy thoughts,  wake  up our spirit:  weaken  the hatred  of our foe and rivals.   
 
HYMN  LI. Dawn.  
1. FORTH  from  the darkness  in the region  eastward  this most  abundant  splendid  light hatb mounted.   
Now  verily  the far−refulgent  Mornings,  Daughters  of Heaven,  bring  welfare  to the people.   
2 The richly−coloured  Dawns  have  mounted  eastward,  like pillars  planted at our sacrifices,   
And,  flushing  far, splendid  and purifying,  unbarred  the portals  of the fold of darkness.   
3 Dispelling  gloom  this day the wealthy  Mornings  urge liberal  givers  to present  their treasures.   
In the unlightened  depth  of darkness  round  them  let niggard  traffickers  sleep  unawakened.   
4 O Goddesses,  is this your car, I ask you, ancient  this day, or is it new,  ye Mornings,   
Wherewith,  rich Dawns,  ye seek with wealth  Navagva,  Dasagva  Angira,  the seven−toned  singer?   
5 With  horses  harnessed  by eternal  Order,  Goddesses,  swiftly  round  the worlds  ye travel,   
Arousing  from  their rest, O Dawns,  the sleeping,  and all that lives,  man,  bird, and beast,  to motion.   
6 Which  among  these  is eldest,  and where  is she through  whom  they fixed  the Rbhus'  regul ations?   
What  time the splendid  Dawns  go forth  for splendour,  they are not known  aparto  alike,  unwasting.   
7 Blest  were  these  Dawns  of old, shining  with succour,  true with the truth  that springs  from  holy Order;   
With  whom  the toiling  worshipper,  by praise s, hymning  and lauding,  soon  attained  to riches.   
8 Hither  from  eastward  all at once  they travel,  from  one place  spreading  in the selfsame  manner.   
Awaking,  from  the seat of holy Order  the Godlike  Dawns  come  nigh like troops  of cattle.   
9 Thus  they go forth with undiminished  colours,  these  Mornings  similar,  in self−same  fashion,   
Concealing  the gigantic  might  of darkness  with radiant  bodies  bright  and pure and shining.   
10 O Goddesses,  O Heaven's  refulgent  Daughters,  bestow  upon  us wealth  with store  of children.   
As from  our pleasant  place  of rest ye rouse  us may we be masters  of heroic  vigour.   
11 Well−skilled  in lore of sacrifice,  ye Daughters  of Heaven,  refulgent  Dawns,  I thus address  you.  
 
May we be glorious  among  the people.  May Heaven  vouchsafe  us this, and Earth  the Goddess,  
 
HYMN  LIL Dawm.  
1. THIS  Lady,  giver  of delight,  after her Sister  shining  forth,  Daughter  of Heaven,  hath shown  herself.−   
2 Unfailing,  Mother  of the Kine,  in colour  like a bright  red mare,   
The Dawn  became  the Asvins'  Friend.   
3 Yea, and thou art the Asvins'  Friend,  the Mother  of the Kine  art thou:   
O Dawn  thou rulest  over wealth.   
4 Thinking  of thee,  O joyous  One,  as her who driveth  hate away,   
We woke  to meet  thee with our lauds.   
5 Our eyes behold  thy blessed  rays like troops  of cattle  loosed  to feed.   
Dawn  hath filled  full the wide  expanse.   
6 When  thou hast filled  it, Fulgent  One!  thou layest  bare the gloom  with light.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
After  thy nature  aid us, Dawn.   
7 Thou  overspreadest  heaven  with rays,  the dear wide  region  of mid−air.   
With  thy bright  shining  lustre,  Dawn.   
 
HYMN  LIII. Savitar.  
1. OF Savitar  the God,  the sapient  Asura,  we crave  this great  gift which  is worthy  of our choice,   
Wherewith  he freely  grants  his worshiper  defence.  This with his rays the Great  God hath vouchsafed  to us
.  
2 Sustainer  of the heaven,  Lord  of the whole  world's  life, the Sage,  he putteth  on his golden−coloured  mai
l.  
Clear−sighted,  spreading  far, filling  the spacious  realm,  Savitar  hath brought  forth  bliss that deserveth  lau
d.  
3 He hath filled  full the regions  of the heaven  and earth:  the God for his own strengthening  waketh  up the 
hymn.   
Savitar  hath stretched  out his arms  to cherish  life, producing  with his rays and lulling  all that moves.   
4 Lighting  all living  creatures,  neer to be deceived,  Savitar,  God,  protects  each holy ordinance.   
He hath stretched  out his arms  to all the folk of earth,  and, with his laws observed,  rules  his own mighty  
course.   
5 Savitar  thrice  surrounding  with his mightiness  mid−air,  three  regions,  and the triple  sphere  of light,   
Sets the three  heavens  in motion  and the threefold  earth,  and willingly  protects  us with his triple  law.  
6 Most  gracious  God,  who brings  to life and lulls to rest, he who controls  the world,  what  moves  not and 
what  moves,   
May he vouchs afe us shelter,  −Savitar  the God,−  for tranquil  life, with triple  bar against  distress.   
7 With  the year's  seasons  hath Savitar,  God,  come  nigh:  may he prosper  our home,  give food and noble  so
ns.  
May he invigorate  us through  the days and nights,  and may he send us opulence  with progeny.   
 
HYMN  LIV. Savitar.  
1. Now  must  we praise  and honour  Savitar  the God:  at this time of the day the men must  call to him,  
Him who distributes  wealth  to Manu's  progeny,  that he may grant  us here riches  most  excellent.   
2 For thou at first producest  for the holy Gods  the noblest  of all portions,  immor−tality:   
Thereafter  as a gift to men,  O Savitar,  thou openest  existence,  life succeeding  life.  
3 If we, men as we are, have sinned  against  the Gods  through  want  of thought,  in weakness,  or through  
insolence,   
Absolve  us from  the guilt and make  us free from  sin, O Savitar,  alike  among  both Gods  and men.   
4 None  may impede  that power  of Savitar  the God whereby  he will maintain  the universal  world.   
What  the fair−fingered  God brings forth  on earth's  expanse  or in the heightof  heaven,  that work  of his stan
ds 
sure.   
 
5 To lofty  hills thou sendest  those  whom  Indra  leads,  and givest  fixed  abodes  with houses  unto these.  H
owever  they may fly and draw  themselves  apart,  still, Savitar,  they stand  obeying  thy behest.  6 May the 
libations  poured  to thee thrice  daily,  day after day, O Savitar,  bring  us blessing.  May Indra,  Heaven,  Ear
th, Sindhu  with the Waters,  Aditi  with Adityas,  give us shelter.  Rig Veda – English Translation  
 
HYMN  LV. Visvedevas.  
1. WHO  of you, Vasus,  saveth?  who protecteth?  O Heaven  and Earth  and Aditi,  preserve  us,  
Varuna.,  Mitra,  from  the stronger  mortal.  Gods,  which  of you at sacrifice  giveth  comfort?   
2 They  who with laud extol  the ancient  statutes,  when  they shine  forth  infallible  dividers,   
Have  ordered  as perpetual  Ordainers,  and beamed  as holy−thoughted  WonderWorkers.   
3 The Housewife  Goddess,  Aditi,  and Sindhu,  the Goddess  Svasti  I implore  for friendship:   
And may the unobstructed  Night  and Morning  both,  day and night,  provide  for our protectio n.  
4 Aryaman,  Varuna  have  disclosed  the pathway,  Agni  as Lord  of Strength  the road to welfare.   
Lauded  in manly  mode  may Indra−Visnu  grant  us their powerful  defence  and shelter.   
5 I have  besought  the favourof  the Maruts,  of Parvata,  of Bhaga  God who rescues.  
From  trouble  caused  by man the Lord  preserve  us; from  woe sent by his friend  let Mitra  save us.  
6 Agree,  through  these  our watery  oblations,  Goddesses,  Heaven  and Earth,  with Ahibudhnya.   
As if to win the sea, the Gharma−heaters  have  opened,  as they come  anear,  the rivers.   
7 May Goddess  Aditi  with Gods  defend  us, save us the saviour  God with care unceasing.   
We dare not stint the sacred  food of Mitra  and Varuna  upon  the back of Agni.   
8 Agni  is Sovran  Lord  of wealth,  Agni  of great  prosperity:   
May he bestow  these  gifts on us.  
9 Hither  to us, rich pleasant  Dawn,  bring  many  things  to be desired,   
Thou  who hast ample  store  of wealth.   
10 So then may Bhaga,  Savitar,  Varuna,  Mitra,  Aryaman,  Indra,  with bounty  come  to us.  
 
HYMN  LVI. Heaven  and Earth.  
1. MAY  mighty  Heaven  and Earth,  most  meet  for honour,  be present  here with light and gleaming  
splendours;   
When,  fixing  them  apart,  vast, most  extensive,  the Steer  roars  loudly  in far−reaching  courses.   
2 The Goddesses  with Gods,  holy with holy,  the Two stand pouring  out their rain, exhaustless:   
Faithful  and guileless,  having  Gods  for children,  leaders  of sacrifice  with shining  splendours.   
3 Sure in the worlds  he was a skilful  Craftsman,  he who produced  these  Twain  the Earth  and Heaven.   
Wise,  with his power he brought  both realms,  together  spacious  and deep,  wellfashioned,  unsupported.   
4 O Heaven  and Earth,  with one accord  promoting,  with high protection  as of Queens,  our welfare,   
Far−reaching,  universal,  holy,  guard  us. May we, car−borne,  through  song  be victors  ever.   
5 To both of you, O Heaven  and Earth,  we bring  our lofty  song  of praise,   
Pure Ones!  to glorify  you both.   
6 Ye sanctify  each other's  form,  by your own proper  might  ye rule,  
And from  of old observe  the Law.   
7 Furthering  and fulfilling,  ye, O Mighty,  perfect  Mitra's  Law.   
Ye sit around  our sacrifice.   
 
HYMN  LVII.  Ksetrapati,  Etc.  
1. WE through  the Master  of the Field,  even  as through  a friend,  obtain  What  nourisheth  our kine and stee
ds. In such may he be good  to us.  
2 As the cow yieldet h milk,  pour for us freely,  Lord  of the Field,  the wave  that beareth  sweetness,   Rig Veda – English Translation  
 
Distilling  meath,  well−purified  like butter,  and let the. Lords  of holy Law be gracious.   
3 Sweet  be the plants  for us. the heavens,  the waters,  and full of sweets  for us be air's mid−region.   
May the Field's  Lord  for us be full of sweetness,  and may we follow  after him uninjured.   
4 Happily  work  our steers  and men,  may the plough  furrow  happily.   
Happily  be the traces  bound;  happily  may he ply the goad.   
5 Suna  and Sira, welc ome ye this laud,  and with the milk which  ye have  made  in heaven   
Bedew  ye both this earth  of ours.   
6 Auspicious  Sita, come  thou near:  we venerate  and worship  thee  
That thou mayst  bless  and prosper  us and bring  us fruits  abundantly.   
7 May Indra  press  the furrow  down,  may Pusan  guide  its course  aright.   
May she, as rich in milk,  be drained  for us through  each succeeding  year.   
8 Happily  let the shares  turn up the ploughland,  happily  go the ploughers  with the oxen.   
With  meath  and milk Parjanya  make  us happy. Grant  us prosperity,  Suna  and Sira.  
 
HYMN  LVIII.  Ghrta.  
1. FORTH  from  the ocean  sprang  the wave  of sweetness:  together  with the stalk it turned  to Amrta,   
That which  is holy oil's mysterious  title: but the Gods'  tongue  is truly  Amrta's  centre.   
2 Let us declare  aloud  the name  of Ghrta,  and at this sacrifice  hold it up with homage.   
So let the Brahman  hear the praise  we utter.  This hath the four−horned  Buffalo  emitted.   
3 Four  are his horns,  three  are the feet that bear him; his heads  are two, his hands are seven  in number.   
Bound  with a triple  bond  the Steer  roars  loudly:  the mighty  God hath entered  in to mortals.   
4 That oil in triple  shape  the Gods  discovered  laid down  within  the Cow,  concealed  by Panis.   
Indra  produced  one shape,  Surya  another:  by their own power  they formed  the third  from  Vena.   
5 From  inmost  reservoir  in countless  channels  flow down  these  rivers  which  the foe beholds  not.  
I look upon  the streams  of oil descending,  and lo! the Golden  Reed  is there  among  them.   
6 Like rivers  our libations  flow together,  cleansing  themselves  in inmost  heart  and spirit.   
The streams  of holy oil pour swiftly  downward  like the wild beasts  that fly before  the bowman.   
7 As rushing  down  the rapids  of a river,  flow swifter  than the wind  the vigorous  curren ts,  
The streams  of oil in swelling  fluctuation  like a red courser  bursting  through  the fences.   
8.Like  women  at a gathering  fair to look on and gently  smiling,  they incline  to Agni.   
The streams  of holy oil attain  the fuel, and Jatavedas  joyfully  receives  them.   
9 As maidens  dock  themselves  with gay adornment  to join the bridal  feast,  I now behold  them.   
Where  Soma  flows  and sacrifice  is ready,  thither  the streams  of holy oil are running.   
10 Send  to our eulogy  a herd of cattle  bestow  upon  us excellent  possessions.   
Bear  to the Gods  the sacrifice  we offer  the streams  of oil flow pure and full of sweetness.   
11 The universe  depends  upon  thy power  and might  within  the sea, within  the heart,  within  all life.  
May we attain  that sweetly−flavoured  wave  of thine,  brought,  at its gathering,  o'er the surfaceof  the floods
.  
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
RIG VEDA  − BOOK  THE FIFTH  
HYMN  I. Agni  
1. Agni  is wakened  by the people's  fuel to meet  the Dawn  who cometh  like a milch−cow.   
Like young  trees  shooting  up on high their branches,  his flames  are rising  to the vault  of heaven.   
2 For worship  of the Gods  the Priest  was wakened:  at morning  gracious  Agni  hath arisen.   
Kindled,  his radiant  might  is made  apparent,  and the great  Deity  set free from  darkness.   
3 When  he hath stirred  the line of his attendants,  with the pure milk pure Agni  is anointed.   
The strength−bestowing  gift is then made  ready,  which  spread  in front,  with tongues,  erect,  he drinketh.   
4 The spirits  of the pious  turn together  to Agni,  as the eyes of all to Surya.   
 
He, when  both Dawns  of different  hues have  borne  him, springs  up at daybreak  as a strong  white  charger.   
5 The noble  One was born at days'  beginning,  laid red in colour  mid the well−laid  fuel.  
Yielding  in every  house  his seven  rich treasures,  Agni  is seated,  Priest  most  skilled  in worship.   
6 Agni  hath sat him down,  a Priest  most  skilful,  on a sweet−smelling  place,  his Mother's  bosom.   
Young,  faithful,  sage,  preeminent  o'er many,  kindled  among  the folk whom  he sustaineth.   
7 This Singer  excellent  at sacrifices,  Agni  the Priest,  they glorify  with homage.   
Him who spread  out both worlds  by Law Eternal  they balm  with oil, strong  Steed  who never  faileth.   
 
8. He, worshipful  House−Frien d, in his home  is worshipped,  our own auspicious  guest,  lauded  by sages.   
That strength  the Bull with thousand  horns  possesses.  In might,  O Agni,  thou excellest  others.   
9 Thou  quickly  passest  by all others,  Agni,  for him to whom  thou hast appeared  most  lovely,   
Wondrously  fair, adorable,  effulgent,  the guest  of men,  the darling  of the people.   
10 To thee,  Most  Youthful  God!  to thee,  O Agni  from  near and far the people  bring  their tribute.   
Mark  well the prayer  of him who best extols  thee.  Great,  high,  auspicious,  Agni,  is thy shelter.   
11 Ascend  to−day  thy splendid  car, O Agni,  in splendour,  with the Holy  Ones  around  it.  
Knowing  the paths  by mid−air's  spacious  region  bring  hither  Gods  to feast  on our oblation.   
12 To him adorable,  sage,  strong  and mighty  we have  sung  forth  our song  of praise  and homage.   
Gavisthira  hath raised  with prayer  to Agni  this laud far−reaching,  like gold light to heaven.   
 
HYMN  II. Agni.  
1. THE  youthful  Mother  keeps  the Boy in secret  pressed  to her close,  nor yields  him to the Father.  
But, when  he lies upon  the arm, the people  see his unfading  countenance  before  them.   
2 What  child  is this thou carriest  as handmaid,  O Youthful  One?  The Consort−Queen  hath bome  him.  
The Babe  unborn  increased  through  many  autumns.  I saw him born what time his Mother  bare him.  
3 I saw him from  afar gold−toothed,  bright−coloured,  hurling  his weapons  from  his habitation,   
What  time I gave him Amrta  free from  mixture.  How  can the Indraless,  the hymnless  harm  me?  
4 I saw him moving  from  the place  he dwells in, even  as with a herd,  brilliantly  shining.   
These  seized  him not: he had been  born already.  They  who were  grey with age again  grow  youthful.   
5 Who  separate  my young  bull from  the cattle,  they whose  protector  was in truth  no stranger?   
Let those  whose hands  have  seized  upon  them  free them.  May he, observant,  drive  the herd to us−ward.   
6 Mid mortal  men godless  have  secreted  the King  of all who live, home  of the people.   
So may the prayers  of Atri give him freedom.  Reproached  in turn be those  who now reproach  him.  
7 Thou  from  the stake  didst  loose  e'en Sunahsepa  bound  for a thousand;  for he prayed  with fervour.   
So, Agni,  loose  from  us the bonds  that bind us, when  thou art seated  here,  O Priest  who knowest.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
8 Thou  hast sped from  me, Agni,  in thine  anger:  this the protector  of Gods'  Laws  hath told me.  
Indra  who knoweth  bent his eye upon  thee:  by him instructed  am I come,  O Agni.   
9 Agni  shines  far and wide  with lofty  splendour,  and by his greatness  makes  all things  apparent.   
He conquers  godless  and malign  enchantments,  and sharpens  both his horns  to gore the Raksas.   
10 Loud  in the heaven  above  be Agni's  roarings  with keen−edged  weapons  to destroy  the demons.   
Forth  burst  his splendours  in the Soma's  rapture.  The godless  bands  press  round  but cannot  stayhim.   
11 As a skilled  craftsman  makes  a car, a singer  I, Mighty  One!  this hymn  for thee have  fashioned.   
If thou,  O Agni,  God,  accept  it gladly,  may we obtain  thereby  the heavenly  Waters.   
12 May he, the strong−necked  Steer,  waxing  in vigour,  gather  the foeman's  wealth  with none  to check  hi
m.  
Thus  to this Agni  have  the Immortals  spoken.  To man who spreads  the grass  may he grant  shelter,  grant  
shelter  to the man who brings  oblation.   
 
HYMN  III. Agni.  
1. THOU  at thy birth  art Varuna,  O Agni;  when  thou art kindled  thou becomest  Mitra.  In 
thee,  O Son of Strength,  all Gods  are centred.  Indra  art thou to man who brings  oblation.   
2 Aryaman  art thou as regardeth  maidens  mysterious,  is thy name,  O Self−sustainer.   
As a kind friend  with streams  of milk they balm  thee what  time thou makcst  wife and lord one−minded.   
3 The Maruts  deck their beauty  for thy glory,  yea, Rudra!  for thy birth fair, brightly−coloured.   
That which  was fixed  as Visnu's  loftiest  station−therewith  the secret  of the Cows  thou guardest.   
4 Gods  through  thy glory,  God who art so lovely!  granting  abundant  gifts gained  life immortal.   
As their own Priest  have  men estab lished  Agni;  and serve  him fain for praise  from  him who liveth.   
5 There  is no priest  more  skilled  than thou in worship;  none  Self−sustainer  pass thee in wisdom.   
Ile man within  whose  house  as guest  thou dwellest,  O God,  by sacrifice  shall  conquer  mortals.   
6 Aided  by thee,  O Agni  may we conquer  through  our oblation,  fain for wealth,  awakened:   
May we in battle,  in the days'  assemblies,O  Son of Strength,  by riches  conquer  mortals.   
7 He shall  bring  evil on the evil−plottcr  whoever  turns  against  us sin and outrage.   
Destroy  this calumny  of him, O Agni,  whoever  injures  us with double−dealing.   
8 At this dawn's  flushing,  God!  our ancient  fathers  served  thee with offerings,  making  thee their envoy,   
When,  Agni,  to the store  of wealth  thou goest,  a God cnkindled  with good  things  by mortals.   
9 Save,  thou who knowest,  draw  thy father  near thee,  who counts  as thine  own son, O Child  of Power.   
O sapient  Agni,  when  wilt thou regard  us? When,  skilled  in holy Law,  wilt thou direct  us?  
10 Adoring  thee he gives  thee many  a title, when  thou,  Good  Lord!  acceptest  this as Father.   
And doth not Agni,  glad in strength  of Godhead,  gain splendid  bliss when  he hath waxen  mighty?   
11 Most  Youthful  Agni,  verily  thou bearest  thy praiser  safely  over all his troubles.   
Thieves  have  been seen by us and open  foemen:  unknown  have  been  the plottings  of the wicked.   
12 To thee these  eulogies  have been  directed:  or to the Vasu  hath this sin been  spoken.   
But this our Agni,  flaming  high,  shall  never  yield  us to calumny,  to him who wrongs  us.  
 
HYMN  IV. Agni.  
1. O AGNI,  King  and Lord  of wealth  and treasures,  in thee is my delight  at sacrifices.   
Through  thee may we obtain  the strength  we long for, and overcome  the fierce  attacks  of mortals.   
2 Agni,  Eternal  Father,  offering−  bearer,  fair to behold,  far−reaching , far−refulgent,   
From  well−kept  household  fire beam  food to feed us, and measure  out to us abundant  glory.   
3 The Sage  of men,  the Lord  of human  races,  pure,  purifying  Agni,  balmed  with butter,   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Him the Omniscient  as your Priest  ye stablish:  he wins among  the Gods  things  worth  the choosing.   
4 Agni,  enjoy,  of one accord  with Ila, striving  in rivalry  with beams  of Sarya,   
Enjoy,  O Jatavedas,  this our fuel, and bring  the Gods  to us to taste oblations.   
5 As dear House−Friend,  guest  welcome  in the dwelling,  to this our sacrifice  come  thou who knowest.   
And,  Agni,  having  scattered  all assailants,  bring  to us the possessions  of our foemen.   
6 Drive  thou away  the Dasyu  with thy weapon.  As, gaining  vital power  for thine  own body,   
O Son of Strength,  the Gods  thou satisfiest,  so in fight  save us, most  heroic  Agni.   
7 May we, O Agni,  with our lauds  adore  thee,  and with our gifts,  fair−beaming  Purifier!   
Send  to us wealth  containing  all things  precious:  bestow  upon  us every  sort of riches.   
8 Son of Strength,  Agni,  dweller in three  regions,  accept  our sacrifice  and our oblation.   
Among  the Gods  may we be counted  pious:  protect  us with a triply−guarding  shelter.   
9 Over  all woes  and dangers,  Jatavedas,  bear us as in a boat across  a river.   
Praised  with our homage  even  as Atri praised  thee,  O Agni,  be the guardian  of our bodies.   
10 As I, remembering  thee with grateful  spirit,  a mortal,  call with might  on thee Immortal,   
Vouchsafe  us high renown,  O Jatavedas,  and may I be immortal  by my children.   
11 The pious  man,  O Jatavedas  Agni,  to whom  thou grantest  ample  room  and pleasure,   
Gaineth  abundant  wealth  with sons and horses,  with heroes  and with kine for his well−being.   
 
HYMN  V. Apris.  
1. To Agni,  Jatavedas,  to the flame,  the well−enkindled  God,  Offer  thick  sacrificial  oil.  
2 He, Narasamsa,  ne'er  beguiled,  inspiriteth  this sacrifice:   
For sage is he, with sweets  in hand.   
3 Adored,  O Agni,  hither  bring  Indra  the Wonderful,  the Friend,   
On lightly−rolling  car to aid.  
4 Spread  thyself  out, thou soft as wool  The holy hymn s have  sung  to thee.   
Bring  gain to us, O beautiful!   
5 Open  yourselves,  ye Doors  Divine,  easy of access  for our aid:  
Fill, more  and more,  the sacrifice.   
6 Fair strengtheners  of vital power,  young  Mothers  of eternal  Law,   
Morning  and Night  we supplicate.   
7 On the wind's  flight  come,  glorified,  ye two celestial  Priests  of man  
Come  ye to this our sacrifice.   
8 l! Sarasvati,  Mahl,  three  Goddesses  who tring  us weal,   
Be seated  harmless  on the grass.   
9 Rich  in all plenty,  Tvastar,  come  auspicious  of thine  own accord   
Help  us in every  sacrifice.   
10 Vanaspati,  wherever  thou knowest  the Gods'  mysterious  names,   
Send  our oblations  thitherward.   
11 To Agni  and to Varuna,  Indra,  the Maruts,  and the Gods,   
With  Svaha  be oblation  brought.   
 
HYMN  VI. Agni.  
1. I VALUE  Agni  that good  Lord,  the home  to which  the kine return:  Whom  fleet−foot  coursers  seek as h
ome,  and strong  enduring  steeds  as home.  Bring  food to those  who sing 
thy praise.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
2 'Tis Agni  whom  we laud as good,  to whom  the milch−kine  come  in herds,   
To whom the chargers  swift  of foot, to whom  our well−born  princes  come.  Bring  food to those  who sing t
hy 
praise.   
3 Agni  the God of all mankind,  gives,  verily,  a steed  to man.   
Agni  gives  precious  gear for wealth,  treasure  he gives  when  he is pleased.  Bring  food to those  who sing th
y 
praise.   
4 God,  Agni,  we will kindle  thee,  rich in thy splendour,  fading  not,  
So that this glorious  fuel may send forth  by day its light for thee.  Bring  food to those  who sing thy praise.   
5 To thee the splendid,  Lord  of flame,  bright, wondrous,  Prince  of men,  is brought.   
Oblation  with the holy verse,  O Agni,  bearer  of our gifts.   
Bring  food to those  who sing thy praise.   
6 These  Agnis  in the seats  of the fire nourish  each thing  most  excellent.   
They  give delight,  they spread  abroad , they move  themselves  continually.  Bring  food to those  who sing th
y 
praise.   
7 Agni,  these  brilliant  flames  of thine  wax like strong  chargers  mightily,   
Who  with the treadings  of their hoofs  go swiftly  to the stalls  of kine.  Bring  food to those  who sing thy pra
ise.  
8 To us who laud thee,  Agni,  bring  fresh  food and safe and happy  homes.   
May we who have  sung  hymns  to thee have  thee for envoy  in each house.  Bring  food to those  who sing th
y 
praise.   
9 Thou,  brilliant  God,  within  thy mouth  warmest  both ladies  of the oil.  
 
So fill us also, in our hymns,  abundantly,  O Lord  of Strength,Bring  food to those  who sing thy praise.   
10 Thus  Agni  have  we duly served  with sacrifices  and with hymns.   
So may he give us what  we crave,  store  of brave  sons and fleet−foot  steeds. Bring  food to those  who sing 
thy 
praise.   
 
HYMN  VII. Agni.  
1. OFFER  to Agni,  O my friends,  your seemly  food,  your seemly  praise;  To him supremest  o'er the folk, t
he Son of Strength,  the mighty  Lord:   
2 Him in whose  presence,  when  they meet  in full assembly,  men rejoice;   
Even  him whom  worthy  ones inflame,  and living  creatures  bring  to life.  
3 When  we present  to him the food and sacrificial  gifts of men,   
He by the might  of splendour  grasps  the holy Ordinance's  rein.  
4 He gives  a signal  in the night  even  to him who is afar,  
When  he, the Bright,  unchanged  by eld, consumes  the sovrans  of the wood.   
5 He in whose  service  on the ways  they offer  up their drops  of sweat,   
On him is their high kin have they mounted,  as ridges  on the earth.   
6 Whom,  sought  of many,  mortal  man hath found  to be the Stay of all;  
He who gives  flavour  to our food,  the home  of every  man that lives.   
7 Even  as a herd that crops  the grass  he shears  the field and wilderness,   Rig Veda – English Translation  
With  flashing  teeth  and beard  of gold,  deft with his unab ated might.   
8 For him, to whom,  bright  as an axe he, as to Atri, hath flashed  forth,   
Hath  the well−bearing  Mother  borne,  producing  when  her time is come.   
9 Agni  to whom  the oil is shed by him thou lovest  to support,   
Bestow  upon  these  mortals  fame  and splendour  and intelligence.   
10 Such  zeal hath he, resistless  one: he gained  the cattle  given  by thee.   
Agni,  may Atri overcome  the Dasyus  who bestow  no gifts,  subdue  the men who give no food.   
 
HYMN  VIII. Agni.  
1. O AGNI  urged  to strength,  the men of old who loved  the Law enkindled  thee,   
the Ancient,  for their aid,  
Thee  very bright,  and holy,  nourisher  of all, most  excellent,  the Friend  and Master  of the home.   
2 Thee,  Agni,  men have  stablished  as their guest  of old, as Master  of the household,  thee,  with hair of fla
me;  
High−bannered,  multiform,  distributor  of wealth,  kind helper,  good  protector,  drier of the floods.   
3 The tribes  of men praise  thee,  Agni,  who knowest  well burnt  offerings,  the Discerner,  lavishest  of wealt
h,  
Dwelling  in secret,  Blest  One! visible  to all, loud−roaring,  skilled  in worship,  glorified  with oil.  
4 Ever  to thee,  O Agni,  as exceeding  strong  have  we drawn  nigh with songs  and reverence  singing  hymns.
  
So be thou pleased  with us, Angiras!  as a God enkindled  by the noble  with man's goodly  light.   
5 Thou,  Agni!  multiform,  God who art lauded  much!  givest  in every  house  subsistence  as of old.  
Thou  rulest  by thy might  o'er food of many  a sort: that light of thine  when  blazing  may not be opposed.   
6 The Gods,  Most  Youthful  Agni,  have  made  thee,  inflamed,  the bearer  of oblations  and the messenger.   
Thee,  widely−reaching,  homed  in sacred  oil, invoked,  effulgent,  have they made  the Eye that stirs the 
thought.   
7 Men seeking  joy have  lit thee worshipped  from  of old, O Agni,  with good  fuel and with sacred  oil.  
So thou,  bedewed  and waxing  mighty  by the plants,  spreadest  thyself  abroad  over the realms  of earth.   
 
HYMN  IX. Agni.  
1. BEARING;  oblations  mortal  men,  O Agni,  worship  thee the God.  I deem  thee Jatavedas:  bear our offer
ings,  thou,  unceasingly.   
2 In the man's  home  who offers gifts,  where  grass  is trimmed,  Agni  is Priest,   
To whom  all sacrifices  come  and strengthenings  that win renown.   
3 Whom,  as an infant  newly−born,  the kindling−sticks  have  brought  to life,  
Sustainer  of the tribes  of men,  skilled  in well−ordered  sacrif ice.  
4 Yea, very hard art thou to grasp,  like offspring  of the wriggling  snakes,   
When  thou consumest  many  woods  like an ox, Agni,  in the mead.   
5 Whose  flames,  when  thou art sending  forth  the smoke,  completely  reach  the mark,   
When  Trta in the height  of heaven,  like as a smelter  fanneth  thee,  e'en as a smelter  sharpeneth  thee.   
6 O Agni,  by thy succour  and by Mitra's  friendly  furtherance,   
May we, averting  hate,  subbue  the wickedness  of mortal  men.   
7 O Agni,  to our heroes  bring  such riches,  thou victorio us God.   
May he protect  and nourish  us, and help in aining  strength:  be thou near us in 6rht for our success.   
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  X. Agni.  
1. BRING  us most  mighty  splendour  thou,  Agni,  resistless  on thy way.  With  overflowing  store  of wealth  
mark  out for us a path to strength.   
2 Ours  art thou,  wondrous  Agni,  bywisdom  and bounteousness  of power.   
The might  of Asuras  rests on thee,  like Mitra  worshipful  in act.  
3 Agni,  increase  our means  of life, increase  the house  and home  of these,   
The men,  the princes  who have won great  riches  through  our hymns  of praise.   
4 Bright  Agni,  they who deck their songs  for thee have  horses  as their meed.   
The men are mighty  in their might,  they whose  high laud,  as that of heaven,  awakes  thee of its own accor
d.  
5 O Agni,  those  resplendent  flames  of thine  go valorously  forth,   
Like lightnings  flashing  round  us, like a rattling  car that seeks  the spoil.   
6 Now,  Agni,  come  to succour  us; let priests  draw  nigh to offer  gifts;   
And let the patrons  of our rites subdue  all regions  of the earth.   
7 Bring  to us, Agni,  Angiras,  lauded  of old and lauded  now,   
Invoker!  wealth  to quell  the strong,  that singers  may extol  thee.  Be near us in fight  for our success.   
 
HYMN  XI. Agni.  
1. THE  watchful  Guardian  of the people  hath been  born,  Agni,  the very strong, for fresh  prosperity.   
With  oil upon  his face,  with high heaventouching  flame,  he shineth  splendidly,  pure,  for the Bharatas.   
2 Ensign  of sacrifice,  the earliest  Household−Priest,  the. men have  kindled  Agni  in his threefold  seat,  
With  Indra  and the Gods  together  on the grass  let the wise Priest  sit to complete  the sacrifice.   
3 Pure , unadorned,  from  thy two Mothers  art thou born:  thou camest  fromVivasvan  as a charming  Sage.   
With  oil they strengthened  thee,  O Agni,  worshipped  God:  thy banner  was the smoke  that mounted  to the 
sky.  
4 May Agni  graciously  come  to our sacrifice.  The men bear Agni  here and there  in every  house.   
He hath become  an envoy,  bearer  of our gifts:  electing  Agni,  men choose  one exceeding  wise.   
5 For thee,  O Agni,  is this sweetes t prayer  of mine:  dear to thy spirit  be this product  of my thought.   
As great  streams  fill the river  so our song  of praise  fill thee,  and make  thee yet more  mighty  in thy strengt
h.  
6 O Agni,  the Angirases  discovered  thee what  time thou layest  hidden,  fleeing back from  wood  to wood.   
Thou  by attrition  art produced  as conquer.ing  might,  and men,  O Angiras,  call thee the Son of Strength.   
 
HYMN  XII. Agni.  
I. To Agni,  lofty  Asura,  meet  for worship,  Steer  of eternal  Law,  my prayer  I offer;   
I bring  my song  directed  to the Mighty  like pure oil for his mouth  at sacrifices.   
2 Mark  the Law,  thou who knowest,  yea, observe  it: send forth  the full streams  of eternal  Order.   
I use no sorcery  with might  or falsehood  the sacred  Law of the Red Steer  I follow.   
3 How  hast thou,  follower  of the Law eternal,  become  the knower  of a new song,  Agni?   
The God,  the Guardian  of the seasons,  knows  me: the Lord  of him who won this wealth  I know  not.  
4 Who,  Agni,  in alliance  with thy foeman,  what  splendid  helpers  won for them  their riches?   
Agni,  who guard  the dwelling−place  of falsehood?  Who  are protectors  of the speech  of liars?   
5 Agni,  those  friends  of thine  have  turned  them  from  thee:  gracious  of old, they have  become  ungracious.   
They  have  deceived  themselves  by their own speeches,  uttering  wicked  words  against  the righteous.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
6 He who pays sacrifice  to thee with homage,  O Agni,  keeps  the Red Steer's  Law eternal;   
Wide  is his dwelling.  May the noble  offipring  of Nahusa  who wandered  forth  come  hither.   
 
HYMN  XIII. Agni.  
1. WIT H songs  of praise  we call on thee,  we kindle  thee with songs  of praise,   
Agni,  −with  songs  of praise,  for help.   
2 Eager  for wealth,  we meditate  Agni's  effectual  praise  to−day,   
Praise  of the God who touches  heaven.   
3 May Agni,  Priest  among  mankind,  take pleasure  in our songs  of praise,   
And worship  the Celestial  Folk.   
4 Thou,  Agni,  art spread  widely  forth,  Priest  dear and excellent;  through  thee  
Men make  the sacrifice  complete.   
5 Singers  exalt  thee,  Agni,  well lauded,  best giver  of our strength:   
So grant thou us heroic  might.   
6 Thou  Agni,  as the felly rings  the spokes,  encompassest  the Gods.   
1 yearn  for bounty  manifold.   
 
HYMN  XIV. Agni.  
1. ENKINDLING  the Immortal,  wake  Agni  with song  of praise:  may he bear our oblations  to the Gods.   
2 At high solemnities  mortal  men glorify  him the Immortal,  best  
At sacrifice  among  mankind.   
3 That he may bear their gifts to heaven,  all glorify  him Agni,  God,   
With  ladle  that distilleth  oil.  
4 Agni  shone  bright  when  born,  with light killing  the Dasyus  and the dark:  
He found  the Kine,  the Floods,  the Sun.  
5 Serve  Agni,  God adorable,  the Sage  whose  back is balmed  with oil:  
Let him approach,  and hear my call.  
6 They  have  exalted  Agni,  God of all mankind,  with oil and hymns   
Of praise,  devout  and eloquent.   
 
HYMN  XV. Agni.  
1. To him, the far−renowned,  the wise Ordainer,  ancient  and glorious,  a song  I offer.   
Enthroned  in oil, the Asura,  bliss−giver,  is Agni,  firm support  of noble,  riches.   
2 By holy Law they kept supporting  Order,  by help of sacrifice,  in lofties t heaven,−   
They  who attained  with born men to the unborn,  men seated  on that stay, heaven's  firm sustainer.   
 
3 Averting  woe,  they labour  hard to bring  him, the ancient,  plenteous  food as power  resistless.   
May he, born newly,  conquer  his assailants:  round him they stand  as round  an angry  lion.  
4 When,  like a mother,  spreading  forth  to nourish,  to cherish  and regard  each man that liveth,−   
Consuming  all the strength  that thou hast gotten,  thou wanderest  round,  thyself,   
in varied  fashion.   
5 May strength  preserve  the compass  of thy vigour,  God!  that broad  stream  of thine  that beareth  riches.   
Thou,  like a thief who keeps  his refuge  secret,  hast holpen  Atri to great  wealth,  by teaching.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
 
HYMN  XVI. Agni.  
1. GREAT  power  is in the beam  of light,  sing praise  to, Agni,  to the God  
Whom  men have  set in foremost  place  like Mitra  with their eulogies.   
2 He by the splendour  of his arms  is Priest  of every  able man.   
Agni  conveys  oblation  straight,  and deals,  as Bhaga  deals,  his boons.   
3 All rests upon  the laud and love of him the rich, high−flaming  God,   
On whom,  loud−roaring,  men have  laid great  strength  as on a faithful  friend.   
4 So, Agni,  be the Friend  of these  with liberal  gift of hero strength.   
Yea, Heaven  and Earth  have not surpassed  this Youthful  One in glorious  fame.   
5 O Agni,  quickly  come  to us, and, glorified,  bring  precious  wealth.   
So we and these  our princes  will assemble  for the good  of all. Be near in fight  to prosper  us.  
 
HYMN  XVII.  Agni.  
1. GOD,  may a mortal  call the Strong  hither,  with solemn  rites,  to aid, A man call Agni  to protect  when  sa
crifice  is well prepared.   
2 Near  him thou seemest  mightier  still in native  glory,  set to hold  
Apart  yon flame−hued  vault  of heaven,  lovely  beyond  the thought  of man.   
3 Yea, this is by the light of him whom  powerful  siong  hath bound  to act,  
Whose  bearns  of splendour  flash  on high as though  they sprang  from  heavenly  seed.   
4 Wealth  loads  the Wonder−Worker's  car through  his, the very wise One's  power.   
Then,  meet  to be invoked  among  all tribes,  is Agni  ghorified.   
5 Now,  too, the princes  shall  obtain  excellent  riches  by our lips.  
Protect  us for our welfare:  lend thy succour,  O thou Son of Strength.  Be near in fight to prosper  us.  
 
HYMN  XVIII.  Agni.  
1. AT dawn  let: Agni,  much−beloved  guest  of the house,  be glorified;  Immortal  who delights  in all oblati
ons brought  by mortal  men.   
2 For Dvita  who receives  through  wealth  of native  strength  maimed  offerings,   
Thy praiser  even  gains  at once  the Soma−drops,  Immortal  Gods!   
3 Nobles,  with song  I call that car of yours  that shines  with lengthened  life,  
For, God who givest  steeds!  that car hither  and thither  goes unharmed.   
4 They  who have  varied  ways  of thought,  who guard,  the lauds  within  their lips,  
And strew the grass  before  the light,  have decked  themselves  with high renown.   
5 Immortal  Agni,  give the chiefs,  heroes  who institute  the rite,  
Heroes'  illustrious,  lofty  fame,  who at the synod  met for praise  presented  me with fifty steeds.   
 
HYMN  XIX. Agni.  
1. ONE  state begets  another  state:  husk is made  visible  from  husk:  Within  his Mother's  side he speaks.   
2 Discerning,  have  they offered  gifts:  they guard  the strength  that never  wastes.   
To a strong  fort have they pressed  in.  
3 Svaitreya's  people,  all his men,  have  gloriously  increased  in might.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
A gold chain  Brhaduktha  wears,  as, through  this Soma,  seeking  spoil.   
4 I bring,  as 'twere,  the longed−for  milk,  the dear milk of the Sister−Pair.   
Like to a caldron  filled  with food is he, unconquered,  conquerin g all.  
5 Beam  of light,  come  to us in sportive  fashion,  finding  thyself  close  to the wind  that fans thee.   
These  flames  of his are wasting  flames,  like arrows  keen−pointed,  sharpened,  on his breast.   
 
HYMN  XX. Agni.  
1. AGNI,  best winner  of the spoil,  cause us to praise  before  the Gods  As our associate  meet  for lauds,  wea
lth which  thou verily  deemest  wealth.   
2 Agni,  the great  who ward  not off the anger  of thy power  and might   
Stir up the wrath  and hatred  due to one who holds  an alien  creed.   
3 Thee,  Agni , would  we choose  as Priest,  the perfecter  of strength  and skill;   
We who bring  sacred  food invoke  with song  thee Chief  at holy rites.   
4 Here  as is needful  for thine  aid we toil, O Conqueror,  day by day,  
For wealth,  for Law.  May we rejoice,  Most  Wise  One! at the feast,  with kine,  rejoice,  with heroes,  at the 
feast.   
 
HYMN  XXI. Agni.  
1. WE stablish  thee as Manus  used,  as Manus  used we kindle  thee.  Like Manus,  for the pious  man , Angir
as, Agni,  worship  Gods.   
2 For well,  O Agni,  art thou pleased  when  thou art kindled  mid mankind.   
Straight  go the ladles  unto thee,  thou highborn  God whose  food is oil.  
3 Thee  have all Gods  of one accord  established  as their messenger.   
Serving  at sacrifices  men adore  thee as a God,  O Sage.   
4 Let mortal  man adore  your God,  Agni,  with worship  due to Gods.   
Shine  forth  enkindled,  Radiant  One.  Sit in the chamber  of the Law,  sit in the chamber  of the food.   
 
HYMN  XXII.  Agni.  
1. LIKE  Atri, Visvasaman!  sing to him of purifying  light,  Who  must  be praised  in holy rites,  the Priest  mo
st welcome  in the house.   
2 Set Jatavedas  in his place,  Agni  the God and Minister.   
Let sacrifice  proceed  to−day  duly,  comprising  all the Gods.   
3 All mortals  come  to thee for aid, the God of most  observant  mind.   
Of thine  excelling  favour  we bethink  us as we long for it.  
4 Mark  with attention  this our speech,  O Agni,  thou victorious  One.   
Thee,  Strong−jawed!  as the homestead's  Lord,  the Atris  with their lauds  exalt,  the Atris  beautify  with son
gs.  
 
HYMN  XXIII.  Agni.  
1. By thy fair splendour's  mighty  power,  O Agni,  bring  victorious  wealth,   
Wealth  that o'ercometh  all mankind,  and, near us, conquereth  in fight.   
2 Victorious  Agni,  bring  to us the wealth  that vanquisheth  in war;  Rig Veda – English Translation  
For thou art wonderful  and true, giver  of strength  in herds  of kine.   
3 For all the folk with one accord,  whose  sacred  grass  is trimmed  and strewn,   
Invite  thee to their worship−halls,  as a dear Priest,  for choicest  wealth.   
4 For he, the God of all men,  hath gotten  him might  that quelleth  foes.   
O Agni,  in these  homes  shine  forth, bright  God!  for our prosperity,  shine,  Purifier!  splendidly.   
 
HYMN  XXIV.  Agni.  
1. O AGNI,  be our nearest  Friend,  be thou a kind deliverer  and a gracious  Friend.   
2 Excellent  Agni,  come  thou nigh to us, and give us wealth  most  splendidly  renowned.   
3 So hear us, listen  to this call of ours,  and keep  us far from  every  sinful  man.   
4 To thee then,  O Most  Bright,  O Radiant  God,  we come  with prayer  for happiness  for our friends.   
 
HYMN  XXV.  Agni.  
1. I WILL  sing near,  for grace,  your God Agni,  for he is good to us. Son of the Brands,  may he give gifts,  
and, righteous,  save us from  the foe. 2 For be is true, whpm  men of old enkindled,  and the Gods  themselv
es, The Priest  with the delicious  tongue,  rich with the light of glorious  beams.  3 With  wisdom  that surpass
eth all, with gracious  will most  excellent,  O Agni,  worthy  of our choice,  shine  wealth  on us through  hymn
s of praise.  4 Agni  is King,  for he extends  to mortals  and to Gods  alike.  Agni  is bearer  of our gifts.  Worsh
ip ye Agni  with your thoughts.  5 Agni  gives to the worshipper  a son, the best, of mightiest  fame,  Of deep  
devotion,  ne'er  subdued,  bringer  of glory  to his sire. 6 Agni  bestows  the hero−lord  who conquers  with the 
men in fight.  Agni  bestows  the fleet−foot  steed,  the victor  never  overcome.  7 The mightiest  song is Agni's
: shine  on high,  thou who art rich in light.  Like the Chief  Consort  of a King,  riches  and strength  proceed  −
from  thee.  8 Resplendent  are thy rays of light:  loud is thy voice  like pressing−stones.  Yea, of itself  thy thu
nder goes forth  like the roaring  of the heaven.  9 Thus,  seeking  riches,  have  we paid homage  to Agni  Conq
ueror.  May he, most  wise,  as with a ship,  carry  us over all our foes.  
 
HYMN  XXVI.  Agni.  
1. O AGNI,  Holy  and Divine,  with splendour  and thy pleasant  tongue  Bring  hither and adore  the Gods.   
2 We pray thee,  thou who droppest  oil, bright−rayed!  who lookest  on the Sun,  
Bring  the Gods  hither  to the feast.   
3 We have enkindled  thee,  O Sage,  bright  caller  of the Gods  to feast.   
O Agni,  great  in Sacrifice.   
4 O Agni,  come  with all the Gods,  come  to our sacrificial  gift:  
We choose  thee as Invoking  Priest.   
5 Bring,  Agni,  to the worshipper  who pours  the juice,  heroic  strength:   
 
Sit with the Gods  upon  the grass.   
6 Victor  of thousands,  Agni,  thou,  enkindled,  cherishest  the laws,  
Laud−worthy,  envoy  of the Gods.   
7 Set Agni  Jatavedas  down,  the bearer  of our sacred  gifts,   
MostYouthful,  God and Minister.   
8 Duly  proceed  our sacrifice,  comprising  all the Gods,  to−day:   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Strew  holy grass  to be their seat.  
9 So may the Maruts  sit thereon,  the Asvins,  Mitra,  Varuna:   
The Gods  with all their company.   
 
HYMN  XXVII.  Agni.  
1. THE  Godlike  hero,  famousest  of nobles,  hath granted  me two oxen  with a wagon.   
Trvrsan's  son Tryaruna  hath distinguished  himself,  Vaisvanara  Agni!  with ten thousan ds.  
2 Protect  Tryaruna,  as thou art waxing  strong  and art highly  praised,  Vaisvanara  Agni!   
Who  granteth  me a hundred  kine and twenty,  and two bay horses,  good  at draught,  and harnessed.   
3 So Trasadasyu  served  thee,  God Most  Youthful,  craving  thy favour  for the ninth  time,  Agni;   
Tryaruya  who with attentive  spirit  accepteth  many  a song  from  me the mighty.   
4 He who declares  his wish  to me, to Asvamedha,  to the Prince,   
Pays  him who with his verse  seeks  gain,  gives  power  to him who keeps  the Law.   
5 From  whom a hundred  oxen,  all of speckled  hue, delight  my heart,   
The gifts of Asvamedha,  like thrice−mingled  draughts  of Soma  juice.   
6 To Asvamedha  who bestows  a hundred  gifts grant  hero power,   
O Indra−Agni!  lofty  rule like the unwasting  Sun in heaven.   
 
HYM N XXVIII.  Agni.  
1. AGNI  inflamed  hath sent to heaven  his lustre:  he shines  forth  widely  turning  unto Morning.   
Eastward  the ladle  goes that brings  all blessing,  praising  the Godswith  homage  and oblation.   
2 Enkindled,  thou art King  of the immortal  world:  him who brings  offerings  thou attendest  for his weal.   
He whom  thou urgest  on makes  all possessions  his: he sets before  thee,  Agni,  gifts that guests  may claim.   
3 Show  thyself  strong  for mighty  bliss,  O Agni,  most  excellent  be thine  effulgent  splendours.   
Make  easy to maintain  our household  lordship,  and overcome  the might  of those  who hate us.  
4 Thy glory,  Agni,  I adore,  kindled,  exalted  in thy strength.   
A Steer  of brilliant  splendour,  thou art lighted  well at sacred  rites.   
5 Agni,  invoked  and kindled,  serve  the Gods,  thou skilled  in sacrifice:   
For thou art bearer  of our gifts.   
6 Invoke  and worship  Agni  while  the sacrificial  rite proceeds:   
For offering−bearer  choose  ye him.  
 
HYMN  XXIX.  Agni.  
1. MAN'S  worship  of the Gods  hath three  great  lustres,  and three  celestial  lights  have they established   
The Maruts  gifted  with pure strength  adore  thee,  for thou,  O Indra,  art their sapient  Rsi.  
2 What  time the Maruts  sang their song  to Indra,  joyous  when  he had drunk  of Soma  juices,   
He grasped  his thunderbo lt to slay the Dragon,  and loosed,  that they might  flow,  the youthful  Waters.   
3 And,  O ye Brahmans,  Maruts,  so may Indra  drink  draughts  of this my carefully  pressed  Sorna;   
For this oblation  found  for man the cattle,  and Indra,  having  quaffed  it, slew the Dragon.   
4 Then  heaven  and earth  he sundered  and supported:  wrapped  even  in these  he struck  the Beast  with terror
.  
So Indra  forced  the Engulfer  to disgorgement,  and slew the Danava.  panting  against  him.  
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
5 Thus  all the Gods,  O Maghavan,  delivered  to thee of their free will the draught  of Soma;   
When  thou for Etasa  didst  cause  to tarry the flying  mares  of Surya  racing  forward.   
6 When  Maghavan  with the thunderbolt  demolished  his nine−and−ninety  castles  all together,   
The Maruts,  where  they met, glorified  Indra:  ye with the Trstup  hymn  obstructed  heaven.   
7 As friend  to aid a friend,  Agni  dressed  quickly  three  hundred  buffaloes,  even  as he willed  it.  
And Indra,  from  man's  gift, for Vrtra's  slaughter,  drank  ofr at once  three  lakes  of pressed−out  Soma.   
8 When  thou three  hundred  buffaloes'  flesh  hadst  eaten,  and drunk,  as Maghavan,  three  lakes  of Soma,   
All the Gods  raised  as 'twere  a shout  of triumph  to Indra  praise  because  he slew the Dragon.   
9 What  time ye came  with strong  steeds  swiftly  speeding,  O Usana  and Indra,  to the dwelling,   
Thou  camest  thither  −conquering  together  with Kutsa  and the Gods:  thou slewest  Susna.   
10 One car−wheel  of the Sun thou rolledst  forward,  and one thou settest  free to move  for Kutsa.   
Thou  slewest  noseless  Dasyus  with thy weapon,  and in their home  o'erthrewest  hostile  speakers.   
11 The lauds  of Gauriviti  made  thee mighty  to Vidathin's  son, as prey,  thou gavest  Pipru.   
Rjisivan  drew  thee into friendship  dressing  the sacred  food,  and thou hast drunk  his Soma.   
12 Navagvas  and Dasgvas  with libations  of Soma  juice  sing hymns  of praise  to Indra.   
Labouring  at their task the men laid open  the stall of Kine  though  firmly closed  and fastened.   
13 How  shall  I serve  thee,  Maghavan,  though  knowing  full well what  hero deeds  thou hast accomplished?
  
And the fresh  deeds  which  thou wilt do, Most  Mighty!  these,  too, will we tell forth  in sacred  synods.   
14 Resistless  from  of old through  hero courage,  thou hast done  all these  many  acts, O Indra.   
What  thou wilt do in bravery,  Thunder−wielder!  none  is there  who may hinder  this thy prowess.   
15 Indra,  accept  the prayers  which  now are offered,  accept  the new prayers,  Mightiest!  which  we utter.   
Like fair and well−made  robes,  I, seeking  riches,  as a deft craftsman  makes  a car, have  wrought  them.   
 
HYMN  XXX.  Indra.  
1. WHERE  is that Hero?  Who  hath looked  on Indra  borne  on light−rolling  car by Tawny  Coursers,   
Who,  Thunderer,  seeks  with wealth  the Soma−presser,  and to his house  goes,  much−invoked,  to aid him?   
2 I have  beheld  his strong  and secret  dwelling,  longing  have  sought  the Founder's  habitation.   
I asked  of others,  and they said in answer,  May we, awakened  men,  attain  to Indra.   
3 We will tell, Indra,  when  we pour libation,  what  mighty  deeds  thou hast performed  to please  us.  
Let him who knows  not learn,  who knows  them  listen:  hither  rides  Maghavan  with all his army.   
4 Indra,  when  born,  thou madest  firm thy spirit:  alone  thou seekest war to fight  with many.   
With  might  thou clavest  e'en the rock asunder,  and foundest  out the stable  of the Milch−kine.   
5 When  thou wast born supremest  at a distance,  bearing  a name  renowned  in far−off  regions,   
Since  then e'en Gods  have  been  afraid  of Indra:  he conquered  all the floods  which  served  the Dasa.   
6 These  blissful  Maruts  sing their psalm  to praise  thee,  and pour to thee libation  of the Soma.   
Indra  with wondrous  powers  subdued  the Dragon,  the guileful  lurker  who beset  the waters.   
7 Thou,  Maghavan,  from  the first didst  scatter  foemen,  speeding,  while  joying  in the milk,  the Giver.   
There,  seeking  man's  prosperity,  thou torest  away  the head  of Namuci  the Dasa.   
8 Pounding  the head  of Namuci  the Dasa,  me, too thou madest  thine  associate,  Indra !  
Yea, and the rolling  stone  that is in heaven  both worlds,  as on a car, brought  to the Maruts.   
9 Women  for weapons  hath the Dasa  taken,  What  injury  can his feeble  armies  To me?  
Well  he distinguished  his two different  voices,  and Indra  then advanced  to fight  the Dasyu.   
10 Divided  from  their calves  the Cows  went  lowing  around,  on every  side, hither  and thither.   
These  Indra  re−united  with his helpers,  what  time the well−pressed  Soma  made  him joyful.   
11 What  time the Somas  mixed  by Babhru  cheered  him, loud the Steer  bellowed  in his habitations.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
So Indra  drank  thereof,  the Fort−destroyer,  and gave him guerdon,  in return,  of milch−kine.   
12 This good  deed  have the Rusamas  done,  Agni!  that they have  granted  me four thousand  cattle.   
We have  received  Rnancay a's wealth,  of heroes  the most  heroic,  which  was freely  offered.   
13 The Rusamas,  O Agni,  sent me homeward  with fair adornment  and with kine in thousands.   
 
The strong  libations  have  made  Indra  joyful,  when  night,  whose  course  was ending,  changed  to mornin g.  
14 Night,  well−nigh  ended,  at Rnancaya's  coming,  King  of the Rusamas,  was changed  to morning.   
Like a strong  courser,  fleet of foot, urged  onward,  Babhru  hath gained  four thousand  as his guerdon.   
15 We have received  four thousand  head  of cattle  presen ted by the Rusamas,  O Agni.   
And we, the singers,  have  received  the caldron  of metal  which  was heated  for Pravargya.   
 
HYMN  XXXI.  Indra.  
1. 1. MAGHAVAN  Indra  turns  his chariot  downward,  the strength−displaying  car which  he hath mo
unted.   
Even  as a herdsman  driveth  forth  his cattle,  he goeth,  first, uninjured,  fain for treasure.   
 
2. 2. Haste  to us, Lord  of Bays;  be not ungracious:  visit us, lover  of gold−hued  oblation.   
There  is naught  else better  than thou art, Indra:  e'en to the wifeless  hast thou given  spous es.  
3 When  out of strength  arose  the strength  that conquers,  Indra  displayed  all powers  that he possesses.   
Forth  from  the cave he drove  the milky  mothers,  and with the light laid bare investing  darkness.   
 
3. 4. Anus  have  wrought  a chariot  for thy Courser,  and Tvastar,  Much−invoked!  thy bolt that glitters
.  
The Brahmans  with their songs  exalting  Indra  increased  his strength  that he might  slaughter  Ahi.  
5 When  heroes  sang their laud to thee the Hero,  Indra!  and stones  and Aditi  accordant,   
Without  or steed  or chariot  were  the fellies  which,  sped by Indra,  rolled  upon  the Dasytis.   
6 I will declare  thine  exploits  wrought  aforetime,  and, Maghavan,  thy deeds  of late achievement,   
When,  Lord  of Might,  thou sunderedst  earth  and heaven,  winning  for man the moistly− gleaming  waters.   
7 This is thy deed,  e'en this, Wonderful!  Singer!  that, slaying  Ahi, here thy strength  thou showedst,   
Didst  check  and stay e'en gusna's  wiles  and magic,  and, drawing  nigh,  didst  chase  away  the Dasytis.   
8 Thou,  Indra,  on the farther  bank  forYadu  and Turvaga  didst  stay the gushing  waters.   
Ye both assailed  the fierce:  thou barest  Kutsa:  when  Gods  and Usana  came  to you together.   
9 Let the steeds  bring  you both,  Indra  and Kutsa,  borne  on the chariot  within  hearing−distance.   
Ye blew  him from the waters,  from  his dwelling,  and chased  the darkness  from  the noble's  spirit.   
10 Even  this sage hath come  looking  for succour  even  to Vata's  docile  harnessed  horses.   
Here  are the Maruts,  all, thy dear companions:  prayers  have  increased  thy power  and might,  O Indra.   
11 When  night  was near its close  he carried  forward  e'en the Sun's  chariot  backward  in its running.   
Etaga  brought  his wheel  and firmly  stays  it: setting  it eastward  he shall  give us courage.   
12 This Indra,  O ye men,  hath come  to see you, seeking  a friend  who hath expressed  the Soma.   
The creaking  stone  is laid upon  the altar,  and the Adhvaryus  come  to turn it quickly.   
13 Let mortals  who were  happy  still be happy;  let them  not come  to sorrow,  O Immortal.   
Love  thou the pious,  and to these  thy people−with  whom  may we be numbered−give  thou vigour.   
 
 
HYMN  XXXII.  Indra.  
1.THE  well thou clavest,  settest  free the fountains,  and gavest  rest to floods  that were  obstructed.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Thou,  Indra,  laying  the great  mountain  open,  slaying  the Danava,  didst  loose  the torrents.   
2 The fountain−depths  obstructed  in their seasons,  thou,  Thunderer!  madest  flow,  the mountain's  udder.   
Strong  Indra,  thou by slaying  e'en the Dragon  that lay extended  there  hast shown  thy vigour.   
3 Indra  with violence  smote  down  the weapon,   
yea, even  of that wild and mighty  creature.   
Although  he deemed  himself  alone  unequalled,  another  had been  born e'en yet more  potent.   
4 Him,  whom  the heavenly  food of these  delighted,  child  of the mist,  strong  waxing,  couched  in darkness,
  
Him the bolt−hurling  Thunderer  with his lightning  smote  down  and slew,  the Danava's  wrath−fire,  Susna.
  
5 Though  he might  ne'er  be wounded  still his vitals  felt that, the God's  bolt, which  his powers  supported,   
When,  after offered  draughts,  Strong  Lord,  thou laidest  him, fain to battle,  in the pit in darkness.   
6 Him as he lay there  huge  in length  extended,  still waxing  in the gloom  which  no sun lightened,   
Him,  after loud−voiced  threats,  the Hero  Indra,  rejoicing  in the poured  libation,  slaughtered.   
 
7 When  'gainst  the mighty  Danava  his weapon  Indra  uplifted,  power  which  none  could  combat,   
When  at the hurling  of his bolt he smote  him, he made  him lower  than all living  creatures.   
8 The fierce  God seized  that huge  and restless  coiler,  insatiate,  drinker  of the sweets,  recumbent,   
And with his mighty  weapon  in his dwelling  smote  down  the footless  evil−speaking  ogre.   
9 Who  may arrest  his strength  or cheek  his vigour?  Alone,  resistless,  he bears  off all riches.   
Even  these  Twain,  these  Goddesses,  through  terror  of Indra's  might,  retire  from  his dominion.   
10 E'en the Celestial  Axe bows  down  before  him, and the Earth,  lover−like,  gives  way to Indra.   
As he imparts  all vigour  to these  people,  straightway  the folk bend  them  to him the Godlike.   
11 I hear that thou wast born sole Lord  of heroes  of the Five Races,  famed  among  the people.   
As such my wishes  have  most  lately  grasped  him, invoking  Indra  both at eve and morning.   
12 So, too, I hear of thee as in due season  urging  to action  and enriching  singers.   
What  have  thy friends  received  from  thee,  the Brahmans  who,  faithful,  rest their hopes  on thee,  O Indra?   
 
HYMN  XXXIII.  Indra.  
1. GREAT  praise  to Indra,  great  and strong  mid heroes,  I ponder  thus,  the feeble  to the Mighty,   
Who  with his band  shows  favour  to this people,  when  lauded,  in the fight  where  spoil  is gathered.   
2 So made  attentive  by our hymns,  Steer!  Indra!  thou fastenedst  the girth  of thy Bay Coursers,   
Which,  Maghavan,  at thy will thou drivest  hither.  With  these  subdue  for us the men who hate us.  
3 They were  not turned  to us−wtrd,  lofty  Indra!  while  yet through  lack of prayer  they stood  unharnessed.   
Ascend  this chariot,  thou whose  hand  wields  thunder,  and draw  the rein, O Lord  of noble  horses.   
4 Thou,  because  many  lauds  are thine,  O Indra,  wast active  warring  in the fields   
for cattle.   
For Surya  in his own abode  thou,  Hero,  formedst  in fights  even  a Dasa's  nature.   
5 Thine  are we, Indra;  thine  are all these  people,  conscious  of might,  whose  cars are set in motion.   
Some  hero come  to us, O Strong  as Ahi beauteous  in war, to be invoked  like Bhaga.   
6 Strength  much  to be desired  is in thee,  Indra:  the Immortal  dances  forth  his hero exploits.   
Such,  Lord  of Treasure,  give us splendid  riches.  I praise  the Friend's  gift, his whose  wealth  is mighty.   
7 Thus  favour  us, O Indra,  with ihy succour;  Hero,  protect  the bards  who sing thy praises.   
Be friendly  in the fray to those  who offer  the skin of beautiful  and well−pressed  Soma.   
8 And these  ten steeds  which  Trasadasyu  gives  me, the goldrich  chief,  the son of Purukutsa,   
Resplendent  in their brightness  shall  convey  me. Gairiksita  willed  it and so came  I hither.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
9 And these,  bestowed  as sacrificial  guerdon,  the powerful  tawny  steeds  of Marutasva;   
And thousands  which  kind Cyavatana  gave me, abundantly  bestowed  for my adornment.   
10 And these  commended  horses,  bright  and active,  by Dhvanya  son of Laksmana  presented,   
Came  unto me, as cows  into the Rsi Samvarana's  stall,  with magnitude  of riches.   
 
HYMN  XXXIV.  Indra.  
1. BOUNDLESS  and wasting  not, the heavenly  food of Gods  goes to the foeless  One,  doer of wondrous  
deeds.   
Press  out, make  ready,  offer  gifts with special  zeal to him whom  many  laud,  accepter  of the prayer.   
2 He who filled  full his belly  with the Soma's  juice,  Maghavan,  was delighted  with the meath's  sweet  drau
ght,  
When  Usana,  that he might  slay the monstrous  beast,  gave him the mighty  weapon  with a thousand  points
.  
3 Illustrious  is the man whoever  presseth  out Soma  for him in sunshine  or in cloud  and rain.  
The mighty  Maghavan  who is the sage's  Frien d advanceth  more  and more  his beauteous  progeny.   
4 The Strong  God doth not flee away  from  him whose  sire, whose  mother  or whose  brother  he hath done  t
o 
death.   
He, the Avenger,  seeketh  this man's  offered  gifts:  this God,  the source  of riches,  doth not flee from  sin.  
5 He seeks  no enterprise  with five or ten to aid, nor stays  with him who pours  no juice  though  prospering  
 
well.   
The Shaker  conquers  or slays  in this way or that, and to the pious  gives  a stable  full of kine.   
6 Exceeding  strong  in war he stays the chariot  wheel,  and, hating  him who pours  not, prospers  him who 
pours.   
Indra  the terrible,  tamer  of every  man,  as Arya  leads  away  the Dasa  at his will.  
7 He gathers  up for plunder  all the niggard’s  gear:  excellent  wealth  he gives  to him who offers  gifts.   
Not even  in wide  stronghold  may all the folk stand  firm who have  provoked  to anger  his surpassing  might
.  
8 When  Indra  Maghavan  hath marked  two wealthy  men fighting  for beauteous  cows  with all their followe
rs,  
He who stirs all things  takes  one as his close  ally, and, Shaker,  with his Heroes,  sends  the kine to him.  
9 Agni!  I laud the liberal  Agnivesi,  Satri  the type and standard  of the pious.   
May the collected  waters  yield  him plenty,  and his be powerful  and bright  dominion.   
 
HYMN  XXXV.  Indra.  
1. INDRA,  for our assistance  bring  that most  effectual  power  of thine,  Which  conquers  men for us, and wi
ns the spoil,  invincible  in fight.   
2 Indra,  whatever  aids be thine,  four be they,  or, O Hero,  three,   
Or those  of the Five Tribes  of men,  bring  quickly  all that help to us.  
3 The aid most  excellent  of thee the Mightiest  hitherward  we call,  
For thou wast born with hero might,  conquering,  Indra,  with the Strong.   
4 Mighty  to prosper  us wast thou born,  and mighty  is the strength  thou hast.  
In native  powe r thy soul is firm:  thy valour,  Indra,  slays  a host.   
5 O Satakratu,  Lord  of Strength,  O Indra,  Caster  of the Stone.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
With  all thy chariot's  force  assail  the man who shows  himself  thy foe.  
6 For, Mightiest  Vrtra−slayer,  thee,  fierce,  foremost  among  many,  folk  
Whose  sacred  grass  is trimmed  invite  to battle  where  the spoil  is won.   
7 Indra,  do thou protect  our car that mingles  foremost  in the fights,   
That bears  its part in every  fray, invincible  and seeking  spoil.   
8 Come  to us, Indra,  and protect  our car with thine  intelligence.   
May we, O Mightiest  One,  obtain  excellent  fame  at break  of day, and meditate  our hymn  at dawn.   
 
HYMN  XXXVI.  Indra.  
1. MAY  Indra  come  to us, he who knows  rightly  to give forth  treasures  from  his store  of riches.   
Even  as a thirsty  steer  who roams  the deserts  may he drink  eagerly  the milked−out  Soma.   
2 Lord  of Bay Horses,  Hero,  may the Soma  rise to thy cheeks  and jaws like mountain−ridges.   
May we, O King,  as he who driveth  course rs, all joy in thee with hymns,  invoked  of many!   
3 Invoked  of many,  Caster  of the Stone  my heart  quakes  like a rolling  wheel  for fear of penury.   
Shall  not Puruvasu  the singer  give thee praise,  O ever−prospering  Maghavan,  mounted  on thy car?  
4 Like the press−stone  is this thy praiser,  Indra.  Loudly  he lifts his voice  with strong  endeavour.   
With  thy left hand,  O Maghavan,  give us riches:  with thy right,  Lord  of Bays,  be not reluctant.   
5 May the strong  Heaven  make  thee the Strong  wax stronger:  Strong,  thou art borne  by thy two strong  Ba
y 
Horses.   
So, fair of cheek,  with mighty  chariot,  mighty,  uphold  us, strong−willed,  thunderarmed,  in battle.   
6 Maruts,  let all the people  in obeisance  bow down  before  this youthful  Srutaratha,   
Who,  rich in steeds,  gave me two dark red horses  together  with three  hundred  head  of cattle.   
 
HYMN  XXXVII.  Indra.  
1. BEDEWED  with holy oil and meetly  worshipped,  the Swift  One vies with Surya's  beam  in splendour.   
For him may mornings  dawn  without  cessation  who saith,  Let us press  Soma  out for Indra.   
2 With  kindled  fire and strewn  grass  let him worship,  and, Soma−presser,  sing with stones  adjusted:   
And let the priest  whose  press−stones  ring forth  loudly,  go down  with his oblation  to the river.   
3 This wife is coming  near who loves her husband  who carries  to his home  a vigorous  consort.   
Here  may his car seek fame,  here loudly  thunder,  and his wheel  make  a thousand  revolutions.   
4 No troubles  vex that King  in whose  home  Indra  drinks  the sharp  Soma  juice  with milk commingled.   
With  heroes  he drives  near,  he slays  the foeman:  Blest,  cherishing  that name,  he guards  his people.   
5 May he support  in peace  and win in battle:  he masters  both the hosts  that meet  together.   
Dear  shall  he be to Surya,  dear to Agni,  who with pressed  Soma  offer s gifts to India.   
 
HYMN  XXXVIII.  Indra.  
1. WIDE,  Indra  Satakratu,  spreads  the bounty  of thine  ample  grace:  So, L
ord of fair dominion,  Friend  of all men,  give us splendid  wealth.  2 The fo
od which,  Mightiest  Indra,  thou possessest  worthy  of renown  Is bruited as
 most  widely  famed,  invincible,  O Golden−hued!  3 O Darter  of the Stone,
 the powers  which  readily  obey  thy will,−  Divinities,  both thou and they,  
ye rule, to guard  them,  earth  and heaven.  4 And from  whatever  power  of tRig Veda – English Translation  
hine,  O Vrtra−slayer,  it may be, Bring  thou to us heroic  strength:  thou has
t a man's  regard  for us. 5 In thy protection,  with these  aids of thine,  O Lor
d of Hundred  Powers,  Indra,  may we be guarded  well,  Hero,  may we be g
uarded  well.  
 
HYMN  XXXIX.  Indra.  
1. STONE−DARTING  Indra.  Wondrous  One,  what  wealth  is richly  given  from  thee,   
That bounty,  Treasure−Finder!  bring  filling  both thy hands,  to us.  
2 Bring  what  thou deemest  worth  the wish,  O Indra,  that which  is in heaven.   
So may we know  thee as thou art, boundless  in thy munificence.   
3 Thy lofty  spirit,  far−renowned  as fain to give and prompt  to win,−   
With  this thou rendest  e'en the firm,  Stone−Darter!  so to gain thee strength.   
4 Singers  with many  songs  have  made  Indra  propitious  to their fame,   
Him who is King  of human  kind,  most  liberal of your wealthy  ones.   
5 To him, to Indra  must  be sung  the poet's  word,  the hymn  of praise.   
To him, accepter  of the prayer,  the Atris  raise  their songs  on high,  the Atris  beautify  their songs.   
 
HYMN  XL. Indra.  Surya.  Atri.  
1. COME  thou to what  the stones  have  pressed,  drink  Soma,  O thou Soma's  Lord,   
Indra  best Vrtra−slayer  Strong  One,  with the Strong.   
2 Strong  is the stone,  the draught  is strong,  strong  is this Soma  that is pressed,   
Indra,  best Vrtra−slayer,  Strong  One with the Strong.   
3 As strong I call on thee the Strong,  O Thunder−armed,  with various  aids,  
Indra,  best Vrtra−slayer,  Strong  One with the Strong.   
4 Impetuous,  Thunderer,  Strong,  quelling  the mighty,  King,  potent,  Vrtra−slayer,  Soma−drinker,   
May he come  hither  with his yoked  Bay Horses;  may Indra  gladden  him at the noon  libation.   
5 O Surya,  when  the Asura's  descendant  Svarbhanu,  pierced  thee through  and through  with darkness,   
 
All creatures  looked  like one who is bewildered,  who knoweth  not the place  where  he is standing.   
6 Wha t time thou smotest  down  Svarbhanu's  magic  that spread  itself  beneath  the sky, O Indra,   
By his fourth  sacred  prayer  Atri disoovered  Surya  concealed  in gloom  that stayed  his function.   
7 Let not the oppressor  with this dread,  through  anger  swallow  me up, for I am thine,  O Atri.  
Mitra  art thou,  the sender  of true blessings:  thou and King  Varuna  be both my helpers.   
8 The Brahman  Atri, as he set the press−stones,  serving  the Gods  with praise  and adoration,   
Established  in the heaven  the eye of Surya,  and caused Svarbhanu's  magic  arts to vanish.   
9 The Atris  found  the Sun again,  him whom  Svarbhanu  of the brood   
Of Asuras  had pierced  with gloom.  This none  besides  had power  to do.  
 
HYMN  XLI. Visvedevas  
1. WHO,  Mitra−Varuna,  is your pious  servant  to give you gifts from  earth  or mighty  heaven?   
Preserve  us in the seat of holy Order,  and give the offerer  power  that winneth  cattle.   
2 May Mitra,  Varuna,  Aryaman,  and Ayu,  Indra  Rbhuksan,  and the Maruts,  love us,  Rig Veda – English Translation  
And they who of one mind  with bounteous  Rudra  accept  the hymn  and laud with adorations.   
3 You will I call to feed the car−horse,  Asvins,  with the wind's  flight  swiftest  of those  who travel:   
Or also to the Asura  of heaven,  Worshipful,  bring  a hymn  as 'twere  libation.   
4 The heavenly  Victor,  he whose  priest  is Kanva,  Trta with Dyaus  accordant,  Vata,  Agni,   
All−feeding  Pusan,  Bhaga  sought  the oblation,  as they whose  steeds  are fleetest  seek the contest.   
5 Bring  ye your riches  forward  borne  on horses:  let thought  be framed  for help and gain of treasure.   
Blest he the priest  of Ausija  through  courses,  the courses  which  are yours  the fleet,  O Maruts.   
6 Bring  hither  him who yokes  the car, your Vayu,  who praises  with his songs,  the God and Singer;   
And,  praying  and devout,  noble  and prudent,  may the Gods'  Spouses  in their thoughts  retain  us.  
7 I speed  to you with powers  that should  be honoured,  with songs  distinguishing  Heaven's  mighty  Daught
ers,  
Morning  and Night,  the Two,  as 'twere  all−knowing:  these  bring  the sacrifice  unto the mortal.   
8 You I extol,  the nourishers  of heroes  bringing  you gifts,  Vastospati  and Tvastar−   
Rich  Dhisana  accords  through  our obeisance  − andTrees  and Plants,  for the swift  gain of riches.   
9 Ours  be the Parvatas, even  they,  for offspring,  free−moving,  who are Heroes  like the Vasus.   
May holy Aptya,  Friend  of man,  exalted,  strengthen  our word  for ever and be near us.  
10 Trta praised  him, germ  of the earthly  hero,  with pure songs  him the Offspring  of the Water s.  
Agn;  with might  neighs  loudly  like a charger:  he of the flaming  hair destroys  the forests.   
11 How  shall  we speak  to the great  might  of Rudra?  How  speak  to Bhaga  who takes  thought  for riches?   
May Plants,  the Waters,  and the Sky preserve  us, and Woods  and Mountains  with their trees  for tresses.   
12 May the swift  Wanderer,  Lord  of refreshments  listen  to our songs,  who speeds  throuih  cloudy  heaven:   
And may the Waters,  bright  like castles,  hear us, as they flow onward  from  the cloven  mountain.   
13 We know  your ways,  ye Mighty  Ones  receiving  choice  meed,  ye Wonderful,  we will proclaim  it.  
Even  strong  birds  descend  not to the mortal  who strives  to reach  them  with swift  blow  and weapons.   
14 Celestial  and terrestrial  generations,  and Waters  will I summon  to the feasting.   
May days with bright  dawns  cause  my songs  to prosper,  and may the conquered  streams  increase  their wa
ters.  
15 Duly  to each one hath my laud been  offered.  Strong  be Varutri  with her powers  to succour.   
May the great  Mother  Rasa  here befriend  us, straight−handed,  with the princes,  striving  forward.   
16 How  may we serve  the Liberal  Ones  with worship,  the Maruts  swift  of course  in invocation,  the Marut
s 
far−renowned  in invocation?   
Let not the Dragon  of the Deep  annoy  us, and gladly  may he welco me our addresses.   
17 Thus  thinking,  O ye Gods,  the mortal  wins  you to give him increase  of his herds  of cattle:  the mortal  w
ins 
him, O ye Gods,  your favour.   
Here  he wins  wholesome  food to feed this body:  as for mine  old age, Nirrti  consume  it  
18 O Gods,  may we obtain  from  you this favour,  strengthening  food through  the Cow's  praise,  ye Vasus.   
May she who gives  good  gifts,  the gracious  Goddes.  s, come  speeding  nigh to us for our well−being.   
 
19 May Ila, Mother  of the herds  of cattle,  and Urvasi  with all the streams  accept  us;
 May Urvasi  in lofty  heaven  accepting,  as she partakes  the oblation  of the living,  20
 Visit  us while  she shares  Urjavya's  food.  
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  XLII.  Visvedevas.  
1. Now  may our sweetest  song with deep  devotion  reach  Varuna,  Mitra,  Aditi,  and Bhaga.   
May the Five Priests'  Lord,  dwelling  in oblations,  bliss−giving  Asura,  hear,  whose  paths  are open.   
2 May Aditi  welcome,  even  as a mother  her dear heart−gladdening  son, my song  that lauds  her.  
The prayer  they love,  bliss−giving,  God−appointed,  I offer  unto Varuna  and Mitra.   
3 In spirit  him, the Sagest  of the Sages;  with sacrificial  oil and meath  bedew  him  
So then let him, God Savitar,  provide  us excellent,  ready,  and resplendent  treasures.   
4 With  willing  mind,  Indra,  vouchsafe  us cattle,  prospe rity, Lord  of Bays!  and pious  patrons;   
And,  with the sacred  prayer  by Gods  appointed,  give us the holy Deities'  lovingkindness.   
5 God Bhaga,  Savitar  who deals  forth  riches,  Indra,  and they who conquer  Vrtra's  treasures,   
And Vaja  and Rbhuksan  and Purandh i, the Mighty  and Immortal  Ones,  protect  us!  
6 Let us declare  his deeds,  the undecaying  unrivalled  Victor  whom  the Maruts  follow.   
None  of old times,  O Maghavan,  nor later,  none  of these  days hath reached  thy hero prowess.   
7 Praise  him the Chief  who gives the boon  of riches,  Brhaspati  distributor  of treasures,   
Who,  blessing  most  the man who sings  and praises,  comes  with abundant  wealth  to his invoker.   
8 Tended,  Brhaspati,  with thy protections,  the princes  are unharmed  and girt by heroes.   
Wealth  that brings bliss is found  among  the givers  of horses  and of cattle  and of raiment.   
9 Make  their wealth  flee who,  through  our hymns  enjoying  their riches,  yield  us not an ample  guerdon.   
Far from  the sun keep  those  who hate devotion,  the godless,  prospering  in their vocation.   
10 With  wheelless  chariots  drive  down  him, O Maruts,  who at the feasts  of Gods  regards  the demons.   
May he, though  bathed  in sweat,  form  empty  wishes,  who blames  his sacred  rite who toils to serve  you.  
11 Praise  him whose  bow is strong  and sure his arrow,  him who is Lord  of every  balm  that bealeth.   
Worship  thou Rudra  for his great  good  favour:  adore  the Asura,  God,  with salutations.   
12 May the House−friends,  the cunning−handed  Artists,  may the Steer's  Wives,  the streams  carved  out by 
Vibh van,  
And may the fair Ones  honour  and befriend  us, Sarasvati,  Brhaddiva,  and Raka.   
13 My newest  song,  thought  that now springs  within  me, I offer  to the Great,  the Sure Protector,   
Who  made  for us this All, in fond love laying  each varied  form  within  his Daughter's  bosom.   
14 Now,  even  now,  may thy fair praise,  O Singer,  attain  Idaspati  who roars  and thunders,   
Who,  rich in clouds  and waters  with his lightning  speeds  forth  bedewing  both the earth  and heaven.   
15 May this my laud attain  the troop  of Maruts , those  who are youths  in act, the Sons  of Rudra.   
The wish  calls me to riches  and well−being:  praise  the unwearied  Ones  whose  steeds  are dappled.   
16 May this my laud reach  earth  and air's mid−region,  and forest  trees  and plants  to win me riches.   
May every Deity  be swift  to listen,  and Mother  Earth  with no ill thought  regard  me.  
17 Gods,  may we dwell  in free untroubled  bliss.   
18 May we obtain  the Asvins'  newest  favour,  and gain their health−bestowing  happy  guidance.   
Bring  riches  hither  unto us, and heroes, and all felicity  and joy, Immortals!   
 
HYMN  XLIII.  Visvedevas.  
1. MAY  the Milch−cows  who hasten  to their object  come  harmless  unto us with liquid  sweetness.  The 
Singer,  lauding,  calls,  for ample  riches,  the Seven  Mighty  Ones  who bring  enjoyment.  2 With reverenc
e and fair praise  will I bring  hither,  for sake of strength,  exhaustless  Earth  and Heaven.  Father  and Mot
her, sweetof  speech,  fairhanded,  may they,  far−famed,  in every  fight  protect  us. 3 Adhvaryus,  make  the
 sweet  libations  ready,  and bring  the beautiful  bright  juice  to Vayu.   
God,  as our Priest,  be thou the first to drink  it: we give thee of the mead  to make  thee joyful.   
4 Two arms−the  Soma's  dexterous  immo.  lators−and  the ten fingers  set and fix the press−stone.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
The stalk  hath poured,  fair with its spreading  branches,  the mead's  bright  glittering  juice  that dwells  on 
mountains.   
5 The Soma  hath been  pressed  for thee,  its lover,  to give thee power  and might  and high enjoyment.   
Invoked,  turn hither  in thy car, O Indra,  at need,  thy two well−tr ained  and dear Bay Horses.   
6 Bring  by God−traversed  paths,  accordant,  Agni,  the great  Aramati,  Celestial  Lady,   
Exalted,  worshipped  with our gifts and homage,  who knoweth  holy Law,  to drink  sweet  Soma.   
7 As on his father's  lap the son, the darling,  so on the fire is set the sacred  caldron,   
Which  holy singers  deck,  as if extending  and heating  that which  holds  the fatty membrane.   
8 Hither,  as herald  to invite  the Asvins,  come  the great  lofty  song,  most  sweet  and pleasant!   
Come  in one car, joy−givers!  to the banquet,  like the bolt binding  pole and nave,  come  hither.   
9 I have  declared  this speech  of adoration  to mightiest  Pusan  and victorious  Vayu,   
Who  by their bounty  are the hymns'  inspirers,  and of themselves  give power  as a possession.   
10 Invoked  by us bring  hither,  jatavedas  the Maruts  all under  their names  and figures.   
Come  to the sacrifice  with aid all Maruts,  all to the songs  and praises  of the singer!   
11 From  high heaven  may Sarasvati  the Holy  visit our sacrifice,  and from  the mountain.   
Eager,  propitious,  may the balmy  Goddess  hear our effectual  speech,  our invocation.   
12 Set in his seat the God whose  back is dusky,  Brhaspati  the lofty,  the Disposer.   
Him let us worship,  set within  the dwelling,  the red, the golden−hued,  the allresplendent.   
13 May the Sustainer,  high in heaven,  come  hither,  the Bounteous  One,  invoked,  with all his favours,   
Dweller  with Dames  divine,  with plants,  unwearied,  the Steer  with triple  horn,  the life−bestower.   
14 The tuneful  eloquent  priests  of him who liveth  have sought the Mother's  bright  and loftiest  station.   
As living  men,  with offered  gifts and homage  they deck the most  auspicious  Child  to clothe  him.  
15 Agni,  great  vital power  is thine,  the mighty:  pairs  waxing  old in their devotion  seek thee.   
May every  Deity  be swift  to listen,  and Mother  Earth  with no ill thought  regard  me.  
16 Gods,  may we dwell  in free untroubled  bliss.   
17 May we obtain  the Asvins'  newest  favour,  and gain their health−bestowing  happy  guidance.   
Bring  riches  hither  unto us, and heroes,  and all felicity  and joy, Immortals!   
 
HYMN  XLIV.  Visvedevas.  
1. As in the first old times,  as all were  wont,  as now,  he draweth  forth  the power  turned  hitherward  with s
ong,  
The Princedom  throned  on holy grass,  who findeth  light,  swift,  conquering  in the' plants  wherein  he waxet
h 
strong.   
2 Shining  to him who leaves  heaven's  regions  undisturbed,  which  to his sheen  who is beneath  show  fair in 
light,   
Good  guardian  art thou,  not to be deceived,  Most  Wise!  Far from  deceits  thy name  dwelleth  in holy Law.   
3 Truth waits  upon  oblation  present  and to come:  naught  checks  him in his way,  this vic tory−  bringing  
Priest:   
The Mighty  Child  who glides  along  the sacred  grass,  the undecaying  Youth  set in the midst  of plants.   
4 These  come,  well−yoked,  to you for furtheranc e in the rite: down  come  the twinborn  strengtheners  of L
aw 
for him,  
With  reins  easily  guided  and commanding  all. In the deep  fall the hide stealeth  away  their names.   
5 Thou,  moving  beauteously  in visibly  pregnant  ones,  snatching  with trees  the branching  plant  that grasps
 the 