Hymns of the Atharva Veda – Translation by M Bloomfield  
1440  
 of Savitar, with the priestly power of Agni, do I drive forth the enemies, as a skilled steersman a 
boat.  
7. M y sturdy guardian, strong Kâma, shall procure for me full freedom from enmity! May the 
gods collectively be my refuge, may all the gods respond to this, my invocation!  
8. Taking pleasure in this (sacrificial) melted butter, and ghee do ye, (O gods), of who m Kâma is 
the highest, be joyful in this place, procuring for me full freedom from enmity!  
9. O Indra and Agni, and Kâma, having formed an alliance, do ye hurl down my enemies; when 
they have fallen into the nethermost darkness, do thou, O Agni, burn up af ter them their dwelling 
places!  
10. Slay thou, O Kâma, those that are my enemies, hurl them down into blind darkness. Devoid 
of vigour, Without sap let them all be; they shall not live a single day!  
11. Kâma has slain those that are my enemies, a broad spa ce has he furnished me to thrive in. 
May the four directions of space bow down to me, and the six broad (regions) carry ghee to me!  
12. They (the enemies) shall float down like a boat cut loose from its moorings! There is no 
returning again for those who h ave been struck by our missiles.  
13. Agni is a defence, Indra a defence, Soma a defence. May the gods, who by their defence 
ward off (the enemy), ward him off!  
14. With his men reduced, driven out, the hated (enemy) shall go, shunned by his own friends! 
And down upon the earth do the lightnings alight; may the strong god crush your enemies!  
15. This mighty lightning supports both moveable and immoveable things, as well as all 
thunders. May the rising sun by his resources and his majesty hurl down my enemies , lie the 
mighty one!  
16. With that triple -armoured powerful covering of thine, O Kâma, with the charm that has been 
made into an Invulnerate armour spread (over thee), with that do thou drive away those who are 
my enemies; may breath, cattle, and life giv e them a wide berth!  
17. With the weapon with which the god drove forth the Asuras, with which Indra led the Dasyus 
to the nethermost darkness, with that do thou, O Kâma, drive forth far away from this world 
those who are my enemies!  
18. As the gods drove forth the Asuras, as Indra. forced the demons into the nethermost darkness, 
thus do thou, O Kâma, drive forth far away from this world those who are my enemies!  
19. Kâma was born at first; him neither the gods, nor the Fathers, nor men have equalled. To 
these art thou superior, and ever great; to thee, O Kâma, do I verily offer reverence.  
20. As great as are the heavens and earth in extent, as far as the waters have swept, as far as fire; 
to these art thou superior, &c.  
21. Great as are the directions (of s pace) and the intermediate direction on either side, great as 
are the regions and the vistas of the sky; to these art thou superior, &c.  
22. As many bees, bats, kurûru -worms, as many vaghas and tree -serpents as there are; to these 
art thou superior, &c.  
23. Superior art thou to all that winks (lives), superior to all that stands still (is not alive), 
superior to the ocean art thou, O Kâma, Manyu! To these art thou superior, &c.  Hymns of the Atharva Veda – Translation by M Bloomfield  
1441  
 24. Not, surely, does the wind equal Kâma, not the fire, not the sun, and not th e moon. To these 
art thou superior, &c.  
25. With those auspicious and gracious forms of thine, O Kâma, through which what thou wilst 
becometh reaL with these do thou enter into us, and elsewhere send the evil thoughts!  
{19053}  
XIX, 53. Prayer to Kâla (time ), personified as a primordial 
power.  
1. Time, the steed, runs with seven reins (rays), thousand -eyed, ageless, rich in seed. The seers, 
thinking holy thoughts, mount him, all the beings (worlds) are his wheels.  
2. With seven wheels does this Time ride, se ven naves has he, immortality is his axle. He carries 
hither all these beings (worlds). Time, the first god, now hastens onward.  
3. A full jar has been placed upon Time; him, verily, we see existing in many forms. He carries 
away all these beings (worlds);  they call him Time in the highest heaven.  
4. He surely did bring hither all the beings (worlds), he surely did encompass all the beings 
(worlds). Being their father, he became their son; there is, verily, no other force, higher than he.  
5. Time begot yond er heaven, Time also (begot) these earths. That which was, and that which 
shall be, urged forth by Time, spreads out.  
6. Time created the earth, in Time the sun burns. In Time are all beings, in Time the eye looks 
abroad.  
7. In Time mind is fixed, in Time breath (is fixed), in Time names (are fixed); when Time has 
arrived all these creatures rejoice.  
8. In Time tapas (creative fervour) is fixed; in Time the highest (being is fixed); in Time brahma 
(spiritual exaltation) is fixed; Time is the lord of everyth ing, he was the father of Pragâpati.  
9. By him this (universe) was urged forth, by him it was begotten, and upon him this (universe) 
was founded. Time, truly, having become the brahma (spiritual exaltation), supports 
Parameshthin (the highest lord).  
10. Ti me created the creatures (pragâh), and Time in the beginning (created) the lord of creatures 
(Prâgapati); the self -existing Kasyapa and the tapas (creative fervour) from Time were born.  
{19054}  
XIX, 54. Prayer to Kâla (time), personified as a primordial 
power. 
1. From Time the waters did arise, from Time the brahma (spiritual exaltation), the tapas 
(creative fervour), the regions (of space did arise). Through Time the sun rises, in Time he goes 
down again.  Hymns of the Atharva Veda – Translation by M Bloomfield  
1442  
 2. Through Time the wind blows, through Time (exist s) the great earth; the great sky is fixed in 
Time. In Time the son (Pragâpati) begot of yore that which was, and that which shall be.  
3. From Time the Riks arose, the Yagus was born from Time; Time put forth the sacrifice, the 
imperishable share of the go ds. 
4. Upon Time the Gandharvas and Apsarases are founded, upon Time the worlds (are founded), 
in Time this Angiras and Atharvan rule over the heavens.  
5. Having conquered this world and the highest world, and the holy (pure) worlds (and) their 
holy divisi ons; having by means of the brahma (spiritual exaltation) conquered all the worlds, 
Time, the highest God, forsooth, hastens onward.  
{11007}  
XI, 7. Apotheosis of the ukkhishta, the leavings of the 
sacrifice.  
1. In the ukkhishta are deposited name (quality)  and form, in the ukkhishta the world is 
deposited. Within the ukkhishta Indra and Agni, and the all are deposited.  
2. In the ukkhishta heaven and earth, and all beings, are deposited; in the ukkhishta are deposited 
the waters, the ocean, the moon, and the  wind.  
3. In the ukkhishta are both being and non -being, death, strength (food), and Pragâpati. The 
(creatures) of the world are founded upon the ukkhishta; (also) that which is confined and that 
which is free, and the grace in me.  
4. He who fastens what i s firm, the strong, the leader, the brahma, the ten creators of the all, the 
divinities, are fixed on all sides to the ukkhishta as the (spokes of the) wheel to the nave.  
5. Rik, Sâman, and Yagus, the singing of the sâmans, their introductions, and the sto tras are in 
the ukkhishta. The sound 'him' is in the ukkhishta, and the modulations and the music of the 
sâman. That is in me.  
6. The prayer to Indra and Agni (aindrâgnam), the call to the soma, as it is being purified 
(pâvamâmam), the mahânâmnî -verses, th e singing of the mahâvrata, (these) divisions of the 
service are in the ukkhishta, as the embryo in the mother.  
7. The ceremony of the consecration of the king (râgasûya), the vâgapeya, the agnishtoma, and 
the cattle -sacrifice belonging to it, the arka and  the horse -sacrifice, and the most delightful 
(sacrifice) for which fresh barhis is strewn, are in the ukkhishta.  
8. The preparation of the sacred fire (agnyâdheyam), the consecration for the soma -sacrifice 
(dikshâ), the sacrifice by which (special) wishes  are fulfilled, together with the metres, the 
sacrifices that have passed out, and the extended sacrifices (satra), are lounded upon the 
ukkhishta.  
9. The agnihotra, faith, the call vashat, vows and asceticism, sacrificial rewards, what is 
sacrificed (to t he gods) and given (to the priests) are contained in the ukkhishta.  
10. The (soma -sacrifice) that lasts one night (ekarâtra), and that which lasts two nights (dvirâtra), Hymns of the Atharva Veda – Translation by M Bloomfield  
1443  
 the (condensed soma -sacrifice called) sadyahkrî, and  
(that which is called) prakrî, th e (Songs called) ukthya, are woven and deposited in the 
ukkhishta; (also the parts) of the sacrifice subtle through (higher) knowledge.  
11. The soma -sacrifice that lasts four nights (katûrâtra), five nights (pañkarâtra), six nights 
(shadrâtra), and along ( with them) those that last double the time; the sixteenfold stotra 
(shodasin), and the soma -sacrifice that lasts seven nights (saptarâtra), all the sacrifices which 
were founded upon immortality (amrita), were begotten of the ukkhishta.  
12. The pratihâra -passages (in the sâman -songs), and their final syllables, the (soma -sacrifices 
called) visvagit and abhgit, the soma -sacrifice that ends  
with the day (sâhna), and that which lasts into the next day (atirâtra), are in the ukkhishta --the 
soma -sacrifice also t hat lasts twelve days. That is in me.  
13. Liberality, accomplishment, possession, the call svadhâ, nurture, immortality (amrita), and 
might, all inner desires are satisfied according to wish in the ukkhishta.  
14. The nine earths, oceans, heavens, are found ed upon the ukkhishta. The sun shines in the 
ukkhishta, and day and night also. That is in me.  
15. The (soma -sacrifice called) upahavya, the offering on the middle day of a sacrifice lasting a 
year (vishûvant), and the sacrifices that are secretly presente d, Ukkhishta, the sustainer of the 
universe, the father of the generator (Pragâpati), supports.  
16. Ukkhishta, the father of the generator, the grandson of the spirit (asu), the primal ancestor 
(grandfather), the ruler of the universe, the lusty bull dwell s upon the earth.  
17. Order (rita), truth (satya), creative fervour (tapas), sovereignty, asceticism, law and works; 
past, future, strength, and prosperity, are in the ukkhishta -force in force.  
18. Success, might, plans, dominion, sovereignty, the six broa d (regions), the year, libation (idâ), 
the orders to the priests (praisha), the draughts of soma (graha), oblations (are founded) upon the 
ukkhishta.  
19. The (liturgies called) katurhotârah, the âpri -hymns, the triennial sacrifices, the (formulas 
called) n îvid, the sacrifices, the priestly functions, the cattle -sacrifice and the soma -oblations 
connected with it, are in the ukkhishta.  
20. The half -months and months, the divisions of the year together with the seasons, the 
resounding waters, thunder, the grea t Vedic canon (sruti) are in the ukkhishta.  
21. Pebbles, sand, stones, herbs, plants, grass, clouds, lightning, rain, are attached to, and are 
founded upon the ukkhishta.  
22. Success, attainment, accomplishment, control, greatness, prosperity, supreme atta inment, and 
wellbeing rest upon, rest in, have been deposited in the ukkhishta.  
23. Whatever breathes with breath, and sees with sight, all gods in the heavens, founded upon 
heaven, were born of the ukkhishta.  
24. The riks and the sâmans, the metres, the a ncient legends (purânam) together with the yagus, 
all gods in the heavens, founded upon heaven, were born of the ukkhishta.  
25. In -breathing and out -breathing, sight, hearing, imperishableness and perishableness, all gods 
in the heavens, founded upon heave n, were born of the ukkhishta.  Hymns of the Atharva Veda – Translation by M Bloomfield  
1444  
 26. Joys, pleasures, delights, jubilation and merriment, all gods in the heavens, founded upon 
heaven, were born of the ukkhishta.  
27. The gods, the (deceased) Fathers, men, Gandharvas and Apsaras, all gods in the heavens, 
founded upon heaven, were born of the ukkhishta.  
{09001}  
IX, 1. Hymn to the honey -lash of the Asvins.  
1. From heaven, from earth, from the atmosphere, from the sea, from the fire, and from the wind, 
the honey -lash hath verily sprung. This, clothed in amrita (ambrosia), all the creatures revering, 
acclaim in their hearts.  
2. Great sap of all forms (colours) it hath -they call thee moreover the seed of the ocean. Where 
the honey -lash comes bestowing gifts, there life's breath, and there immortality has settled d own.  
3. Men severally, contemplating it profoundly, behold its action upon the earth: from the fire and 
from the wind the honey -lash hath verily sprung, the strong child of the Maruts.  
4. Mother of the Âdityas, daughter of the Vasus, breath of life of crea ted beings, nave of 
immortality, the honey -lash, golden -coloured, dripping ghee, as a great embryo, moves among 
mortals.  
5. The god's begot the lash of honey, from it came an embryo having all forms (colours). This, as 
soon as born, (while yet) young its m other nourishes; this, as soon as born, surveys all the 
worlds.  
6. Who knows it and who perceives it, the inexhaustible, soma -holding cup that has come from 
the heart of it (the honey -lash)? 'Tis the wise priest: he shall derive inspiration from it!  
7. He knows them, and he perceives them, the inexhaustible breasts of it (the honey -lash), that 
yield a thousand streams. Nourishment they pour out -without recalcitration.  
8. The great (cow) that loudly gives forth the sound 'him,' that bestows strength, and go es with 
loud shouts to the holy act, bellowing with lust for the three (male) gharmas (fires), she lows, and 
drips with (streams) of milk.  
9. When the waters, the mighty bulls, self -sovereign, wait upon (the cow), swollen with milk, 
(then) they, the waters , pour nourishment (upon her), and cause her to pour nourishment at will 
for him that knoweth this.  
10. The thunder is thy voice, O Pragâpati; as a bull thou hurlest thy fire upon the earth. From the 
fire, and from the wind the honey -lash hath verily sprun g, the strong child of the Maruts.  
11. As the soma at the morn ing -pressure is dear to the Asvins, thus in my own person, O Asvins, 
lustre shall be sustained!  
12. As the soma at the second (mid -day) pressure is dear to Indra and Agni, thus in my own 
person , O Indra, and Agni, lustre shall be sustained!  
13. As the soma at the third pressure (evening) is dear to the Ribhus, thus in my own person, O 
Ribhus, lustre shall be sustained!  Hymns of the Atharva Veda – Translation by M Bloomfield  
1445  
 14. May I beget honey for myself; may I obtain honey for myself! Bringing mil k, O Agni, I have 
come:. endow me with lustre!  
15. Endow me, O Agni, with lustre, endow me with offspring and with life! May the gods take 
note of this (prayer) of mine; may Indra together with the Rishis (take note of it)!  
16. As bees carry together honey  upon honey, thus in my own person, O Asvins, lustre shall be 
sustained!  
17. As the bees pile this honey upon honey, thus in my own person, O Asvins, lustre, brilliance, 
strength, and force shall be sustained!  
18. The honey that is in the mountains, in the  heights; in the cows, and in the horses; the honey 
which is in the surâ (brandy) as it is being poured out, that shall be in me!  
19. O Asvins, lords of brightness, anoint me with the honey of the bee, that I may speak forceful 
speech among men!  
20. The th under is thy speech, O Pragâpati; as a bull thou hurlest thy fire upon earth and heaven. 
All animals live upon it (the earth), and she with it (Pragâpati's fire) fills nourishment and food.  
21. The earth is the staff, the atmosphere the embryo, the heaven the whip (itself?), the lightning 
the whip -cord; of gold is the tip (of the whip?).  
22. He that knoweth the seven honies of the whip becomes rich in honey; (to wit), the Brâhmana, 
the king, the cow, the ox, rice, barley, and honey as the seventh.  
23. Rich in honey becomes he, rich in honey become his appurtenances, worlds rich in honey 
does he win, he that knoweth thus.  
24. When in a bright sky it thunders, then Pragâpati manifests himself to (his) creatures (pragâh). 
Therefore do I stand with the sacred co rd suspended from the right shoulder (prâkinopavita), 
saying, 'O Pragâpati, watch over me!' The creatures (pragâh) watch over him, Pragâpati watches 
over him, that knoweth thus.  
 
 