Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  XXXIII.  Rudra.  
1. FATHER  of Maruts,  let thy bliss approach  us: exclude  us not from  looking  on the sunlight.   
Gracious  to our fleet courser  be the Hero  may we transplant  us, Rudra,  in our children.   
2 With  the most  saving  medicines  which  thou givest,  Rudra,  may I attain  a hundred  winters.   
Far from  us banish  enmity  and hatred,  and to all quarters  maladies  and trouble.   
3 Chief  of all born art thou in glory,  Rudra,  armed  with the thunder,  mightiest  of the mighty.   
Transport  us over trouble  to well−being  repel  thou from  us all assaults  of mis. chief.   
4 Let us not anger  thee with worship,  Rudra,  ill praise,  Strong  God!  or mingled  invocation.   
Do thou with strengthening  balms  incite our heroes:  I hear thee famed  as best of all physicians.   
5 May I with praise−songs  win that Rudra's  favour  who is adored  with gifts and invocations.   
 
Ne'er  may the tawny  God,  fair−checked,  and gracious,  swifthearing,  yield  us to this evil purpose.   
6 The Strong,  begirt  by Maruts,  hath refreshed  me, with most  invigorating  food,  imploring.   
As he who finds  a shade  in fervent  sunlight  may I, uninjured,  win the bliss of Rudra.   
7 Where  is that gracious  hand  of thine,  O Rudra,  the hand  that giveth  health  and bringeth  comfort,   
Remover  of the woe that Gods  have  sent us? O Strong  One,  look thou on me with compassion.   
8 To him the strong,  great,  tawny,  fair−complexioned,  I utter forth  a mighty  hymn  of praises.   
We serve  the brilliant  God with adorations,  we glorify,  the splendid  name  of Rudra.   
9 With  firm limbs,  multiform,  the strong,  the tawny  adorns  himself  with bright  gold decorations:   
The strength  of Godhead  ne'er departs  from  Rudra,  him who is Sovran  of this world,  the mighty.   
10 Worthy,  thou carriest  thy bow and arrows,  worthy,  thy manyhued  and honoured  necklace.   
Worthy,  thou cuttest  here each fiend  to pieces:  a mightier  than thou there  is not, Rudra.   
11 Praise  him the chariot−borne,  the young,  the famous,  fierce,  slaying  like a dread  beast  of the forest.   
O Rudra,  praised,  be gracious  to the singer.  let thy hosts  spare  us and smite  down  another.   
12 I bend  to thee as thou approachest,  Rudra,  even  as a boy before  the sire who greets  him.  
I praise  thee Bounteous  Giver,  Lord  of heroes:  give medicines  to us as thou art lauded.   
13 Of your pure medicines,  O potent  Martits,  those  that are wholesomest  and healthbestowing,   
Those  which  our father  Manu  hath selected,  I crave  from.  Rudra  for our gain and welfare.   
14 May Rudra's  missile  turn aside  and spare  us, the great  wrath  of the impetuous  One avoid  us.  
Turn,  Bounteous  God,  thy strong  bow from  our princes,  and be thou gracious  to our seed and offspring.   
15 O tawny  Bull,  thus showing  forth  thy nature,  as neither  to be wroth,  O God,  nor slay us.  
Here,  Rudra, listen  to our invocation.  Loud  may we speak,  with heroes,  in assembly.   
 
HYMN  XXXIV.  Maruts  
1. THE  Maruts  of resistless  might  who love the rain, resplendent,  terrible  like wild beasts  in their strength
,  
Glowing  like flames  of fire, impetuous  in career, blowing  the wandering  raincloud,  have  disclosed  the kin
e.  
2 They  gleam  with armlets  as the heavens  are decked  with stars,  like cloud−born  lightnings  shine  the torre
nts 
of their rain.  
Since  the strong  Rudra,  O Maruts  with brilliant  chests,  sprang  into life for you in Prsni's  radiant  lap.  
3 They  drip like horses  in the racings  of swift  steeds;  with the stream's  rapid  cars they hasten  on their way
.  
Maruts  with helms  of gold,  ye who make  all things  shake,  con e with your spotted  deer,  one−minded,  to o
ur Rig Veda – English Translation  
food.   
4 They  have  bestowed  of Mitra  all that live, to feed,  they who for evermore  cause  their swift  drops  to flow
;  
Whose  steeds  are spotted  deer,  whose  riches  never  fail, like horses  in full speed,  bound  to the pole in wor
k.  
5 With  brightly−flarning  kine whose  udders  swell  with milk,  idth glittering  lances  on your unobstructed  
paths,   
O Maruts,  of one mind,  like swans  who seek their nests,  come  to the rapturous  enjoyment  of the meath.   
6 To these  our prayers,  O Maruts,  come  unanimous,  come  ye to our libations  like the praise  of men.   
Make  it swell  like a mare,  in udder  like a cow,  and for the singer  grace  the song with plenteous  strength.   
7 Give  us a steed,  O Maruts  migbty  in the car; prevailing  prayer  that brings  remembrance  day by day;  
Food  to your praisers,  to your bard in deeds  of might  give winning  wisdom,  power  uninjured,  unsurpassed
.  
8 When  the bright−chested  Maruts,  lavish  of their gifts,  bind at the time bliss their horses  to the cars,  
Then,  as the milch−cow  feeds  her calf within  the stalls,  they pour forth  food for all oblation−bringing  men
.  
9 Save  us, O Maruts,  Vasus,  from  the injurer,  the mortal  foe who makes  us looked  upon  as wolves.   
With  chariot  all aflame  compass  him round  about:  O Rudras,  cast away  the foeman's  deadly  bolt.  
10 Well−k nown,  ye Maruts,  is that wondrous  course  of yours,  when  they milked  Prsni's  udder,  close  akin 
to 
her.  
Or when  to shame  the bard who lauded,  Rudra's  Sons,  ye O infallible  brought  Trita  to decay.   
11 We call youi such,  great  Maruts,  following  wonted  ways,  to the oblation  paid to Visnu  Speeder−on.   
With  ladles  lifted  up, with prayer,  we seek of them  preeminent,  golden−hued,  the wealth  which  all extol.   
 
12 They,  the Dasagvas,  first of all brought  sacrifice:  they at the break  of mornings  shall  inspirit  us. Daw
n with her purple  beams  uncovereth  the nights,  with great  light glowing  like a billowy  sea of milk.  13 T
he Rudras  have  rejoiced  thern  in the gathered  bands  at seats  of worship  as in purple  ornaments.  They  wi
th impetuous  vigour  sending  down  the rain have taken to themselves  a bright  and lovely  hue. 14 Soliciti
ng their high protection  for our help,  with this our adoration  we sing praise  to them,  Whom,  for assistan
ce, like the five terrestrial  priests.  Trita  hath brought  to aid us hither  on his car. 15 So may your favourin
g help be turned  to us−ward,  your kindness  like a Iowing  cow approach  us, Wherewith  ye bear your ser
vant over trouble,  and free your worshipper  from  scoff  and scorning.  
 
HYMN  XXXV.  Son of Waters.  
1. EAGER  for spoil  my flow of speech  I utter:  may the Floods'  Child  accept  my songs  with favour.   
Will not the rapid  Son of Waters  make  them  lovely,  for he it is who shall  enjoy  them?   
2 To him let us address  the song  well−fashioned,  forth  from  the heart.  Shall  he not understand  it'  
The friendly  Son of Waters  by the greatness  of Godhead  hath produced  all things  existing.   
3 Some  floods  unite  themselves  and others  join them:  die sounding  rivers  fill one common  storehouse.   
On every  side the bright  Floods  have  encompassed  the bright  resplendent  Offspri ng of the Waters.   
4 The never−sullen  waters,  youthful  Maidens,  carefully  decking,  wait on him the youthful.   
He with bright  rays shines  forth  in splendid  beauty,  unfed  with wood.  in waters,  oil−enveloped.   
5 To him three  Dames  are oftering  food to feed him, Goddesses  to the God whom  none  may injure.   
Within  the waters  hath he pressed,  as hollows,  and drinks  their milk who now are first made  mothers.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
6 Here  was the horse's  birth;  his was the sunlight.  Save  thou our princes  from  the oppressor's  onslaught.   
Him,  indestructible,  dwelling  at a distance  in forts unwrought  lies and ill spirits  reach  not.  
7 He, in whose  mansion  is the teeming  Milch−cow,  swells  the Gods'  nectar  and cats noble  viands.   
lle Son of Waters,  gathering  strength  in waters,  shines  for his worshipper  to give him treasures.   
8 He who in waters  with his own pure Godhead  shines  widely,  law−abiding,  everlasting−   
The other  worlds  are verily  his branches,  and plants  are born of him with all their offspring.   
9 The Waters'  Son hath risen,  and clothed in lightning  ascended  up unto the curled  cloud's  bosom;   
And bearing  with them  his supremest  glory  the Youthful  Ones,  gold−coloured,  move  around  him.  
10 Golden  in form  is he, like gold to look on, his colour  is like gold,  the Son of Waters.   
When  he is seated  fresh  from  golden  birthplace  those  who present  their gold give food to feed him.  
11 This the fair name  and this the lovely  aspect  of him the Waters'  Son increase  in secret.   
Whom  here the youthful  Maids  together  kindle,  his food is sacred  oil of golden  colour.   
12 Him,  nearest  Friend  of many,  will we worship  with sacrifice.  and reverence  and oblation.   
I make  his back  to shine,  with chips provide  him; t offer  food and with my songs  exalt  him.  
13 The Bull hath laid his own life−germ  Within  them.  He sucks  them  as an infant,  and they kiss him.  
He, Son of Waters,  of unfading  colour,  hadi entered  here as in another's  body.   
14 While  here he dwelleth  in sublimest  station,  resplendent  with the rays that never  perish,   
The Waters,  bearing  oil to feed their ofispring,  flow,  Youthful  Ones,  in wanderings  about  him.  
15 Agni,  I gave  good  shelter  to the people,  and to the princes  goodly  preparation.   
Blessed  is all that Gods  regard  with favour.  Loud  may we speak,  with heroes,  in assembly.   
 
HYMN  XXXVI  Various  Gods.  
1. WATER  and milk hath he endued,  sent forth  to thee:  the men have  drained  him with the filters  and the 
stones.   
Drink,  Indra,  from  the Hotar's  bowlfirst  right  is thine−Soma  hallowed  and poured  with Vasat  and Svaha.   
2 Busied  with sacrifice,  with spotted  deer and spears,  gleaming  upon  your way with ornaments,  yea, our 
Friends,   
Sitting  on sacred  grass,  ye Sons  of Bharata,  drink  Soma  from  the Potar's  bowl,  O Men of heaven.   
 
3 Come  unto us, ye swift  to listen:  as at home  upon  the sacred  grass  sit and enjoy  yourselves.   
And,  Tvastar,  well−content  be joyful  in the juice  with Gods  and Goddesses  in gladsome  company.   
4 Bring  the Gods  hither,  Sage, and offer  sacrifice:  at the three  altars  seat thee willingly,  O Priest.   
Accept  for thy delight  the proffered  Soma  meath:  drink  from  the Kindler's  bowl  and fill thee with thy shar
e.  
5 This is the strengthener  of thy body's  manly  might:  strength,  victor y for all time are placed  within  thine  
arms.   
Pressed  for thee,  Maghavan,  it is offered  unto thee:  drink  from  the chalice  of this Brahman,  drink  thy fill.  
6 Accept  the sacrifice;  mark  both of you, my call: the Priest  hath seated  him after the ancient  texts.  
My prayer  that bids them  come  goes forth  to both the Kings:  drink  ye the Soma  meath  from  the Director's  
bowl.   
 
HYMN  XXXVII.  Various  Gods.  
1. Enjoy  thy fill of meath  out of the Hotar's  cup: Adhvaryus  he desires  a full draught  poured  for him.  
Bring  it him: seeking  this he gives.  Granter  of Wealth,  drink  Sorna  with the Rtus from  the Hotar's  cup.  
2 He whom  of old I called  on, him I call on now.  He is to be invoked;  his name  is He who Gives,   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Here  brought  by priests  is Soma  meath.  Granter  of Wealth,  drink Soma  with the Rtus from  the Potar's  cup
.  
3 Fat may the horses  be wherewith  thou specdest  on: Lord  of the Wood,  unharming,  strengthen  thou thyse
lf.  
Drawing  and seizing,  Bold  One,  thou who grantest  wealth,  drink  Soma  with the Rtus from  the Nestar's  cu
p.  
4 From  Hotar's  cup and Potar's  he hath drunk  and joyed:  the proffered  food hath pleased  him from  the 
Nestar's  bowl.   
The fourth  cup undisturbed,  immortal,  let him drink  who giveth  wealth,  the cup of the wealth−giving  God
.  
5 Yoke,  O ye Twain,  to−day  your hero−bearing  car, swift−moving  hitherward:  your loosing−place  is here
.  
Mix the oblations,  then come  hither  with the meath,  and drink  the Soma,  ye rich in abundant  strength.   
6 Agni,  accept  the fuel and our offered  gift: accept  the prayer  of man,  accept  our eulogy,   
Do thou with all, with Rtu, O thou Excellent,  fain, make  the great  Gods  all fain taste the gift we bring.   
 
HYMN  XXXVIII.  Savitar.  
1. UPRISEN  is Savitar,  this God,  to quicken,  Priest  who neglects  not this most  constant  duty.   
To the Gods,  verily, he gives  rich treasure,  and blesses  him who calls them  to the banquet.   
2 Having  gone  up on high,  the God broadhanded  spreads  his arms  widely  forth  that all may mark  him.  
Even  the waters  bend  them  to his service:  even  this wind  rests in the circling  region.   
3 Though  borne  by swift  steeds  he will yet unyoke  them:  e'en the fleet chariot  hath he stayed  from  going.   
He hath checked  e'en their haste  who glide  like serpents.  Night  closely  followed  Savitar's  dominion.   
4 What  was spread  out she weaves  afres h, re−weaving:  the skilful  leaves  his labour  half−completed.   
He hath arisen  from  rest, and parted  seasons:  Savitar  hath approached,  God,  holy−minded.   
5 Tlirough  various  dwellings,  through  entire  existence,  spreads,  manifest,  the household  light of Agni.   
The Mother  gives  her Son the goodliest  portion,  and Savitar  hath sped to meet  his summons.   
6 He comes  again,  unfolded,  fain for conquest:  at home  was he, the love of all things  moving.   
Each  man hath come  leaving  his evil doings,  after the Godlike  Savita r's commandment.   
7 The wild beasts  spread  through  desert  places  seeking  their watery  share  which  thou hast set in waters.   
The woods  are given  to the birds.  These  statutes  of the God Savitar  none  disobeyeth.   
8 With  utmost  speed,  in restless  haste  at sunset Varuna  seeks  his watery  habitation.   
Then  seeks  each bird his nest, each beast  his lodging.  In due place  Savitar  hath set each creature.   
9 Him whose  high law not Varuna  nor Indra,  not Mitra,  Aryaman,  nor Rudra  breaketh,   
Nor evil−hearted  fiends,  here for my welfare  him I invoke,  God Savitar,  with worship.   
10 May they who strengthen  bliss,  and thought  and wisdom,  and the Dames'  Lord  and Narasamsa  aid us.  
That good  may come  to us and wealth  be gathered,  may we be Savitar  the God's  beloved.   
11 So come  to us our hearts'  desire,  the bounty  bestowed  by thee,  from  heaven  and earth  and waters,   
 
That it be well with friends  and those  who praise  thee,  and, Savitar,  with the loud−lauding  singer.  
 
HYMN  XX Asvins.  
1. SING  like the two press−stones  for this same  purpose;  come  like two misers  to the tree of treasure;   
Like two laud−singing  Brahmans  in the assembly,  like the folk's  envoys  called  in many  places.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
2 Moving  at morning  like two chr−borne  heroes,  like to a pair of goats  ye come  electing;   
Like two fair dames  embellishing  their bodies,  like a wise married  pair among  the people.   
3 Like to a pair of horns  come  first to usward,  like to a pair of hoofs  with rapid  motion;   
Come  like two Cakavas  in the grey of morning,  come  like two chariot  wheels  at dawn,  ye Mighty.   
4 Bear  us across  the rivers  like two vessels,  save us as ye were  yokes,  naves,  spokes and fellies.   
Be like two dogs  that injure  not our bodies;  preserve  us, like two crutches,  that we fall not.  
5 Like two winds  ageing  not, two confluent  rivers,  come  with quick  vision  like two eyes before  us.  
Come  like two hands  most  helpful  to the body, and guide  us like two feet to what  is precious.   
6 Even  as two lips that with the mouth  speak  honey,  even  as two breasts  that nourish  our existence,   
Like the two nostrils  that protect  our being,  be to us as our ears that hear distinctly.   
7 Like two hands  give ye us increasing  vigour;  like heaven  and earth  constrain  the airy regions.   
Asvins,  these  hymns  that struggle  to approach  you, sharpen  ye like an axe upon  a whetstone.   
8 These  prayers  of ours exalting  you, O Asvins,  have  the GrtSamadas,  for a laud, made  ready.   
Welcome  them,  O ye Heroes,  and come  bither.  Loud  may we speak.  with brave  men,  in assembly.   
 
HYMN  XL. Soma  and Pusan.  
1 SOMA  and Pusan,  Parents  of all riches,  Parents  of earth  and Parents  of high heaven,   
You Twain,  brought  forth  as the whole  world's  protectors,  the Gods  have  made  centre  of life eternal.   
2 At birth  of these  two Gods  all Gods  are joyful:  they have caused  darkness,  which  we hate,  to vanish.   
With  these,  with Soma  and with Pusan,  India  generates  ripe warm  milk in the raw milch−cows.   
3 Soma  and Pusan,  urge your chariot  hither,  the seven−wheeIed  car that measures  out the region,   
That stirs not all, that moves  to every  quarter,  fivc−reined  and harnessed  by the thought,  ye Mighty.   
4 One in the heaven  on high hath made  his dwelling,  on earth  and in the firmament  the other.   
May they disclose  to us great  store  of treasure,  much−longed  for, rich in food,  source  of enjoyment.   
5 One of you Twain  is Parent  of all creatures,  the otherjourneys  onward  all−beholding.   
Soma  and Pusan,  aid my thought  with favour:  with you may we o'ercome  in all encounters.   
6 May Pusan  stir our thought,  the all−impelling,  may Soma  Lord  of riches  grant  us riches.   
May Aditi  the perfect  Goddess  aid us. Loud  may we speak,  with heroes,  in assembly.   
 
HYMN  XLI. Various  Deities.  
1. O VAYU,  come  to us with all the thousand  chariots  that are thine,  Team−borne,  to drink  the Soma  juic
e.  
2 Drawn  by thy team,  O Vayu,  come;  to thee is offered  this, the pure.   
Thou  visitest  the presser's  house.   
3 Indra  and Vayu,  drawn  by teams,  ye Heroes,  come  today  and drink.   
Of the bright  juice  when  blent  with milk.   
4 This Soma  hath been  shed for you, Lawstrengtheners,  Mitra−Varuna!   
Listen  ye here to this my call.  
5 Both  Kings  who never  injure  aught  seat them  in their supreme st home,   
The thousand−pillared,  firmly−based.   
6 Fed with oblation,  Sovran  Kings,  Adityas,  Lords  of liberal  gifts.   
They  wait on him whose  life is true.  
 
7 With  kine,  Nasatyas,  and with steeds,  come,  Asvins,  Rudras,  to the house   
That will protect  its heroes well;   Rig Veda – English Translation  
8 Such,  wealthy  Gods!  as none  afar nor standing  nigh to us may harm,   
Yea, no malicious  mortal  foe.  
9 As such,  O longed−far  Asvins,  lead us on to wealth  of varied  sort,  
Wealth  that shall  bring  us room  and rest.  
10 Verily  Indra,  conquering  all, driveth  e'en mighty  fear away,   
For firm is he and swift  to act.  
11 Indra  be gracious  unto us: sin shall  not reach  us afterward,   
And good  shall  be before  us still.  
12 From  all the regions  of the world  let Indra  send security,   
The foe−subduer,  swift  to act.  
13 O all ye Gods,  come  hitherward:  hear this mine  invocation,  seat  
Yourselves  upon  this sacred  grass.   
14 Among  ihe gunahotras  strong  for you is this sweet  gladdening  draught.   
Drink  ye of this delightsome  juice.   
15 Ye Martus  led by Indra,  Gods  with Pri§an  for your bounteousest,   
Hear  all of you this call of mine.   
16 Best Mother,  best of Rivers,  best of Goddesses,  Sarasvati,  We are, as 'twere,  of no repute  and dear Mot
her, 
give thou us renown.   
17 In thee,  Sarasvati,  divine,  all generations  have their stay.  
Be, glad with Sunahotra's  sons:  O Goddess  grant  us progeny.   
18 Enriched  with sacrifice,  accept  Sarasvati,  these  prayers  of ours,   
Thoughts  which  GrtSamadas  beloved  of Gods  bring,  Holy  One,to  thee.   
19 Ye who bless  sacrifice,  go forth,  for verily we choose  you both,   
And Agni  who conveys  our gifts.   
20 This our.effectual  sacrifice,  reaching  the sky, shall  Heaven  and Earth   
Present  unto the Gods  to−day.   
21 In both your laps, ye guileless  Ones,  the Holy  Gods  shall  sit them  down   
To−day  to drink  the Soma  here.   
 
HYMN  XLII Kapinjala.  
1. TELLING  his race aloud  with cries  repeated,  he sends  his voice  out as his boat a steersman.   
O Bird,  be ominous  of happy  fortune  from  no side may calamity  befall  thee.   
2 Let not the falcon  kill thee,  nor the eagle let not the arrow−bearing  archer  reach  thee.   
Still crying  in the region  of the Fathers,  speak  here auspicious,  bearing  joyful  tidings.   
3 Bringing  good  tidings,  Bird of happy  omen,  call thou out loudly  southward  of our dwellings,   
So that no thief,  no sinner  may oppress  us. Loud  may we speak,  with heroes,  in assembly.   
 
HYMN  XLIII.  Kapinjala.  
1. HERE  on the right  sing forth  chanters  of hymns  of praise,  even  the winged  birds  that in due season  spe
ak.  
He, like: a Sama−chanter  utters  both the notes,  skilled in the mode  of Trstup  and of Gayatri.   
2 Thou  like the chanter−priest  chantest  the Sama,  Bird;  thou singest  at libations  like a Brahman's  son.  
Even  as a vigorous  horse  when  he comes  near the mare,  announce  to us good  forturue,  Bird,  on every  side
, Rig Veda – English Translation  
proclaim  in all directions  happy  luck,  O Bird.   
3 When  singing  here,  O Bird.  announce  good  luck to us, and when  thou sittest  still think  on us with kind 
thoughts.   
When  flying  off thou singest  thou art like a lute. With  brave  sons in assembly  may we speak  aloud.  
 
RIG VEDA  − BOOK  THE THIRD  
HYMN  I. Agni.  
1. THOU,  Agni,  who wilt have the strong,  hast made  me the Soma's  priest,  to worship  in assembly.   
Thou  shinest  to the Gods,  I set the pressstones.  I toil; be joyful  in thyself,  O Agni.   
2 East have  we turned  the rite; may the hymn  aid it. With  wood  and worship  shall  they honour  Agni.   
From  heaven  the synods  of the wise have learnt  it: c'en for the quick  and strong  they seek advancement.   
3 The Prudent,  he whose  will is pure,  brought  welfare,  allied  by birth  to Heave n and Earth  in kinship.   
The Gods  discovered  in the midst  of waters  beautiful  Agni  with the Sisters'  labour.   
4 Him,  Blessed One,  the Seven  strong  Floods  augmented,  him white  at birth  and red when  waxen  mighty.
  
As mother  mares  run to their new−born  you ling, so at his birth  the Gods  wondered  at Agni.   
5 Spreading  with radiant  limbs  throughout  the region,  purging  his power  with wise purifications,   
Robing  himself  in light,  the life of waters,  lie spreads  abroad  his high and perfect  glories.   
6 He sought  heaven's  Mighty  Ones,  the unconsuming,  the unimpaired,  not clothed  and yet not naked.   
Then  they,  ancient  and young,  who dwell together,  Seven  sounding  Rivers,  as one germ  received  him.  
7 His piles,  assuming  every  form,  are scattered  where  flow sweet  waters,  at the spring  of fatness;   
There  stood  the milch−kine  with full−laden  udders,  and both paired  Mighty  Mothers  of the Won drous.   
8 Carefully  cherished,  Son of Strength,  thou shoncst  assuming  lasting  and refulgent  beauties.   
Full streams  of fatness  and sweet  juice  descended,  there  where  the Mighty  One grew  strong  by wisdom.   
9 From  birth  he knew  even  his Father's  bosom,  he set his voices  and his streams  in motion;   
Knew  him who moved  with blessed  Friends  in secret,  with the young  Dames  of heaven.  He stayed  not 
hidden.   
10 He nursed  the Infant  of the Sire and Maker:  alone  the Babe  sucked  many  a teeming  bosom.   
Guard,  for the Bright and Strong,  the fellow−spouses  friendly  to men and bound  to him in kinship.   
11 The Mighty  One increased  in space  unbounded;  full many  a glorious  flood  gave strength  to Agni.   
Friend  of the house,  within  the lap of Order  lay Agni,  in the Sister  Rivers ' service.   
12 As keen  supporter  where  great  waters  gather,  light−shedder  whom  the brood  rejoice  to look on;  
He who begat,  and will beget,  the dawnlights,  most  manly,  Child  of Floods,  is youthful  Agni.   
13 Him,  varied  in his form,  the lovely  Infant  of floods and plants  the blessed  wood  hath gendered.   
Gods  even,  moved  in spirit,  came  around  him, and served  him at his birth,  the Strong,  the Wondrous.   
14 Like brilliant  lightnings,  mighty  luminaries  accompany  the light−diffusing  Agni,   
Waxen,  as 'twere  in secret, in his dwelling,  while  in the boundless  stall they milk out Amrta.   
15 I sacrificing  serve  thee with oblations  and crave  with longing  thy good−will  and friendship.   
Grant,  with the Gods,  thy grace  to him who lauds  thee,  protect  us with thy rays that guard  the homestead.   
16 May we, O Agni,  thou who leadest  wisely,  thy followers  and masters  of all treasures,   
Strong  in the glory  of our noble  offspring,  subdue  the godless  when  they seek the battle.   
17 Ensign  of Gods  hast thou become,  O Agni,  joy−giver,  knower  of all secret  wisdom.   
Friend  of the homestead,  thou hast lightened  mortals:  carborne  thou goest  to the Gods,  fulfilling.   
18 Within  the house  hath sate the King  immortal  of mortals,  filling  full their sacred  synods.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Bedewed  with holy oil he shine th widely,  Agni,  the knower  of all secret  wisdom.   
19 Come  unto us with thine  auspicious  friendship,  come  speeding,  Mighty,  with thy mighty  succours.   
Grant  us abundant  wealth  that saves  from  danger,  that brings  a good  repute,  a glorious  portion.   
20 To thee who art of old these  songs,  O Agni,  have  I declared,  the ancient  and the later.   
These  great  libations  to the Strong  are offiered:  in every  birth  is Jatavedas  stablished.   
21 Stablished  in every  birth  is Jatavedas,  kindled  perpetual  by the Visvamitras.   
May we rest ever in the loving−kindness,  in the auspicious  grace  of him the Holy.   
22 This sacrifice  of ours do thou,  O Mighty,  O truly  Wise,  bear to the Gods  rejoicing.   
Grant  us abundant  food,  thou priestly  Herald,  vouchsafe  to give us ample  wealth,  O Agni.  
23 As holy food,  Agni,  to thine'invoker  give wealth  in cattle,  lasting,  rich in marvels.   
 
To us he born a son, and spreading  offspring.  Agni,  be this thy gracious  will to us−ward.  
 
HYMN  II. Agni.  
1. To him, Vaisvanara,  who strengthens  Holy  Law,  to Agni  we present  our praise  like oil made  pure.   
With  thoughtful  insight  human  priests  bring  him anear,  our Herald  from  of old, as an axe forms  a car.  
2 He made  the heaven  and earth  resplendent  by his birth:  Child  of two Mothers  he was meet  to be implore
d,  
Agni,  oblation−bearer,  gracious,  ever−young,  infallible,  rich in radiant  light,  the guest  of men.   
3 Within  the range  of their surpassinq  power,  by might,  the Gods  created  Agni  with inventive  thought.   
I, eager  to win strength,  address  him, like a steed , resplendent  with his brilliance,  with his ample  light.   
4 Eager  to gain,  we crave  from  him the friendly  God strength  confident,  choiceworthy  meet  to be extolled
:  
The Bhrgus'  bounty,  willing,  strong  with sages'  lore, even Agni  shining  forth  with light that comes  from  
heaven.   
5 For happiness,  men,  having  trimmed  the sacred  grass,  set Agni  glorious  for his strength  before  them  her
e;  
Yea, with raised  ladles,  him bright,  dear to all the Gods,  perfecting  aims of works,  Rudra  of solemn  rites.   
6 Around  thy dwelling−place,  O brightly−shining  Priest,  are men at sacrifice,  whose  sacred  grass  is trimm
ed.  
Wishing  to do thee service,  Agni,  they are there,  desirous  of thy friendship  grant  them  store  of wealth.   
7 He hath filled  heaven  and earth  and the great  realm  of light,  when  at his birth  the skilful  held him in thei
r 
hold.   
He like a horse  is led forth  to the sacrifice  Sage,  graciously  inclined,  that he may win us strength.   
8 Honour  the oblation−bearer,  him who knows  fair rites,  serve  ye the Household  Friend  who knows  all thi
ngs 
that be.  
He drives  the chariot  of the lofty  ordinance:  Agni  most  active,  is the great  High  Priest  of Gods.   
9 They  who are free from  death,  fain for him, purified  three  splendours  of the mighty  Agni,  circling  all.  
To man,  for his enjoym ent, one of these  they gave:  the other  two have passed  into the sister  sphere.   
10 Man's  sacrificial  food hath sharpened  like an axe, for brightness,  him the Sage  of men,  the people's  Lor
d,  
Busied  with sacred  rites he mounts  and he descends.  He hath laid down  his vital germ  within  these  worlds
.  Rig Veda – English Translation  
11 He stirs with life in wombs  dissimilar  in kind,  born as a Lion  or a loudly−bellowing  Bull:   
Vaisvanara  immortal  with wide−reaching  might,  bestowing  goods  and wealth  on him who offiers  gifts.   
12 Vaisvanara,  as of old, mounted  the cope  of heaven,  heaven's  ridge,  well greeted,  by those  skilled  in no
ble 
songs.   
He, as of old, producing  riches  for the folk, still watchful,  traversesthe  common  way again.   
13 For new prosperity  we seek to Agni,  him whose  course  is splendid,  gold−haired,  excellently  bright,   
Whom  Matarisvan  stablished,  dweller  in the heaven,  meet  for high praise  and holy,  sage and true to Law.   
14 As pure and swift  of course,  beholder  of the light,  who stands  in heaven's  bright  sphere  a sign,  who wa
kes 
at dawn,   
Agni,  the head  of heaven,  whom  none  may turn aside−to  him the Powerful  with mighty  prayer  we seek.   
15 The cheerful  Priest,  the pure,  in whom  no guile  is found,  Friend  of the House,  praise−worthy,  dear to a
ll 
mankind,   
Fair to behold  for beauty  like a splendid  car,−  Agni  the Friend  of men we ever seek for wealth.   
 
HYMN  III. Agni.  
1. To him who shines  afar, Vaisvanara,  shall  bards  give precious  things  that he may go on certain  paths:   
For Agni  the Immortal  serves  the Deities,  and therefore  never  breaks  their everlasting  laws.   
2 He, wondrous  envoy,  goes between  the earth  and heaven,  firm seated  as the Herald,  great  High  Priest  of 
men.   
He compassethwith  rays the lofty  dwelling−place,  Agni,  sent forward  by the Gods,  enriched  with piayer.   
3 Sages  shall glorify  Agni  with earnest  thoughts,  ensign  of sacrifice,  who fills the synod  full:  
In whom  the singers  have stored  up their holy acts to him the worshipper  looks  for joy and happiness.   
 
4 The Sire of sacrifice,  great  God of holy bards,  Agni,  the measure and the symbol  of the priests,   
Hath  entered  heaven  and earth  that show  in varied  form:  the Sage  whom  many  love rejoiceth  in his might.
  
5 Bright  Agni  with the bright  car, Lord  of green  domains,  Vaisvanara  dweller  in the floods,  who finds  the 
light,   
Pervading,  swift  and wild,  encompassed  round  with powers,  him very glorious  have the Gods  established  
here.   
6 Agni,  together  with the Gods  and Manu's  folk by thought  extending  sacrifice  in varied  form,   
Goes,  car−borne,  to and fro with those  who crown  each rite, the fleet,  the Household  Friend,  who turns  th
e 
curse  aside.   
7 Sing,  Agni,  for long life to us and noble  sons:  teem  thou with plenty,  shine  upon  us store  of food.   
Increase  the great  man's  strength,  thou ever−vigilant:  thou,  longing  for the Gods,  knowest  their hymns  full 
well.   
8 The Mighty  One,  Lord  of the people  and their guest,  the leader  of their thoughts,  devoted  Friend  of pries
ts,  
Our solemn  rites'  announcer,  Jatavedas,  men with worship  ever praise,  with urgings  for their weal.   
9 Agni  the God resplendent,  giver  of great  joy, hath on his lovely  car compassed  the lands  with,  might.   
Let us with pure laudations  in his house  approach  the high laws of the nourisher  of multitudes.   
10 I celebrate  thy glories,  O Vaisvanara,  wherewith  thou,  O farsigh ted God,  has found  the light.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Thou  filledst  at thy birth  both worlds,  the earth  and heaven:  all this, O Agni,  hast thou compassed  of thyse
lf.  
11 By his great  skill the Sage  alone  hath brought  to pass a great  deed,  mightier  than Vaisvanara's  wondrou
s 
acts.  
Agni  sprang  into being,  magnifying  both his Parents,  Heaven  and Earth,  rich in prolific  seed.   
 
HYMN  IV Apris.  
1. 1. BE friendly  with each kindled  log of fuel, with every  flash  bestow  the boon  of riches.   
Bring  thou the Gods,  O God,  unto our worship:  serve, well−inclined,  as Friend  thy friends,  O Agni.   
2 Agni  whom  daily  Varuna  and Mitra  the Gods  bring  thrice  a day to this our worship,   
Tanunapat,  enrich  with meath  our service  that dwells  with holy oil, that offers  honour.   
3 The thought  that bringeth  every boon  proceedeth  to worship  first the Priest  of the libation,   
That we may greet  the Strong  One with our homage.  Urged,  may he bring  the Gods,  best Sacrificer.   
4 On high your way to sacrifice  was made  ready;  the radiant  flames  went  upward  to the regions .  
Full in the midst  of heaven  the Priest  is seated:  sirew  we the sacred  grass  where  Gods  may rest them.   
5 Claiming  in mind  the seven  priests'  burntoblations,  inciting  all, they came  in settled  order.   
To this our sacrifice  approach  the many  who show  in hero beauty  at assemblies.   
6 Night  and Dawn,  lauded,  hither  come  together,  both smiling,  different  are their forms  in colour,   
That Varuna  and Mitra  may accept  us, and Indra,  girt by Maruts,  with his glories.   
 
2. 7. I crave  the grace  of heaven's  two chief  Invokers:  the seven  swift  steeds  joy in their wonted  man
ner.  
These  speak  of truth,  praising  the truth  eternal,  thinking  on Order  as the guards  of Order.   
8 May Bharati  with all her Sisters,  Ila accordant  with the Gods,  with mortalls  Agni,   
Sarasvati  with all her kindred  Rivers,  come  to this grass,  Three  Goddesses,  and seat them.   
9 Well  pleased  with us do thou O God,  O Tvastar,  give ready  issue  to our procreant  vigour,   
Whence  springs  the hero,  powerful,  skilled  in action,  lover  of Gods,  adjuster  of the press−stones.   
10 Send  to the Gods  the oblation,  Lord  of Forests;  and let the Immolator,  Agni,  dress  it.  
He as the truer  Priest  shall  offer  worship,  for the Gods'  generations  well he knoweth.   
11 Come  thou to us, O Agni,  duly kindled,  together  with the potent  Gods  and Indra.   
On this our grass  sit Aditi,  happy  Mother,  and let our Hail delight  the Gods  Immortal.   
 
 
HYMN  V. Agni.  
1. AGNI  who shines  against  the Dawns  is wakened.  The holy Singer  who precedes  the sages.   
With  far−spread  lustre,  kindled  by the pious, the Priest  hath thrown  both gates  of darkness  open.   
2 Agni  hath waxen  mighty  by laudations,  to be adored  with hymns  of those  who praise  him.  
Loving  the varied  shows  of holy Order  at the first flush  of dawn  he shines  as envoy.   
3 Amid  men's  homes  hath Agni  been  established,  fulfilling  with the Law,  Friend,  germ  of waters.   
Loved  and adored,  the height  he hath ascended,  the Singer,  object  of our invocations.   
4 Agni  is Mitra  when  enkindled  duly,  Mitra  as Priest,  Varuna,  Jatavedas;   
Mitra  as active  minis ter, and House−Friend,  Mitra  of flowing  rivers  and of mountains.   
5 The Earth's,  the Bird's  dear lofty place  he guardeth,  he guardeth  in his might  the course  of Surya,   
Guardeth  the Seven−headed  in the centre,  guardeth  sublime  the Deities  enjoyment.   
6 The skilful  God who knows  all forms  of knowledge  made  for himself  a fair form,  meet  for worship.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
This Agni  guards  with care that never  ceases  the Sonia's  skin,  the Bird's  place  rich in fatness.   
7 Agni  hath entered  longingly  the longing  shrine  rich with fatness, giving  easy access.   
Resplendent,  pure,  sublime  and purifying,  again,  again  he renovates  his Mothers.   
8 Born  suddenly,  by plants  he grew  to greatness,  when  tender  shoots  with holy oil increased  him,  
Like waters  lovely  when  they hasten  downward  may Agni in his Parents'  lap protect  us.  
9 Extolled,  the Strong  shone  forth  with kindled  fuel to the earth's  centre,  to the height  of heaven.   
May Agni,  Friend,  adorable  Matarisvan,  as envoy  bring  the Gods  unto our worship.   
10 Best of all luminaries  lofty  Agni supported  with his flame  the height  of heaven,   
When,  far from  Bhrgus,  Matarisvan  kindled  the oblation−bearer  where  he lay in secret.   
11 As holy food,  Agni  to thine  invoker  give wealth  in cattle,  lasting,  rich in marvels.   
To us be born a son and spread ing offspring.  Agni,  be this thy gracious  will to us−word.   
 
HYMN  VI. Agni.  
1. URGED  on by deep  devotion,  O ye singers,  bring,  pious  ones,  the God−approaching  ladle.   
Borne  onward  to the right  it travels  eastward,  and, filled  with oil, to Agni  bears  oblation.  
2 Thou  at thy birth  didst  fill both earth  and heaven,  yea, Most  Adorable,  thou didst  exceed  them.   
Even  through  the heaven's  and through  the earth's  expanses  let thy swift  seventongued  flames  roll on, O 
Agni.   
3 Both  Heaven  and Earth  and Gods  who should be worshipped  establish  thee as Priest  for every  dwelling,
  
Whenever  human  families,  God−devoted,  bringing  oblations;  laud thy splendid  lustre.   
4 Firm  in the Gods'  home  is the Mighty  seated,  between  vast Heaven  and Earth  the well−beloved−   
Those  Cows  who yield,  unharmed,  their nectar,  Spouses  of the Far−Strider,  everyoung,  united.   
5 Great  are the deeds  of thee,  the Great,  O Agni:  thou by thy power  hast spread  out earth  and heaven.   
As soon  as thou wast born thou wast an envoy,  thou,  Mighty  One,  was Leader  of the people.   
6 Bind  to the pole with cords  of holy Order  the long−maned  ruddy  steeds  who sprinkle  fatness.   
Bring  hithier,  O thou God,  all Gods  together:  provide  them  noble  worship,  Jatavedas.   
7 Even  from  the sky thy brilliant  lights  shone  hither : still hast thou beamed  through  many  a radiant  morni
ng,  
That the Gods  praised  their joyous  Herald's  labour  eagerly  burning,  Agni,  in the forests.   
8 The Gods  who take delight  in air's wide  region,  or those  the dwellers  in heaven's  realm  of brightness,   
Or those,  the Holy,  prompt  to hear,  our helpers,  who,  carborne,  turn their horses  hither,  Agni−−−   
9 With  these,  borne  on one ear, Agni,  approach  us, or borne  on many,  for thy steeds  are able.   
Bring,  witb their Dames,  the Gods,  the Three  and−Thirty,  after thy Godlike  nature,  and be joyful.   
10 He is the Priest  at whose  repeated  worship  even  wide  Heaven  and Earth  sing out for increase.   
They  fair and true and holy coming  forward  stand  at his sacrifice  who springs  from  Order.   
11 As holy food,  Agni,  to thine  invoker  give wealth  in cattle,  lasting,  rich in marvels.   
To us be born a son and spreading  offspring.  Agni,  be this thy gracious  will to usward.   
 
HYMN  VII.  
1. THE  seven  tones  risen  from  the whitebacked  viand  have  made  their way between  the pair of Mothers.   
Both  circumjacent  Parents  come  together  to yield  us length  of days they hasten  forward.   
2 The Male  who dwells  in heaven  hath Mares  and Milchkine:  he came  to Goddesses  who bring  sweet  
treasure.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
To thee safe resting  in the seat of Order  the Cow  alone upon  her way proceedeth.   
3 Wise  Master,  wealthy  finder−out  of riches,  he mounted  those  who may with case be guided.   
He, dark−backed,  manifold  with varied  aspect,  hath made  them  burst  forth  from  their food the brush−woo
d.  
4 Strength−giving  streams  bear hither  him eternal,  fain to support  the mighty  work.  of Tvastar.   
He, flashing  in his home  with all his members,  hath entered  both the worlds  as they were  single.   
5 They  know  the red Bull's  blessing,  and are joyful  under  the flaming−coloured  Lord's  domin ion:  
They  who give shine  from  heavenwith  fair effulgence,  whose  lofty song  like Ila must  be honoured.   
6 Yea, by tradition  from  the ancient  sages  they brought  great  strength  from  the two mighty  Parents,   
To where  the singer's  Bull,  the night's  dispeller,  after his proper  law hath waxen  stronger.   
7 Seven  holy singers  guard  with five Adhvaryus  the Bird's  beloved  firmly−settled  station.   
The willing  Bulls,  untouched  by old, rejoice  them:  as Gods  themselves  the ways  of Gods  they follow.   
8 I crave  the grace  of heaven's  two chief  Invokers:  the seven  swift  steeds  joy in their wonted  manner.   
These  speak  of truth,  praising  the Truth  Eternal,  thinking  on Order  as the guards  of Order.   
9 The many  seek the great  Steed  as a stallion:  the reins  obey  the Lord  of varied  colour.   
O heavenly  Priest,  most  pleasant,  full of wisdom,  bring  the great  Gods  to us, and Earth  and Heaven.   
10 Rich  Lord,  the Mornings  have  gleamed  forth  in splen dour,  fair−rayed,  fair−speaking,  worshipped  with 
all 
viands,   
Yea, with the glory  of the earth,  O Agni.  Forgive  us, for our weal,  e'en sin cornmitted.   
11 As holy food,  Agni,  to thine  invoker,  give wealth  in cattle,  lasting,  rich in marvels.   
To us be born a son, and spreading  offspring  Agni,  be this thy gracious  will to usward.   
 
HYMN  VIII Sacrificial  Post.  
1. GOD−SERVING  men,  O Sovran  of the Forest,  with heavenly  meath  at sacrifice  anoint  thee.   
Grant  wealth  to us when  thou art standing  upright  as when  reposing  on this Mother's  bosom.   
2 Set up to eastward  of the fire enkindled,  accepting  prayer  that wastes  not, rich in hero.   
Driving  far from  us poverty  and famine,  lift thyself  up to bring  us great  good  fortune.   
3 Lord  of the Forest,  raise.  thyself  up on the loftiest  spot of earth.   
Give  splendour,  fixt and measured  well,  to him who brings  the sacrifice.   
4 Well−robed,  enveloped  he is come,  the youthful:  springing  to life his glory  waxeth  greater.   
Contemplative  in mind  and God−adoring,  sages  of high intelligence  upraise  him.  
5 Sprung  up he rises in the days'  fair weather,  increasing  in the men−frequented  synod.   
With  song  the wise and skilful  consecrate  him: his voice  the God−adoring  singer  utters.   
6, Ye whom  religious  men have  firmly  planted;  thou Forest Sovran  whom  the axe hath fashioned,−   
Let those  the Stakes  divine  which  here are standing  be fain to grant  us wealth  with store  of children.   
7 O men who lift the ladles  up, these  hewn  and planted  in the ground,   
Bringing  a blessing  to the field,  shall  bear our precious  gift to Gods.   
8 Adityas,  Rudras,  Vasus,  careful  leaders,  Earth,  Heaven,  and Prthivi  and Air's  mid−region,   
Accordant  Deities  shall  bless  our worship  and make  our sacrifice's  ensign  lofty.   
9 Like swan's  that flee in lengthened  line, the Pillars  have come  to us arrayed  in brilliant  coIour.   
They,  lifted  up on high,  by sages,  eastward,  go forth  as Gods  to the God's  dwelling−places.   
10 Those  Stakes  upon  the earth  with rings  that deck them  seem  to the eye like horns  of horned  creatures;   
Or, as upraised  by priests  in invocation,  let them  assist  us in the rush to battle.   
11 Lord  of the Wood,  rise with a hundred  branches.  with thousand  branches  may we rise to greatness,   
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
Tlou  whom  this hatchct,  with an edge  well whetted  for great  felicity,  hath brought  before  us. 
 
HYMN  IX.  
1. WE as thy friends  have chosen  thee,  mortals  a God,  to be our help,  The Waters'  Child,  the blessed,  the r
esplendent  One,  victorious  and beyond  compare.   
2 Since  thou delighting  in the woods  hast gone  unto thy mother  streams,   
Not to be scorned,  Agni,  is that return  of thine  when  from  afar thou now art here.   
3 O'er pungent  smoke  host thou prevailed,  and thus art thou benevolent.   
Some  go before,  and others  round  about  thee sit, they in whose  friendship  thou hast place.   
4 Him who had passed  beyond  his foes,  beyond  continual  pursuits,  Him the unerring  Ones,  observant,  fou
nd 
in floods,  couched  like a lion in his lair.  
5 Him wandering  at his own free will, Agni  here hidden  from  our view,   
Him Matarisvan  brought  to us from  far away  produced  by friction,  from  the Gods.   
6 O Bearer  of Oblations,  thus mortals  received  thee from  the Gods,   
Whilst  thou,  the Friend  of man,  guardest  each sacrifice  with thine  own power,  Most  Youthful  One.   
7 Amid  thy wonders  this is good,  yea, to the simple  is it clear,   
When  gathered  round  about  thee,  Agni,  lie the herds  where  thou art kindled  in the morn.   
8 Offer  to him who knows  fair rites,  who burns  with purifying  glow,   
Swift  envoy,  active,  ancient,  and adorable:  serve  ye the God attentively.   
9 Three  times  a hundred  Gods  and thrice  a thousand,  and three  times  ten and nine have  worshipped  Agni,   
For him spread  sacred  grass,  with oil bedewed  him, and stablished  him as Priest  and Sacrificer.   
 
HYMN  X. Agni.  
1. THEE  Agni,  God,  Imperial  Lord  of all mankind,  do mortal  men With  understanding  kindle  at thesacrifi
ce.  
2 They  laud thee in their solemn  rites,  Agni,  as Minister  and Priest,   
Shine  forth  in thine  own home  as guardian  of the Law.   
3 He, verily,  who honours  thee with fuel, Knower  of all life,  
He, Agni!  wins  heroic  might,  he prospers  well.   
4 Ensign  of sacrifices,  he, Agni,  with Gods  is come  to us,  
Decked  by the seven  priests,  to him who bringeth  gifts.   
5 ToAgni,  the Invoking  Priest,  offer  your best, your lofty speech,   
To him Ordainer−like  who brings  the light of songs.   
6 Let these  our hymns  make  Agni  grow,  whence,  meet  for laud,  he springs  to life,  
To mighty  strength  and great  possession,  fair to see.  
7 Best Sacrificer,  bring  the Gods,  O Agni,  to the pious  man:   
A joyful  Priest,  thy splen dour drive  our foes afar  
8 As such,  O Purifier,  shine  on us heroic  glorious  might:   
Be nearest  Friend  to those  who laud thee,  for their weal.   
9 So, wakeful,  versed  in sacred  hymns,  the holy singers  kindly  thee.   
Oblation−bearer,  deathless,  cherisher  of strength.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
 
HYMN  Xl. Agni.  
1. AGNI  is Priest,  the great  High  Priest  of sacrifice,  most  swift  in act:  
He knows  the rite in constant  course.   
2 Oblation−bearer,  deathless,  well inclined,  an eager  messenger,   
Agni  comes  nigh us with the thought.   
 
3 Ensign  of sacrifice  from  of old, Agni  well knoweth  with his thought   
To prosper  this man's  aim and hope.   
4 Agni,  illustrious  from  old time,  the Son of Strength  who knows  all life,  
The Gods  have made  to their Priest.   
5 Infallible  is Agni,  he who goes before  the tribes  of men,   
A chariot  swift  and ever new.   
6 Strength  of the Gods  which  none  may harm,  subduing  all his enemies,   
Agni  is mightiest  in fame.   
7 By offering  sacred  food to him the mortal  worshipper  obtains.   
A home  from  him whose  light makes  pure.   
8 From Agni,  by our hymns,  may we gain all things  that bring  happiness,   
Singers  of him who knows  all life.  
9 O Agni,  in our deeds  of might  may we obtain  all precious  things:   
Tle Gods  are centred  all in thee.   
 
HYMN  XII. Indra−Agni.  
1. MOVED,  Indra−Agni,  by our hymn,  come  to the juice,  the precious  dew:  Dr.ink  ye thereof,  impelled  b
y song.   
2 O Indra−Agni,  with the man who lauds  you comes  the wakening  rite:  
So drink  ye both this juice  assured.   
3 Through  force  of sacrifice  I choose  Indra−Agni  who love the wise:   
With  Sorna  let these  sate them  here.   
4 Indra  and Agni  I invoke,  joint−victors,  bounteous,  unsubdued,   
Foe−slayers,  best to win the spoil.   
5 Indra  and Agni,  singers  skilled  in melody  hymn  you, bringing  lauds:   
I choose  you for the sacred  food.   
6 Indra  and Agni,  ye cast down  the ninety  forts which  DAsas  held,   
Together,  with one mighty  deed.   
7 To Indra−Agni  eeverent  thoughts  go forward  from  the holy task  
Along  the path of sacred  Law.   
8 O Indra−Agni,  powers  are yours,  and dwellings  and delightful  food  
Good  is your readiness  to act.  
9 Indra  and Agni,  in your deeds  of might  ye deck  heaven's  lucid  realms:   
Famed  is that hero strength  of yours.   
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  XIII. Agni.  
1. To Agni,  to this God of yours  I sing aloud  with utmost  power.  May he come  to us with the Gods,  and si
t, best Offerer,  on the grass.   
2 The Holy,  whose  are earth  and heaven,  and succour  waits  upon  his strength;   
Him men who bring  oblations  laud,  and they who wish  to gain,  for grace.   
3 He is the Sage  who guides  these  men,  Leader  of sacre d rites is he.  
Him your own Agni,  serve  ye well,  who winneth  and bestoweth  wealth.   
4 So may the gracious  Agni  grant  most  goodly  shelter  for our use;  
Whence  in the heavens  or in the floods  he shall  pour wealth  upon  our lands.   
5 The singers  kindle  him, the Priest,  Agni  the Lord  of tribes  of men,   
Resplendent  and without  a peer through  his own excellent  designs.   
6 Help  us, thou Brahman,  best of all invokers  of the Gods  in song.   
Beam,  Friend  of Maruts,  bliss on us, O Agni,  a most  liberal  God.   
 
7 Yea, grant us treasure  thousandfold  with children  and with nourishm
ent, And,  Agni,  splendid  hero strength,  exalted,  wasting  not away.  
 
HYMN  XIV. Agni.  
1 THE  pleasant  Priest  is come  into the synod,  true, skilled  in sacrifice,  most  wise,  Ordainer.   
Agni,  the Son of Strength,  whose  car is lightning,  whose  hair is flame,  hath shown  on earth  his lustre.   
2 To thee I offer  reverent  speech:  accept  it: to thee who markest  it, victorious,  faithful!   
Bring,  thou who knowest,  those  who know,  and seat thee amid  the sacred  grass, for help,  O Holy.   
3 The Two who show  their vigour,  Night  and Morning,  by the wind's  paths  shall  haste  to thee O Agni.   
When  men adorn  the Ancient  with oblations,  these  seek,  as on two chariot−seats,  the dwelling.   
4 To thee,  strong  Agni!  Varuna  and Mitra and all the Maruts  sang a song  of triumph,   
What  time unto the people's  lands  thou camest,  spreading  them  as the Sun of men,  with lustre.   
5 Approaching  with raised  hands  and adoration,  we have this day fulfilled  for thee thy longing.   
Worship  the Gods with most  devoted  spirit,  a Priest  with no unfriendly  thought,  O Agni.   
6 For, Son of Strength,  from  thee come  many  succours,  and powers  abundant  that a God possesses.   
Agni,  to us with speech  that hath no falsehood  grant  riches,  real, to be told in thousands.   
7 Whatever,  God,  in sacrifice  we mortals  have  wrought  is all for thee,  strong,  wise of purpose!   
Be thou the Friend  of each good  chariot's  master.  All this enjoy  thou here,  immortal  Agni.   
 
HYMN  XV. Agni.  
1. RESPLENDENT  with thy wide−extending  lustre, dispel  the terrors  of the fiends  who hate us  
May lofty  Agni  be my guide  and shelter,  the easily−invoked,  the good  Protector.   
2 Be thou To us, while  now the morn  is breaking,  be thou a guardian  when  the Sun hath mounted..   
Accept,  as men accept  a true−born  infant,  my laud,  O Agni  nobly  born in body.   
3 Bull,  who beholdest  men,  through  many  mornings,  among  the dark ones shine  forth  red, O Agni.   
Lead  us, good  Lord,  and bear us over trouble:  Help  us who long,  Most  Youthful  God,  to riches.   
4 Shine  forth, a Bull invincible,  O Agni,  winning  by conquest  all the forts and treasures,   
Thou  Jatavedas  who art skilled  in guiding,  the chief  high saving  sacrifice's  Leader.   
5 Lighting  Gods  hither,  Agni,  wisest  Singer,  bring  thou to us many  and flawless  shelters.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Bring  vigour,  like a car that gathers  booty:  bring  us, O Agni,  beauteous.Rarth  and Heaven.   
6 Swell,  O thou Bull and give those  powers  an impulse,  e'en Earth  and Heaven  who yield  their milk in ple
nty,  
Shining,  O God,  with Gods  in clear  effulgence.  Let not a mortal's  evil will obstruct  us.  
7 Agni,  as holy food to thine  invoker,  give wealth  in cattle,  lasting,  rich in marvels.   
To us be born a son and spreading  ofrspring.  Agni,  be this thy gracious  will to us−ward.   
 
HYMN  XVI. Agni.  
1. THIS  Agni  is the Lord of great  felicity  and hero Strength;  Lord  of wealth  in herds  of kine;  Lord  of the 
battles  with the foe.  
2 Wait,  Maruts,  Heroes,  upon  him the Prosperer  in whom  is bliss−increasing  wealth;   
Who  in fights  ever conquer  evil−hearted  men,  who overcome  the enemy.   
3 As such,  O Agni,  deal us wealth  and hero might,  O Bounteous  One!   
Most  lofty,  very glorious,  rich in progeny,  free from  disease  and full of power.   
4 He who made  all that lives,  who passes  all in might,  who orders  service  to the Gods,   
He works  among the Gods,  he works  in hero strength,  yea, also in the praise  of men.   
5 Give  us not up to indigence,  Agni,  nor want  of hero sons,   
Nor, Son of Strength,  to lack of cattle,  nor to blame.  Drive.  thou our enemies  away.   
6 Help  us to strength,  blest  Agni!  rich in progeny,  abundant,  in our sacrifice.   
 
Flood  us with riches  yet more  plenteous,  bringing  weal,  with high renown,  most  Glorious  One!  
 
HYMN  XVII.  Agni.  
1. DULY  enkindled  after ancient  customs,  bringing  all treasures,  he is balmed  with unguents,−   
Flame−haired,  oil−clad,  the purifying  Agni,  skilled  in fair rites,  to bring  the Gods  for worship.   
2 As thou,  O Agni,  skilful  Jatavedas,  hast sacrificed  as Priest  of Earth,  of Heaven,   
So with this offering  bring  the Gods,  and prosper  this sacrifice  today  as erst for Manu.   
3 Three  are thy times  of life, O Jatavedas,  and the three  mornings  are thy births,  O Agni.   
With  these,  well−knowing,  grant  the Gods'  kind favour,  and help in stir aiid stress  the man who worships.   
4 Agni  most  bright  and fair with song  we honour,  yea, the adorable,  O Jatavedas.   
Thee,  envoy,  messenger,  oblation−bearer,  the Gods  have  made  centre  of life eternal.   
5 That Priest  before  thee,  yet more  skilled  in worship,  stablished  of old, healthgiver  by his nature,−   
After  his custom  offer,  thou who knowest,  and lay our sacrifice  where  Gods  may taste it.  
 
HYMN  XVIII.  Agni.  
1. AGNI,  be kind to us when  we approach  thee good  as a friend  to friend,  as sire and mother.   
The races  of mankind  are great  oppressors  burn up malignity  that strives  against  us.  
2 Agni,  burn up the unfriendly  who are near us, burn thou the foeman's  curse  who pays no worship.   
Burn,  Vasu,  thou who markest  well,  the foolish:  let thine  eternal  nimble  beams  surround  thee.   
3 With  fuel, Agni,  and with oil, desirous,  mine  offering  I present  for strength  and conquest,   
With  prayer,  so far as I have  power,  adoring−this  hymn  divine  to gain a hundred  treasures.   
4 Give  with thy glow,  thou Son of Strength,  when  lauded,  great  vital power  to those  who toil to serve  theeRig Veda – English Translation  
.  
Give  richly , Agni,  to the Visvamitras  in rest and stir. Oft have we decked  thy body.   
5 Give  us, O liberal  Lord,  great  gtore  of riches,  for, Agni,  such art thou when  duly kindled.   
Thou  in the happy  singer's  home  bestowest,  amply  with arms  extended,  things  of beauty.   
 
HYMN  XIX. Agni.  
1. Aow,  quick,  sage,  infallible,  all−knowing,  I choose  to be our Priest  at this oblation.   
In our Gods'  service  he, best skilled,  shall  worship:  may he obtain  us boons  for strength  and riches.   
2 Agni,  to thee I lift the oil−fed  ladle,  bright,  with an offering, bearing  our oblation.   
From  the right  hand,  choosing  the Gods'  attendance,  he with rich presents  hath arranged  the worship.   
3 Of keenest  spirit  is the man thou aidest  give us good  offspring,  thou who givest  freely.   
In power  of wealth  most  rich in men. O Agni,  of thee,  the Good,  may we sing forth  fair praises.   
4 Men as they worship  thee the God,  O Agni,  have set on thee full many  a brilliant,  aspect.   
So bring  Most  Youthful  One,  the Gods'  asserrigly,  the Heavenly  Host  which  thou to−day  shalt  honour.   
5 When  Gods  anoint  thee Priest  at their oblation,  and seat thee for thy task as Sacrificer,   
O Agni,  be thou here our kind defender,  and to ourselves  vouchsafe  the gift of glory.   
 
HYMN  XX Agni.  
1. WITH  lauds  at break  of morn  the priest  invoketh  Agni,  Dawn,  Dadhikras,  and both the Asvins.   
With  one consent  the Gods  whose  light is splendid,  longing  to taste our sacrifice,  shall  hear us.  
2 Three  are thy powers,  O Agni,  three  thy stations,  three  are thy tongues,  yea, many,  Child  of Order!   
Three  bodies  hast thou which  the Gods  delight  in: with these  protect  our hymns  with care unceasing.   
3 O Agni,  many  are the names  thou bearest,  immortal,  God,  Divine,  and Jatavedas.   
And many  charms  of charmers,  All−Inspirer!  have  they laid in thee,  Lord  of true attendan ts!  
4 Agni,  like Bhaga,  leads  the godly  people,  he who is true to Law and guards  the seasons.   
 
Ancient,  all−knowing,  he the Vrtra−slayer  shall  bear the singer  safe through  every  trouble.   
5 I call on Savitar  the God,  on Morning,  Brhaspati,  and Dadhikras,  and Agni,   
On Varuna  and Mitra,  on the Asvins,  Bhaga,  the Vasus,  Rudras  and Adityas.   
 
HYMN  XXI. Agni.  
1. SET this our sacrifice  among  the Immortals:  be pleased  with these  our presents,  Jatavedas.   
O Priest,  O Agni,  sit thee down  before  us, and first enjoy the drops  of oil and fatness.   
2 For thee,  O Purifier,  flow the drops  of fatness  rich in oil.  
After  thy wont  vouchsafe  to us the choicest  boon  that Gods  may feast.   
3 Agni,  Most  Excellent!  for thee the Sage  are drops  that drip with oil.  
Thou  art enkindled  as the best of Seers.  Help  thou the sacrifice.   
4 To thee,  O Agni,  mighty  and resistless,  to thee stream  forth  the drops  of oil and fatness.   
With  great  light art thou come,  O praised  by poets!  Accept  our offering,  O thou Sage.   
5 Fatness  exceeding  rich, extracted  from  the midst,−this  as our gift we offer  thee.   
Excellent  God,  the drops  run down  upon  thy skin.  Deal them  to each among  the Gods.   
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  XXII.  Agni.  
1 THIS  is that Agni  whence  the longing  Indra  took the pressed  Soma  deep  within  his body.   
Winner  of spoils  in thousands,  like a courser,  with praise  art thou exalted,  Jatavedas.   
2 That light of thine  in heaven  and earth,  O Agni,  in plants,  O Holy  One,  and in the waters,   
Wherewith  thou hast spread  wide  the air's mid−region−bright  is that splendour,  wavy,  man−beholding.   
3 O Agni,  to the sea of heaven  thou goest:  thou hast called  hither  Gods  beheld  in spirit.   
The waters,  too, come  hither,  those  up yonder  in the Sun's  realm  of light,  and those  beneath  it.  
4 Let fires that dwell  in mist,  combi ned with those  that have  their home  in floods,   
Guileless  accept  our sacrifice,  great  viands  free from  all disease.   
5 Agni,  as holy food to thine  invoker  give wealth  in cattle,  lasting,  rich in marvels.   
To us be born a son and spreading  offspring.  Agni,  be this thy gracious  will to us−ward.   
 
HYMN  XXIII.  Agni.  
1. RUBBED  into life, well stablished  in the dwelling,  Leader  of sacrifice,  the Sage,  the youthful,   
Here  in the wasting  fuel Jatavedas,  eternal,  hath assumed  immortal  being.   
2 Both  Bharatas,  Deva sravas,  Devavata,  have  strongly  rubbed  to life effectual  Agni.   
O Agni,  look thou forth  with ample  riches:  be, every  day, bearer  of food to feed us.  
3 Him nobly  born of old the fingers  ten produced,  him whom  his Mothers  counted  dear.   
Praise  Devavata's  Agni, thou Devasravas,  him who shall  be the people's  Lord.   
4 He set thee in the earth's  most  lovely  station,  in Ila's place,  in days of fair bright  weather.   
On man,  on Apaya,  Agni!  on the rivers  Drsadvati,  Sarasvati,  shine  richly.   
5 Agni,  as holy food to thine  invoker  give wealth  in cattle,  lasting,  rich in marvels.   
To us be born a son and spreading  offspring  Agni,  be this thy gracious  will to us−ward   
 
HYMN  XXIV.  Agni.  
1. AGNI,  subdue  opposing  bands,  and drive  our enemies  away.  Invincible,  slay godless  foes:  give splendo
ur to the worshipper.   
2 Lit with libation,  Agni,  thou,  deathless,  who callest  Gods  to feast,   
Accept  our sacrifice  with joy.  
3 With  splendour,  Agni,  Son of Strength,  thou who art worshipped,  wakeful  One.   
 
Seat thee on this my sacred  grass.  
4 With  all thy fires,  with all the Gods,  Agni,  exalt  the songs  we sing.   
And living  men in holy rites.   
5 Grant,  Agni,  to the worshipper  wealth  rich in heroes,  plenteous  store,   
Make  thou us rich with many  sons.   
 
HYMN  XXV.  Agni.  
1. 1. THOU  art the sapient  Son of Dyaus,  O Agni,  yes and the Child  of Earth,  who knowest  all thing
s.  
Bring  the Gods  specially,  thou Sage,  for worship.   
 
2. 2. Agni  the wise bestows  the might  of heroes  grants  strengthening  food,  preparing  it for nectar.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Thou  who art rich in food bring  the Gods  hither.   
3 Agni,  infallible,  lights  Earth  and Heaven,  immortal  Goddesses  gracious  to all men,−   
Lord  through  his strength,  splendid  through  adorations.   
4 Come  to the sacrifice,  Agni  and Indra  come  to the offerer's  house  who hath the Soma.   
Come,  friendly−minded,  Gods,  to drink  the Soma.   
5 In the floods'  home  art thou enkindled,  Agni,  O Jatavedas,  Son of Strength,  eternal,   
Exalting  with thine  help the gatheringplaces.   
 
 
HYMN  XXVI.  Agni.  
1. REVERING  in our heart  Agni  Vaisvanara,  the finder  of the light,  whose  promises  are true,  
The liberal,  gladsome,  car−borne  God we Kusikas  invoke  him with oblation,  seeking  wealth  with songs.   
2 That Agni,  bright,  Vaisvanara,  we invoke  for help,  and Matarisvan  worthy  of the song  of praise;   
Brhaspati  for man's  observance  of the Gods,  the Singer  prompt  to hear,  the swiftly−moving  guest.   
3 Age after age Vaisvanara,  neighing  like a horse,  is kindled  with the women  by the Kusikas.   
May Agni,  he who wakes  among  Immortal  Gods,  grant  us heroic  strength  and wealth  in noble  steeds.   
4 Let them  go forth,  the strong,  as flames  of fire with might.  Gathered  for victo ry they have  yoked  their 
spotted  deer.   
Pourers  of floods,  the Maruts,  Masters  of all wealth,  they who can ne'er  be conquered,  make  the mountain
s 
shake.   
5 The Maruts,  Friends  of men,  are glorious  as the fire: their mighty  and resplendent  succour  we implor e.  
Those  storming  Sons  of Rudra  clothed  in robes  of rain, boon−givers  of good  gifts,  roar as the lions  roar.  
6 We, band  on band  and troop  following  troop,  entreat  with fair lauds  Agni's  splendour  and the Maruts'  
might,   
With  spotted  deer for steeds,  with wealth  that never  fails,  they,  wise Ones,  come  to sacrifice  at our gatheri
ngs.  
7 Agni  am I who know,  by birth,  all creatures.  Mine  eye is butter,  in my mouth  is nectar.   
I am light threefold,  measurer  of the region  exhaustless  heat am I, named  burnt−obla tion.  
8 Bearing  in mind  a thought  with light accordant,  he purified  the Sun with three  refinings;   
By his own nature  gained  the highest  treasure,  and looked  abroad  over the earth  and heaven.   
9 The Spring  that fails not with a hundred  streamlets,  Father  inspired  of' prayers  that men should  utter,   
The Sparkler,  joyous  in his Parents'  bosorn,  −him,  the Truth−speaker,  sate ye, Earth  and Heaven.   
 
HYMN  XXVII.  Agni.  
1. IN ladle  dropping  oil your food goes in oblation  up to heaven,  Goes  to the Gods  in search  of bliss.   
2 Agni  I laud,  the Sage  inspired,  crowner  of sacrifice  through  song,   
Who  listens  and gives  bounteous  gifts.   
3 O Agni,  if we might  obtain  control  of thee the potent  God,   
 
Then  should  we overcome  our foes.   
4 Kindled  at sacrifices  he is Agni,  hallower,  meet  for praise,   
With  flame  for hair: to him we seek.   
5 Immortal  Agni,  shining  far, enrobed  with oil, well worshipped,  bears   
The gifts of sacrifice  away.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
6 The priests  with ladles  lifted  up, worshipping  here with holy thought,   
Have  brought  this Agni  for our aid.  
7 Immortal,  Sacrificer,  God,  with wondrous  power  he leads  the way,   
Urging  the great  assembly  on.  
8 Strong,  he is set on deeds  ofstrength.  In sacrifices  led in front,   
As Singer  he completes  the rite.  
9 Excellent,  he was made  by thought.  The Germ  of beings  have  I gained,   
Yea, and die Sire of active  strength.   
10 Thee  have I stablished,  Excellent,  O strengthened  by the sage's  prayer,   
Thee,  Agni,  longing,  nobly  bright.   
11 Agni,  the swift  and active  One,  singers,  at time of sacrifice ,  
Eagerly  kindle  with their food.   
12 Agni  the Son of Strength  who shines  up to the heaven  in solemn  rites,   
The wise of heart,  I glorify.   
13 Meet  to be lauded  and adored,  showing  in beauty  through  the dark,   
Agni,  the Strong,  is kindled  well.   
14 Agni  is kindled  as a bull, like a horsebearer  of the Gods:   
Men with oblations  worship  him.  
15 Thee  will we kindle  as a bull, we who are Bulls  ourselves,  O Bull.   
Thee,  Agni,  shining  mightily.   
 
HYMN  XXVIII.  Agni.  
1. AGNI  who knowest  all, accept  our offering  and the cake of meal,  At dawn's  libation,  rich in prayer!   
2 Agni,  the sacrificial  cake hath been  prepared  and dressed  for thee:   
Accept  it, O Most  Youthful  God.   
3 Agni,  enjoy  the cake of meal  and our oblation  three  days old:  
Thou,  Son of Strength,  art stablished  at our sacrifice.   
4 Here  at the midday  sacrifice  enjoy  thou the sacrificial  cake,  wise,  Jatavedas!   
Agni,  the sages  in assemblies  never  minish  the portion  due to thee the Mighty.   
5 O Agni,  at the third  libation  takewith  joy the offered  cake of sacrifice,  thou,  Son of Strength.   
Through  skill in song  bear to the Gods  our sacrifice,  watchful  and fraught  with riches,  to Immortal  God.   
6 O waxing  Agni,  knower,  thou,  of all, accept  our gifts,  the cake,   
And that prepared  ere yesterday.   
 
HYMN  XXIX.  Agni.  
1. HERE  is the gear for friction,  here tinder  made  ready  for the spark.  Bring  thou the Matron:  we will rub 
Agni  in ancient  fashion  forth.   
2 1n the two fire−sticks  Jatavedas  lieth,  even  as the well−set  germ  in pregnant  women,   
Agni  who day by day must  be exalted  by men who watch  and worship  with oblations.   
3 Lay this with care on that which  lies extended:  straight  hath she borne  the Steerwhen  made  prolific.   
With  his red pillar−radiant  is his splendour  −in our skilled  task is born the Son of Ila.  
4 In Ila's place  we set thee down,  upon  the central  point  of earth,   
 
That,  Agni  Jatavedas,  thou mayst  bear our offerings  to the Gods.   
5 Rub into life, ye men,  the Sage,  the guileless,  Immortal,  very wise and fair to look on.  Rig Veda – English Translation  
O men,  bring  forth  the most  propitio us Agni,  first ensign  of the sacrifice  to eastward.   
6 When  with their arms  they rub him straight  he shineth  forth  like a strong  courser,  red in colour,  in the 
wood.   
Bright,  checkless,  as it were  upon  the Atvins'  path,  lie passeth  by the stones  and burnet h up the grass.   
7 Agni  shines  forth  when  born,  observant,  mighty,  the bountiful,  the Singar  praised  by sages;   
Whom,  as adorable  and knowing  all things,  Gods  set at solemn  rites as offeringbearer.   
8 Set thee,  O Priest,  in, thine  own place,  observant:  lay down  the sacrifice  in the home  of worship.   
Thou,  dear to Gods,  shalt  serve  them  with oblation:  Agni,  give long life to the sacrificer.   
9 Raise  ye a mighty  smoke,  my fellow−workers!  Ye shall  attain  to wealth  without  obstruction.   
This Agni  is the battle− winning  Hero  by whom  the Gods  have  overcome  the Dasyus.   
10 This is thine  ordered  place  of birth  whence  sprung  to life thou shonest  forth.   
Knowing  this, Agni,  sit thee down,  and prosper  thou the songs  we sing.   
11 As Germ  Celestial  he is called  Tanunapat,  and Narasamsa  born diffused  in varied  shape.   
Formed  in his Mother  he is Matarisvan;  he hath,  in his course,  become  the rapid  flight  of wind.   
12 With  strong  attrition  rubbed  to life, laid down  with careful  hand,  a Sage,   
Agni,  make  sacrifices  good,  and for the pious  bring  the Gods.   
13 Mortals  have brought  to life the God Immortal,  the Conqueror  with mighty  jaws,  unfailing.   
The sisters  ten, unwedded  and united,  together  grasp  the Babe,  the new−born  Infant.   
14 Served  by the seven  priests,  he shone  forth  from  ancient  time,  when  in his Mother's  bosom,  in her lap, 
he 
glowed.   
Giving  delight  each day he closeth  not his eye, since  from  the Asura's  body  hewas  brought  to life.  
15 Even  as the Maruts,  onslaughts  who attack  the foe, those  born the first of all knew the full power  of 
prayer.   
The Kusikas  have made  the glorious  hymn  ascend,  and, each one singly  in his home,  have  kindled  fire.  
16 As we, O Priest  observant,  have  elected  thee this day, what  time the solemn  sacrifice  began,   
So surely  hast thou worshipp ed, surely  hast thou toiled:  come  thou unto the Soma,  wise and knowing  all.  
 
HYMN  XXX.  Indra.  
1. THE  friends  who offer  Soma  long to find thee:  they pour forth  Soma  and present  their viands.   
They  bear unmoved  the cursing  of the people,  for all our wisdo m comes  from  thee,  O Indra.   
2 Not far for thee are mid−air's  loftiest  regions:  start hither,  Lord  of Bays,  with thy Bay Horses.   
Made  for the Firm  and Strong  are these  libations.  The pressing−stones  are set and fire is kindled.   
3 Fair cheeks  hath Indra,  Maghavan,  the Victor,  Lord  of a great  host,  Stormer,  strong  in action.   
What  once  thou didst  in might  when  mortals  vexed  thee,−where  now,  O Bull,  are those  thy hero exploits?   
4 For, overthrowing  what  hath ne'er  been  shaken,  thou goest  forth  alone  destroyi ng Vrtras.   
For him who followeth  thy Law the mountains  and heaven  and earth  stand  as if firmly  stablished.   
5 Yea, Much−invoked!  in safety  through  thy glories  alone  thou speakest  truth  as Vrtra's  slayer.   
E'en these  two boundless  worlds  to thee,  O Indra,  what  time thou graspest  them,  are but a handful.   
6 Forthwith  thy Bay steeds  down  the steep,  O Indra,  forth,  crushing  foemen,  go thy bolt of thunder!   
Slay those  who meet  thee,  those  who flee, who follow:  make  all thy promise  true; be all completed.   
7 The man to whom  thou givest  as Provider  enjoys  domestic  plenty  undivided.   
Blest,  Indra,  is thy favour  dropping  fatness:  thy worship,  Much−invoked!  brings  gifts in thousands.   
8 Thou,  Indra,  Much−invoked!  didst  crush  to pieces  Kunaru  handless  fiend  who dwelt  with Danu.   
Thou  with might,  Indra,  smotest  dead  the scorner,  the footless  Vrtra  as he waxed  in vigour.   
9 Thou  hast established  in her seat, O Indra,  the level  earth,  vast, vigorous,  unbounded.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
The Bull hath propped  the heaven  and air's mid−region.  By thee sent onward  let the floods  flow hither.   
10 He who withheld  the kine,  in silence  I yielded  in fear before  thy blow,  O Indra.   
 
He made  paths  easy to drive  forth  the cattle.  Loud−breathing  praises  helped  the Much−invoked  One.   
11 Indra  alone  filled  full the earth  and heaven,  the Pair who meet  together,  rich in treasures.   
Yea, bring  thou near us from  the air's mid−region  strength,  on thy car, and wholesome  food,  O Hero.   
12 Surya  transgresses  not the ordered  limits  set daily  by the Lord  of Tawny  Coursers.   
When  to the goal he comes,  his journey  ended,  his Steeds  he looses:  this is Indra's  doing.   
13 Men gladly  in the course  of night  would  look on the broad  bright  front  of the refulgent  Morning;   
And all acknowledge,  when  she comes  in glory,  the manifold  and goodly  works  of Indra.   
14 A mighty  splendour  rests upon  her bosom:  bearing  ripe milk the Cow,  unripe,  advances.   
All sweetness  is collected  in the Heifer,  sweetness  which  Indra  made  for our enjoyment.   
15 Barring  the way they come.  Be firm,  O Indra;  aid friends  to sacrifice  and him who singeth.   
These  must  be slain  by thee,  malignant  mortals,  armed  with ill arts, our quiverbearing  foemen.   
16 A cry is beard  from  enemies  most  near us: against  them  send thy fiercest−flaming  weapon.   
Rend  them  from  under,  crush them  and subdue  them.  Slay,  Maghavan,  and make  the fiends  our booty.   
17 Root  up the race of Raksasas,  O Indra  rend it in front  and crush  it in the middle.   
How  long hast thou bebaved  as one who wavers?  Cast thy hot dart at him who hates  devotion:   
18 When  borne  by strong  Steeds  for our weal,  O Leader,  thou seatest  thee at many  noble  viands.   
May we be winners  of abundant  riches.  May Indra  be our wealth  with store  of children.   
19 Bestow  on us resplendent  wealth.  O Indra  let us enjoy  thine  overflow  of bounty.   
Wide  as a sea our longing  hath expanded,  fulfil  it, O thou Treasure−Lord  of treasures.   
20 With  kine and horses  satisfy  this longing  with very splendid  bounty  skill extend  it.  
Seeking  the light,  with hymns  to thee,  O Indra,  Kusikas  have  brought  their gift, the singers.   
21 Lord  of the kine,  burst  the kine's  stable  open:  cows  shall  be ours,  and strength  that wins  the booty.   
Hero,  whose  might  is true, thy home  is heaven:  to us, O Maghavan,  grant  gifts of cattle.   
22 Call we on Maghavan,  auspicious  Indra,  best Hero  in this fight  where  spoil  is gathered,   
The Strong  who listens,  who gives  aid in battles,  who slays  the Vrtras,  wins  and gathers  riches.   
 
HYMN  XXXI.  Indra.  
1. WISE,  teaching,  following  the thought  of Order,  the sonless  gained  a grandson  from  his daughter.   
Fain,  as a sire, to see his child  prolific,  he sped to meet  her with an eager  spirit.   
2 The Son left not his portion  to the brother,  he made  a home  to hold him who should  gain,  it.  
What  time his Parents  gave the Priest  his being,  of the good  pair one acted,  one promoted.   
3 Agni  was born trembling  with tongue  that flickered,  so that the Red's  great  children  should  be honoured.
  
Great  is their germ,  that born of them  is mighty,  great  the Bays'  Lord's  approach  through  sacrifices.   
4 Conquering  bands  upon  the Warrior  waited:  they recognized  great  light from  out the darkness.   
The conscious  Dawns  went  forth  to meet  his coming,  and the sole Master  of the kine was Indra.   
5 The sages  freed  them  from  their firmbuilt  prison:  the seven  priests  drove  them  forward  with their spirit.   
All holy Order's  pathway  they discovered  he, full of knowledge,  shared  these  deeds  through  worship.   
6 When  Sarama  had found  the mountain's  fissure,  that vast and ancient  place  she plundered  thoroughly.   
In the floods ' van she led them  forth,  light−footed:  she who well knew  came  first unto their lowing.   
7 Longing  for friendship  came  the noblest  singer:  the hill poured  forth  its treasure  for the pious.   
The Hero  with young  followers  fought  and conquered,  and straightwa y Angiras  was singing  praises,   
8 Peer of each noble  thing,  yea, all excelling,  all creatures  doth he know,  he slayeth  Susna.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Our leader,  fain for war, singing  from  heaven,  as Friend  he saved  his lovers  from  dishonour.   
9 They  sate them  down  with spirit  fain for booty,  making  with hymns  a way to life eternal.   
And this is still their place  of frequent  session,  whereby  they sought  to gain the months  through  Order.   
10 Drawing  the milk of ancient  seed prolific,  they joyed  as they beheld  their own possession.   
Their  shout  of triumph  heated  earth  and heaven.  When  the kine showed,  they bade  the heroes  rouse  them.   
11 Indra  drove  forth  the kine,  that Vrtra−slayer,  while  hymns  of praise  rose up and gifts were  offered.   
For him the Cow,  noble  and far−extending,  poured pleasant  juices,  bringing  oil and sweetness.   
 
12 They  made  a mansion  for their Father,  deftly  provided  him a great  and glorious  dwelling;   
With  firm support  parted  and stayed  the Parents,  and, sitting,  fixed  him there  erected,  mighty.   
13 What  time the ample  chalice  had impelled  him, swift  waxing,  vast, to pierce  the earth  and heaven,−   
Him in whom  blameless  songs  are all united:  all powers  invincible  belong  to Indra.   
14 I crave  thy powers,  I crave  thy mighty  friendship:  full many  a team  goes to the Vrtra−slayer.   
Great  is the laud,  we seek the Princes'  favour.  Be thou,  O Maghavan,  our guard  and keeper.   
15 He, having  found  great,  splendid,  rich dominion,  sent life and motion  to his friends  and lovers.   
Indra  who shone  together  with the Heroes  begot  the song,  the fire, and Sun and Morning.   
16 Vast,  the House−Friend,  he set the waters  flowing,  all−lucid,  widely  spread,  that move  together.   
By the wise cleansings  of the meath  made  holy,  through  days,  and nights  they speed  the swift  streams  
onward.   
17 To thee proceed  the dark,  the treasure−holders,  both of them  sanctified  by Surya's  bounty.   
The while  thy ovely  storming  Friends,  O Indra,  fail to attain  the measure  of thy greatness.   
18 Be Lord  of joyous  songs,  O Vrtra−slayer,  Bull dear to all, who gives  the power  of living.   
Come  unto us with thine  auspicious  friendship,  hastening,  Mighty  One,  with mighty  succours.   
19 Like Angiras  I honour  him with worship,  and renovate  old song for him the Ancient.   
Chase  thou the many  godless  evil creatures,  and give us, Maghavan,  heaven's  light to help m.  
20 Far forth  are spread  the purifying  waters  convey  thou us across  them  unto safety.   
Save  us, our Charioteer,  from  harm,  O Indra,  soon,  very soon,  make  us win spoil  of cattle.   
21 His kine their Lord  hath shown,  e'en Vrtra's  slayer,  through  the black  hosts  he passed  with red attendan
ts.  
Teaching  us pleasant  things  by holy Order,  to, us hath he thrown  open  all his portals.   
22 Call we on Maghavan,  auspicious  Indra,  best Hero  in this fight  where  spoil  is gathered.   
The Strong  who listens,  who gives  aid in battles,  who slays  the Vrtras,  wins  and gathers  riches.   
 
HYMN  XXXII.  Indra  
1. DRINK  thou this Soma,  Indra,  Lord  of Soma;  drink  thou the draught  of noonday  which  thou Iovest.   
Puffing  thy cheeks,  impetuous,  liberal  Giver, here loose  thy two Bay Horses  and rejoice  thee.   
2 Quaff  it pure,  meal−blent,  mixt with milk,  O Indra;  we have  poured  forth  the Soma  for thy rapture.   
Knit with the prayer−fulfilling  band  of Maruts,  yea, with the Rudras,  drink  till thou art sated;   
3 Those  who gave increase  to thy strength  and vigour;  the Maruts  singing  forth  thy might,  O Indra.   
Drink  thou,  O fair of cheek,  whose  hand  wields  thunder,  with Rudras  banded,  at our noon  libation.   
4 They,  even  the Maruts  who were  there,  excited  with song  the meath−created  strength  of Indra.   
By them  impelled  to act he reached  the vitals  Of Vrtra,  though  he deemed  that none  might  wound  him.  
5 Pleased,  like a man,  with our libation,  Indra,  drink,  for enduring  hero might,  the Soma.   
Lord  of Bays,  moved  by sacrifice  come  hither:  thou with the Swift  Ones  stirrest  floods  and waters.   
6 When  thou didst  loose  the streams  to run like racers  in the swift  contest,  having  smitten  Vrtra   
With  flying  weapon  where  he lay, O Indra,  and, godless,  kept the Goddesses  encompa ssed.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
7 With  reverence  let us worship  mighty  Indra,  great  and sublime,  eternal,  everyouthful,   
Whose  greatness  the dear world−halves  have  not measured,  no, nor conceived  the might  of him the Holy.   
8 Many  are Indra's  nobly  wrought  achievements,  and none  of all the Gods  transgress  his statutes.   
He beareth  up this earth  and heaven,  and, doer of marvels,  he begot  the Sun and Morning.   
9 Herein,  O Guileless  One,  is thy true greatness,  that soon as born thou drankest  up the Soma.   
Days  may not check  the power  of thee the Mighty,  nor the nights,  Indra,  nor the months,  nor autumns.   
10 As soon  as thou wast born in highest  heaven  thou drankest  Soma  to delight  thee,  Indra;   
And when  thou hadst  pervaded  earth  and heaven  thou wast the first supporter  of the singer.   
11 Thou,  puissant  God,  more  mighty,  slewest.  Ahi showing  his strength  when  couched  around  the waters.
  
The heaven  itself  attained  not to thy greatness  when  with one hip of thine  the earth  was shadowed.   
12 Sacrifice,  Indra,  made  thee wax so mighty,  the dear oblation  with the flowing  Soma.   
O Worshipful,  with worship  help our worship,  for worship  helped  thy bolt when  slaying  Ahi.  
 
13 With  sacrifice  and wish  have  I brought  Indra;  still for new blessings  may I turn him hither,   
Him magnified  by ancient  songs  and praises,  by lauds  of later time and days yet recent.   
14 I have  brought  forth  a song when  longing  seized  me: ere the decisive  day will I laud Indra;   
Then  may lie safely  bear us over trouble,  as in a ship,  when  both sides  invocate  him.  
15 Full is his chalice:  Glory!  Like a pourer  I have  filled  up the vessel  for his drinking.   
Presented  on the right,  dear Soma  juices  have  brought  us Indra,  to rejoice  him, hither.   
16 Not the deep−flowing  flood,  O Much−invoked  One!  not hills that compass  thee about  restrain thee,   
Since  here incited,  for thy friends,  O Indra,  thou breakest  e'en the firm built stall of cattle.   
17 Call we on Maghavan,  auspicious  Indra,  best Hero  in this fight  where  spoil  is gathered,   
The Strong  who listens,  who gives  aid in battles,  who slays the Vrtras,  wins  and gathers  riches.   
 
HYMN  XXXIII.  Indra.  
1. FORTH  from  the bosom  of the mountains,  eager  as two swift  mares  with loosened  rein contending,   
Like two bright  mother  cows  who lick their youngling,  Vipas  and Sutudri  speed  down  their waters.  
2 Impelled  by Indra  whom  ye pray to urge you, ye move  as 'twere  on chariots  to the ocean.   
Flowing  together,  swelling  with your billows,  O lucid  Streams,  each of you seeks  the other.   
3 I have  attained  the most  maternal  River,  we have approached  Vipas, the broad,  the blessed.   
Licking  as 'twere  their calf the pair of Mothers  flow onward  to their common  home  together.   
4 We two who rise and swell  with billowy  waters  move  forward  to the home  which  Gods  have  made  us.  
Our flood  may not be stayed  when  urged to motion.  What  would  the singer,  calling  to the Rivers?   
5 Linger  a little at my friendly  bidding  rest, Holy  Ones,  a moment  in your journey.   
With  hymn  sublime  soliciting  your favour  Kusika's  son hath called  unto the River.   
6 Indra  who wields  the thunder dug our channels:  he smote  down  Vrtra,  him who stayed  our currents.   
Savitar,  God,  the lovely−handed,  led us, and at his sending  forth  we flow expanded.   
7 That hero deed  of Indra  must  be lauded  for ever that he rent Ahi in pieces.   
He smote  away  the obstructors  with his thunder,  and eager  for their course  forth  flowed  the waters.   
8 Never  forget  this word  of thine,  O singer,  which  future  generations  shall  reecho.   
In hymns,  O bard,  show  us thy loving  kindness.  Humble  us not mid men.  To thee be honour!   
9 List quickly,  Sisters,  to the bard who cometh  to you from  far away  with car and wagon.   
Bow  lowly  down;  be easy to be traversed  stay, Rivers,  with your floods  below  our axles.   
10 Yea, we will listen  to thy words,  O singer.  With  wain  and car from  far away thou comest.   
Low,  like a nursing  mother,  will I bend  me, and yield  me as a maiden  to her lover.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
11 Soon  as the Bharatas  have fared  across  thee,  the warrior  band,  urged  on and sped by Indra,   
Then  let your streams  flow on in rapid  motion.  I crave  your favour  who deserve  our worship.   
12 The warrior  host,  the Bharatas,  fared  over the singer  won the favour  of the Rivers.   
Swell  with your billows,  hasting,  pouring  riches.  Fill full your channels,  and roll swiftly  onward.   
13 So let your wave  bear up the pins, and ye, O Waters,  spare  the thongs;   
And never  may the pair of Bulls,  harmless  and sinless,  waste  away.   
 
HYMN  XXXIV.  Indra.  
1. FORT−RENDER,  Lord  of Wealth,  dispelling  foemen,  Indra  with lightnings  hath o'ercome  the Dasa.   
Impelled  by prayer  and waxen great  in body,  he hath filled  earth  and heaven,  the Bounteous  Giver.   
2 I stimulate  thy zeal, the Strong,  the Hero  decking  my song  of praise  forth;  Immortal.   
O Indra,  thou art equally  the Leader  of heavenly  hosts  and human  generations.   
3 Leading,  his band  Indra  encompassed  Vrtra;  weak  grew  the wily leader  of enchanters.   
He who burns  fierce  in forests  slaughtered  Vyamsa,  and made  the Milch−kine  of the nights  apparent.   
4 Indra,  light−winner,  days'  Creator,  conquered,  victorious,  hostile  bands  with those who loved  him.  
For man the days'  bright  ensign  he illumined,  and found  the light for his joy and gladness.   
 
5 Forward  to fiercely  falling  blows  pressed  Indra,  herolike  doing  many  hero exploits.   
These  holy songs  he taught  the bard who gaised  him, and widely  spread  these  Dawns'  resplendent  colour.   
6 They  laud the mighty  acts of him the Mighty,  the many  glorious  deeds  performed  by Indra.   
He in his strength,  with all−surpassing  prowess,  through  wondrous  arts crushed  the malignant  Dasyus.   
7 Lord  of the brave,  Indra  who rules  the people  gave freedom  to the Gods  by might  and battle.   
Wise  singers  glorify  with chanted  praises  these  his achievements  in Vivasvan's  dwelling.   
8 Excellent,  Conqueror,  the victory−giver,  the winner  of the light and Godlike  Waters,   
He who hath won this broad  earth  and this heaven,  −in Indra  they rejoice  who love devotions.   
9 He gained  possession  of the Sun and Horses,  Indra  obtained  the Cow  who feedeth  many.   
Treasure  of gold he won;  he smote  the Dasyus,  and gave protection  to the Aryan  colour.   
10 He took the plants  and days for his possession;  he gained  the forest  trees  and air's mid−region.   
Vala  he cleft,  and chased  away  opponents:  thus was he tamer  of the overweening.   
11 Call we on Maghavan,  auspicious  Indra,  best Hero  in the fight  where  spoil  is gathered,   
The Strong,  who listens,  who gives  aid in battles,  who slays  the Vrtras,  wins  and gathers  treasures.   
 
HYMN  XXXV  Indra.  
1. MOUNT  the Bay Horses  to thy chariot  harnessed,  and come  to us like Vayu  with his coursers.   
Thou,  hastening  to us, shalt drink  the Soma.  Hail,  Indra.  We have  poured  it for thy rapture.   
2 For him, the God who is invoked  by many,  the two swift  Bay Steeds  to the pole I harness,   
That they in fleet course  may bring  Indra  hither,  e'en to this sacrifice  arranged  completely.   
3 Bring  the strong  Steeds  who drink  the warm  libation,  and, Bull of Godlike  nature,  be thou gracious.   
Let thy Steeds  eat; set free thy Tawny  Horses,  and roasted  grain  like this consume  thou daily.   
4 Those  who are yoked  by prayer  I harness, fleet friendly  Bays  who take their joy together.   
Mounting  thy firm and easy car, O Indra,  wise and all−knowing  come  thou to the Soma.   
5 No other  worshippers  must  stay beside  them  thy Bays,  thy vigorous  and smooth−backed  Coursers.   
Pass by them  all and hasten  onward  hither:  with Soma  pressed  we will prepare  to feast  thee.   
6 Thine  is this Sorna:  hasten  to approach  it. Drink  thou thereof,  benevolent,  and cease  not.  
Sit on the sacred  grass  at this our worship,  and take these  drops  into thy belly,  Indra .  Rig Veda – English Translation  
7 The grass  is strewn  for thee,  pressed  is the Soma;  the grain  is ready  for thy Bays  to feed on.  
To thee who lovest  them,  the very mighty,  strong,  girt by Maruts,  are these  gifts presented.   
8 This the sweet  draught,  with cows,  the men,  the mountains,  the waters,  Indra,  have for thee made  ready.   
Come,  drink  thereof,  Sublime  One,  friendly−minded,  foreseeing,  knowing  well the ways  thou goest.   
9 The Maruts,  they with whom  thou sharedst  Soma,  Indra,  who made  thee strong  and were  thine  army,−   
With  these  accordant,  eagerly  desirous  drink  thou this Soma  with the tongue  of Agni.   
10 Drink,  Indra,  of the juice  by thine  own nature,  or by the tongue  of Agni,  O thou Holy.   
Accept  the sacrificial  gift, O Sakra,  from  the Adhvaryu's  hand  or from  the Hotar's.   
11 Call we on Maghavan,  auspicious  Indra,  best Hero  in the fight  where  spoil  is gathered,   
The Strong,  who listens,  who.gives  aid in battles,  who slays  the Vrtras,  wins  and gathers  riches.   
 
HYMN  XXXVI.  Indra.  
1. WITH  constant  succours,  fain thyself  to share  it, make  this oblation  which  we bring  effective.  Grown  
great  through  strengthening  gifts at each libation,  he hath become  renowned  by mighty  exploits.  2 For I
ndra were  the Somas  erst−  discovered,  whereby  he grew  strong−jointed,  vast, and skilful.  Indra  , take qu
ickly  these  presented  juices:  drink  of the strong,  that which  the strong  have  shaken.  3 Drink  and wax gre
at. Thine  are the juices,  Indra,  both Somas  of old time and these  we bring  thee.  Even  as thou drankest,  I
ndra,  earlier  Somas,  so drink  to−day,  a new guest,  meet  for praises.  4 Great  and impetuous,  mighty−voi
ced in battle,  surpassing  power  is his, and strength  resistless.  Him the broad  earth  hath never  comprehen
ded when  Somas  cheered  the Lord  of Tawny  Coursers.   
5 Mighty  and strong  he waxed  for hero exploit:  the Bull was furnished  a Sage's  wisdom.   
Indra  is our kind Lord;  his steers  have  vigour;  his cows  are many  with abundant  offspring.   
6 As floods  according  to their stream  flow onward,  so to the sea, as borne  on cars, the waters.   
Vaster  is Indra  even than his dwelling,  what  time the stalk milked  out, the Soma,  fills him.  
7 Eager  to mingle  with the sea, the rivers  carry  the well−pressed  Soma  juice  to Indra.   
They  drain  the stalk  out with their arms,  quick−banded,  and cleanse  it with a stream  of mead and filters.   
8 Like lakes  appear  his flanks  filled  full with Soma:  yea, he contains  libations  in abundance.   
When  Indra  had consumed  the first sweet  viands,  he, after slaying  Vrtra,  claimed  the Soma.   
9 Then  bring  thou hither,  and let none  prevent  it: we know  thee well,  the Lord  of wealth  and treasure.   
That splendid  gift which  is thine  own,  O Indra,  vouchsafe  to us, Lord  of the Tawny  Coursers.   
10 O Indra,  Maghavan,  impetuous  mover,  grant  us abundant  wealth  that brings  all blessings.   
Give  us a hundred  autumns  for our lifetime:  give us, O fair−checked  Indra,  store  of heroes.   
11 Call we on Indra,  Maghavan,  auspicious,  best Hero  in the fight  where  spoil  is gathered,   
The Strong,  who listens,  who gives  aid in battles,  who slays  the Vrtras,  wins  and gathers  riches.   
 
HYMN  XXXVII.  Indra.  
1. O INDRA,  for the strength  that slays  Vrtra  and conquers  in the fight,   
We turn thee hitherward  to us.  
2 O Indra,  Lord  of Hundred  Powers,  may those  who praise  thee hitherward.   
Direct  thy spirit  and thine  eye.  
3 O Indra , Lord  of Hundred  Powers,  with all our songs  we invocate   
Thy names  for triumph  over foes.   
4 We strive  for glory  through  the powers  immense  of him whom  many  praise,   
Of Indra  who supports  mankind.   
5 For Vrtra's  slaughter  I address  Indra  whom  many  invocat e,  Rig Veda – English Translation  
To win us booty  in the wars.   
6 In battles  be victorious.  We seek thee,  Lord  of Hundred  Powers,   
Indra,  that Vrtra  may be slain.   
7 In splendid  combats  of the hosts,  in glories  where  the fight  is won.   
Indra,  be victor  over foes.   
8 Drink  thou the Soma  for our help,  bright,  vigilant,  exceeding  strong,   
O Indra,  Lord  of Hundred  Powers.   
9 O Satakratu,  powers  which  thou mid the Five Races  hast displayed−   
These,  Indra,  do I claim  of thee.   
10 Indra,  great  glory  hast thou gained.  Win splendid  fame  which  none  may mar  
We make  thy might  perpetual.   
11 Come  to us either  from  anear,  Or, Sakra,  come  from  far away.   
Indra,  wherever  be thy home,  come to us thence,  O Thunder−armed.   
 
HYMN  XXXVIII.  Indra.  
1. HASTING  like some  strong  courser  good  at drawing,  a thought  have  I imagined  like a workman.   
Pondering  what  is dearest  and most  noble,  I long to see the sages  full of wisdom.   
2 Ask of the sages'  mighty  generations  firm−minded  and devout  they framed  the heaven.   
These  are thy heart−sought  strengthening  directions,  and they have  come  to be sky's  upholders.   
3 Assuming  in this world  mysterious  natures,  they decked  the heaven  and earth  for high domin ion,  
Measured  with measures,  fixed  their broad  expanses,  set the great  worlds  apart  held firm for safety.   
4 Even  as he mounted  up they all adorned  him: self−luminous  he travels  clothed  in splendour.   
That is the Bull's,  the Asura's  mighty  figure:  he, omniform,  hath reached  the eternal  waters.   
 
5 First the more  ancient  Bull engendered  offspring;  these  are his many  draughts  that lent him vigour.   
From  days of old ye Kings,  two Sons  of Heaven,  by hymns  of sacrifice  have  won dominion.   
6 Three  seats  ye Sovra ns, in the Holy  synod,  many,  yea, all, ye honour  with your presence.   
There  saw I, going  thither  in the spirit,  Gandharvas  in their course  with wind−blown  tresses.   
7 That same  companionship  of her, the Milch−cow,  here with the strong  Bull's  divers  forms  they stablishe
d.  
Enduing  still some  new celestial  figure,  the skilful  workers  shaped  a form  around  him.  
8 Let no one here debar  me from  enjoying  the golden  light which  Savitar  diffuses.   
He covers  both all−fostering  worlds  with praises  even  as a woman  cherishes  her children.   
9 Fulfil,  ye twain,  his work,  the Great,  the Ancient:  as heavenly  blessing  keep  your guard  around  us.  
All the wise Gods  behold  his varied  actions  who stands  erect,  whose  voice  is like a herdsman's.   
10 Call we on Indra,  Maghavan,  auspicious,  best Hero  in the fight  where  spoil  is gathered,   
The Strong,  who listens,  who gives  aid in battles,  who slays  the Vrtras,  wins  and gathers  riches.   
 
HYMN  XXXIX.  Indra.  
1. To Indra  from  the heart  the hymn  proceedeth,  to him the Lord,  recited,  built with praises;   
The wakening  song  sung  forth  in holy synod:  that which  is born for thee,  O Indra,  notice.   
2 Born  from  the heaven  e'en in the days aforetime,  wakening,  sting  aloud  in holy synod,   
Auspicious,  clad in white  and shining  raiment,  this is the ancient  hymn  of our forefathers.   
3 The Mother  of the Twins  hath borne  Twin  Children:  my tongue's  tip raised  itself  and rested  silent.   
Killing  the darkness  at the light's  foundation,  the Couple  newly  born attain  their beauty.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
4 Not one is found  among  them, none  of mortals,  to blame  our sires who fought  to win the cattle.   
Their  strengthener  was Indra  the Majestic  he spread  their stalls  of kine the Wonder−Worker.   
5 Where  as a Friend  with friendly  men,  Navagvas,  with heroes,  on his knees  he sought  the cattle.  
There,  verily  with ten Dasagvas  Indra  found  the Sun lying  hidden  in the darkness.   
6 Indra  found  meath  collected  in the milch−cow,  by foot and hoof,  in the cow's  place  of pasture.   
That which  lay secret,  hidden  in the waters,  he held in his right  hand, the rich rewarder.   
7 He took the light,  discerning  it from  darkness:  may we be far removed  from  all misfortune.   
These  songs,  O Soma−drinker,  cheered  by Soma,  Indra,  accept  from  thy most  zealous  poet.   
8 Let there  be light through  both the worlds  for worship:  may we be far from  most  overwhelming  evil.  
Great  woe comes  even  from  the hostile  mortal,  piled  up; but good  at rescue  are the Vasus.   
9 Call we on Maghavan,  auspicious  Indra,  best Hero  in the fight  where  spoil  is gathered,   
The Strong,  who listens , who gives  aid in battles,  who slays  the Vrtras,  wins  and gathers  riches.   
 
HYMN  XL. Indra.  
1. THEE,  Indra,  we invoke,  the Bull,  what  time the Soma  is expressed.  So drink  thou of the savoury  juice.
  
2 Indra,  whom  many  laud,  accept  the strength−conferring  Soma  juice:   
Quaff,  pour down  drink  that satisfies.   
3 Indra,  with all the Gods  promote  our wealth−bestowing  sacrifice,   
Thou  highly−lauded  Lord  of men.   
4 Lord  of the brave,  to thee proceed  these  drops  of Soma  juice  expressed,   
The bright  drops  to thy dwelling−place.   
5 Within  thy belly,  Indra,  take juice,  Soma  the most  excellent:  Thine  are the drops celestial.   
6 Drink  our libation,  Lord  of hymns:  with streams  of meath  thou art bedewed   
Our glory,  Indra,  is thy gift.  
7 To Indra  go the treasures  of the worshipper,  which  never  fail:  
He drinks  the Soma  and is strong   
8 From  far away,  from  near at hand,  O Vrtra−slayer,  come  to us:  
 
Accept  the songs  we sing to thee.   
9 When  from  the space  between  the near and far thou art invoked  by us,  
Thence,  Indra.  come  thou hitherward.   
 
HYMN  XLI. Indra.  
1. INVOKED  to drink  the Soma  juice,  come  with thy Bay Steeds,  Thunder−armed   
Come,  Indra,  hitherward  to me.  
2 Our priest  is seated,  true to time;  the grass  is regularly  strewn;   
The pressing−stones  were  set at morn.   
3 These  prayers,  O thou who hearest  prayer  are offered:  seat thee on the grass.   
Hero,  enjoy  the offered  cake.   
4 O Vrtra−slayer,  be thou pleased  with these  libations,  with these  hymns,   
Song−loving  Indra,  with our lauds.   
5 Our hymns  caress  the Lord  of Strength,  vast, drinker  of the Soma's  juice,   
Indra,  as mother−cows  their calf.  
6 Delight  thee with the juice  we pour for thine  own great  munificence:   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Yield  not thy singer  to reproach.   
7 We, Indra,  dearly  loving  thee,  bearing  oblation,  sing thee hymns   
Thou,  Vasu,  dearly  lovest  us.  
8 O thou to whom  thy Bays  are dear,  loose  not thy Horses  far from us:  
Here  glad thee,  Indra,  Lord  divine.   
9 May long−maned  Coursers,  dropping  oil, bring  thee on swift  car hitherward,   
Indra,  to seat thee on the grass.   
 
HYMN  XLII.  Indra.  
1. COME  to the juice  that we have  pressed,  to Sorna,  Indra,  bleat  with milk:   
Come,  favouring  us, thy Bay−drawn  car!  
2 Come,  Indra,  to this gladdening  drink,  placed  on the grass,  pressed  out with stones:   
Wilt thou not drink  thy fill thereof?   
3 To Indra  have my songs  of praise  gone  forth,  thus rapidly  sent hence,   
To turn him to the Soma−draught.   
4 Hither  with songs  of praise  we call Indra  to drink  the Soma  juice:   
Will he not come  to us by lauds?   
5 Indra,  these  Somas  are expressed.  Take  them  within  thy belly,  Lord   
Of Hundred  Powers,  thou Prince  of Wealth.   
6 We know  thee winner  of the spoil,  and resolute  in battles,  Sage!   
Therefore  thy blessing  we implore.   
7 Borne  hither  by thy Stallions,  drink,  Indra,  this juice  which  we have pressed,   
Mingled  with barley  and with milk.   
8 Indra,  for thee,  in thine  own place,  I urge the Soma  for thy draught:   
Deep  in thy heart  let it remain,   
9 We call on thee,  the Ancient  One,  Indra,  to drink  the Soma  juice,   
We Kusikas  who seek thine  aid.  
 
HYMN  XLIII.  Indra.  
1. MOUNTED  upon  thy chariot−seat  approach  us: thine  is the Sorna−draught  from  days aforetime.  Loose
 for the sacred  grass  thy dear companions.  These  men who bring  oblation  call thee hither.   
2 Come  our true Friend,  passing  by many  people;  come  with thy two Bay Steeds  to our devotions;   
For these  our hymns  are calling  thee,  O Indra,  hymns  formed  for praise,  soliciting  thy friendship.   
3 Pleased,  with thy Bay Steeds,  Indra,  God,  come  quickly  to this our sacrifice  that heightens  worship;   
For with my thoughts,  presenting  oil to feed thee,  I call thee to the feast  of sweet  libations.   
4 Yea, let thy two Bay Stallions  bear thee hither,  well limbed  and good  to draw,  thy dear companions.   
Pleased  with the corn−blent  offering  which  we bring  thee,  may Indra,  Friend,  hear his friend's  adoration.   
5 Wilt thou not make  me guardian  of the people,  make  me, impetuous  Maghavan,  their ruler?   
Make  me a Rsi having  drunk  of Soma?  Wilt thou not give me wealth  that lasts for ever?   
6 Yoked  to thy chariot,  led thy tall Bays,  Indra,  companions  of thy banquet,  bear thee hither,   
Who  from  of old press  to heaven's  farthest  limits,  the Bull's  impetuous  and well−groomed  Horses.   
7 Drink  of the strong  pressed  out by strong  ones,  Indra,  that which  the Falcon  brought  thee when  thou 
longedst;   
In whose  wild joy thou stirrest  up the people,  in whose  wild joy thou didst  unbar  the cow−stalls.   
8 Call we on Indra,  Makhavan,  auspicious,  best Hero  in the fight  where  spoil  is gathered;   Rig Veda – English Translation  
The Strong,  who listens,  who gives  aid in battles,  who slays  the Vrtras,  wins  and gathers  riches.   
 
HYMN  XLIV.  Indra.  
1. May this delightsome  Soma  be expressed  for thee by tawny  stones.  Joying  thereat,  O Indra,  with thy Ba
y Steeds  come:.  ascend  thy golden−coloured  car.  
2 In love thou madest  Usas  glow,  in love thou madest  Surya  shine.   
Thou,  Indra,  knowing,  thinking,  Lord  of Tawny  Steeds,  above  all glories  waxest  great.   
3 The heaven  with streams  of golden  hue, earth  with her tints of green  and gold−   
The golden  Pair yield  Indra  plenteous  nourishment:  between  them  moves the golden  One.   
4 When  born to life the golden  Bull illumines  all the realm  of light.   
He takes  his golden  weapon,  Lord  of Tawny  Steeds,  the golden  thunder  in his arms.   
5 The bright,  the well−loved  thunderbolt,  girt with the bright,  Indra  disclosed,   
Disclosed  the Soma  juice  pressed  out by tawny  stones,  with tawny  steeds  drave  forth  the kine.   
 
HYMN  XLV.  Indra.  
1. COME  hither,  Indra,  with Bay Steeds,  joyous,  with tails like peacocks'  plumes.   
Let no men cheek  thy course  as fowlers  stay the bird:  pass o'er them  as o'er desert  lands.   
2 He who slew Vrtra,  burst  the cloud,  brake  the strongholds  and drave  the floods,   
Indra  who mounts  his chariot  at his Bay Steeds'  cry, shatters  e'en things  that stand  most  firm.   
3 Like pools  of water  deep  and full, like kine thou cherishest  thy might;   
Like the milch−cows  that go well−guarded  to the mead,  like water−brooks  that reach  the lake.   
4 Bring  thou us wealth  with power  to strike,  our share,  'gainst  him who calls it his.  
Shake,  Indra,  as with hooks,  the tree for ripened  fruit,  for wealth  to satisfy  our wish.   
5 Indra,  self−ruling  Lord  art thou,  good  Leader,  of most  glorious  fame.   
So, waxen  in thy strength,  O thou whom  many  praise,  be thou most  swift  to hear our call.  
 
HYMN  XLVI.  Indra.  
1. OF thee,  the Bull,  the Warrior,  Sovran  Ruler,  joyous  and fierce,  ancient  and ever youthful,   
The undecaying  One who wields  the thunder,  renowned  and great,  great  are the exploits,  Indra.   
2 Great  art thou,  Mighty  Lord,  through  manly  vigour,  O fierce  One,  gathering  spoil,  subdu ing others,   
Thyself  alone  the universe's  Sovran:  so send forth  men to combat  and to rest them.   
3 He hath surpassed  all measure  in his brightness,  yea, and the Gods,  for none  may be his equal.   
Impetuous  Indra  in his might  cxccedcth  wide  vast mid−air  and heaven  and earth  together.   
 
4 To Indra,  even  as rivers  to the ocean,  flow forth  from  days of old the Soma  juices;   
To him wide  deep  and mighty  from  his birth−time,  the well of holy thoughts,  aIl−co mprehending.   
5 The Soma,  Indra,  which  the earth  and heaven  bear for thee as a mother  bears  her infant,   
This they send forth  to thee,  this, vigorous  Hero!  Adhvaryus  purify  for thee to drink  of.  
 
HYMN  XLVII.  Indra.  
1. DRINK,  Indra,  Marut−girt,  as Bull,  the Soma,  for joy, for rapture  even  as thou listest.   
Pour  down  the flood  of meath  within  thy belly:  thou from  of old art King  of Soma  juices.   