Rig Veda – English Translation  
2 Indra,  accordant,  with the banded  Maruts,  drink  Soma,  Hero,  as wise Vrtra−slayer.   
Slay thou our foemen,  drive  away  assailants  and make  us safe on every  side from  danger.   
3 And,  drinker  at due seasons,  drink  in season,  Indra,  with friendly  Gods,  our pressed−out  Soma.   
The Maruts  following,  whom  thou madest  sharers,  gave  thee the victory,  and thou slewest  Vrtra.   
4 Drink  Soma,  Indra,  banded  with the Maruts  who,  Maghavan,  strengthened  thee at Ahi's  slaughter,   
'Gainst  Sambara,  Lord  of Bays!  in winning  cattle,  and now rejoice  in thee,  the holy Singers.   
5 The Bull whose  strength  hath waxed,  whom  Maruts  follow,  free−g iving  Indra,  the celestial  Ruler,   
Mighty,  all−conquering,  the victory−giver,  him let us call to grant  us new protection.   
 
HYMN  XLVIII.  Indra.  
1. SOON  as the young  Bull sprang  into existence  he longed  to taste the pressed−out  Soma's  liquor.   
Drink  thou thy fill, according  to thy longing,  first, of the goodly  mixture  blent  with Soma.   
2 That day when  thou wast born thou,  fain to taste it, drankest  the plant's  milk which  the mountains  nouris
h.  
That milk thy Mother  first, the Dame  who bare thee,  poured  for thee in thy mighty  Father's  dwelling.   
3 Desiring  food he came  unto his Mother,  and on her breast  beheld  the pungent  Soma.   
Wise,  he moved  on, keeping  aloof  the others,  and wrought  great  exploits  in his varied  aspects.   
4 Fierce,  quickly  conquering,  of surpassing  vigour,  he framed  his body  even  as he listed.   
E'en from  his birth−time  Indra  conquered  Tvastar,  bore off the Soma  and in beakers  drank  it.  
5 Call we on Maghavan,  auspicious  Indra,  best Hero  in the fight  where  spoil  is gathered;   
The Strong,  who listens,  who gives  aid in battles,  who slays  the Vrtras,  wins  and gathers  riches.   
 
HYMN  XLIX.  Indra.  
1. GREAT  Indra  will I laud,  in whom  all people  who drink  the Soma  have  attained  their longing;   
Whom,  passing  wise,  Gods,  Heaven  and Earth,  engendered,  formed  by a Master's  hand,  to crush  the Vrtra
s.  
2 Whom,  most  heroic,  borne  by Tawny  Coursers,  verily  none  subdueth  in the battle;   
Who,  reaching  far, most  vigorous,  hath shortened  the Dasyu's  life with Warriors  bold of spirit.   
3 Victor  in fight,  swift  mover like a warhorse,  pervading  both worlds,  rainer  down  of blessings,   
To he invoked  in war like Bhaga,  Father,  as 'twere,  of hymns,  fair, prompt  to hear,  strength−giver.   
4 Supporting  heaven,  the high back  of the region,  his car is Vayu  with his team  of Vasus.   
Illumining  the nights,  the Sun's  creator,  like Dhisana  he deals  forth  strength  and riches.   
5 Call we on Maghavan,  auspicious  Indra,  best Hero  in the fight  where  spoil  is gathered;   
The Strong,  who listens,  who gives  aid in battles,  who slays  the Vrtras, wins  and gathers  treasure.   
 
HYMN  L. Indra.  
1. LET Indra  drink,  All−hail!  for his is Soma,−the  mighty  Bull come,  girt by Maruts,  hither.
 Far−reaching,  let him fill him with these  viands,  and let our offering  sate his body's  longing
. 2 I yoke  thy pair of trusty  Steeds  for swiftness,  whose  faithful  service  from  of old thou lov
est. Here,  fair of cheek!  let thy Bay Coursers  place  thee:  drink  of this lovely  welleffused  lib
ation.   
3 With  milk they made  Indra  their good  Preserver,  lauding  for help and rule the bounteous  rainer.   
Impetuous  God,  when  thou hast drunk  the Soma,  enraptured  send us cattle  in abundance.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
4 With  kine and horses  satisfy  this longing  with very splendid  bounty  still extend  it.  
Seeking  the light,  with hymns  to thee,  O Indra,  the Kusikas  have  brought  their gift, the singers.   
5 Call we on Maghavan,  auspicious  Indra,  best Hero  in the fight  where  spoil  is gathered;   
The Strong,  who listens,  who gives  aid in battles,  who slays  the Vrtras,  wins  and gathers  riches.   
 
HYMN  LI. Indra.  
1. HIGH  hymns  have  sounded  forth  the praise  of Maghavan,  supporter  of mankind,  of Indra  meet  for laud
s;  
Him who hath waxen  great,  invoked  with beauteous  songs,  Immortal  One,  whose  praise  each day is sung 
aloud.   
2 To Indra  from  all sides  go forth  my songs  of praise,  the Lord  of Hundred  Powers,  strong,  Hero,  like the 
sea,  
Swift,  winner  of the booty,  breaker−down  of forts,  faithful  and ever−glorious,  finder  of the light.   
3 Where  battle's  spoil  is piled  the singer  winneth  praise,  for Indra  taketh  care of matchless  worshippers.   
He in Vivasvan's  dwelling  findeth  his delight:  praise  thou the ever−conquering  slayer  of the foe.  
4 Thee,  valorous,  most  heroic  of the heroes,  shall  the priests  glorify  with songg  and praises.   
Full of all wondrous  power  he goes to conquest:  worship  is his, sole Lord  from  days aforetime.   
5 Abundant  are the gifts he gives  to mortals:  for him the earth  bears  a rich store  of treasures.   
The heavens,  the growing  plants,  the living  waters,  the forest  trees  preserve  their wealth  for Indra.   
6 To thee,  O Indra,  Lord  of Bays,  for ever are offered  prayers  and songs:  accept  them  gladly.   
As Kinsman  think  thou of some  fresh  assistance;  good  Friend,  give strength  and life to those  who praise  t
hee.  
7 Here,  Indra,  drink  thou Soma  with the Maruts,  as thou didst  drink  the juice  beside  Saryata.   
Under  thy guidance,  in thy keeping,  Hero,  the singers  serve,  skilled  in fair sacrifices.   
8 So eagerly  desirous  drink  the Soma,  our juice,  O Indra,  with thy friends  the Maruts,   
Since  at thy birth  all Deities  adorned  thee for the great  fight,  O thou invoked  of many.   
9 He was your comrade  in your zeal, O Maruts:  they,  rich in noble  gifts,  rejoiced  in Indra.   
With  them  together  let the Vrtra−slayer  drink  in his home  the worshipper's  libation.   
10 So, Lord  of affluent  gifts,  this juice  hath been  pressed  for thee with strength   
Drink  of it, thou who lovest  song.   
11 Incline  thy body  to this juice  which  suits thy Godlike  nature  well:   
May it cheer  thee who lovest  it.  
12 Brave  Indra,  let it work  through  both thy flanks,  and through  thy head  by prayer,   
And through  thine  arms, to prosper  us.  
 
HYMN  LII. Indra.  
1. INDRA,  accept  at break  of day our Soma  mixt with roasted  corn,  With  groats  with cake,  with eulogies.   
2 Accept,  O Indra,  and enjoy  the well−dressed  sacrificial  cake:  Oblations  are poured  forth  to thee.   
3 Consume  our sacrificial  cake,  accept  the songs  of praise  we sing,   
As he who woes  accepts  his bride.   
4 Famed  from  of old, accept  the cake at our libation  poured  at dawn,   
Forgreat,  O Indra, is thy power.   
5 Let roasted  corn of our midday  libation,  and sacrificial  cake here please  thee,  Indra,   
What  time the lauding  singer,  keen  of purpose  and eager  as a bull, with hymns  implores  thee.   
6 At the third  sacrifice,  O thou whom  many  praise,  give glory  to the roasted  corn and holy cake.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
With  offered  viands  and with songs  may we assist  thee,  Sage,  whom  Vaja  and the Rbhus  wait upon.   
7 The groats  have  we prepared  for thee with Pusan,  corn for thee,  Lord  of Bay Steeds,  with thy horses.   
Eat thou the meal−cake,  banded  with the Maruts,  wise Hero,  Vrtra−slayer,  drink  the Soma.   
 
8 Bring  forth  the roasted  corn to meet  him quickly,  cake for the bravest  Hero  mid the heroes.
 Indra,  may hymns  accordant  with thee daily  strengthen  thee,  Bold  One,  for the draught of So
ma. 
 
HYMN  LIII. Indra,  Parvata,  Etc.  
1. ON a high car, O Parvata  and Indra,  bring  pleasant  viands,  with brave  heroes,  hither.   
Enjoy  the gifts,  Gods,  at our sacrifices  wax strong  by hymns,  rejoice  in our oblation.   
2 Stay still, O Maghavan,  adva nce no farther.  a draught  of well−pressed  Soma  will I give thee.   
With  sweetest  song  I grasp,  O Mighty  Indra,  thy garment's  hem as a child  grasps  his father's.   
3 Adhvaryu,  sing we both;  sing thou in answer:  make  we a laud acceptable  to Indra.   
Upon  this sacrificer's  grass  he seated:  to Indra  shall  our eulogy  be uttered.   
4 A wife,  O Maghavan  is home  and dwelling:  so let thy Bay Steeds  yoked  convey  thee hither.   
Whenever  we press  out for thee the Soma,  let Agni  as our Herald  speed  to call thee.   
5 Depart,  O Maghavan;again  come  hither:  both there  and here thy goat is Indra,  Brother,   
Where  thy tall chariot  hath a place  to rest in, and where  thqu loosest  thy loud−neighing  Courser.   
6 Thou  hast drunk  Soma,  Indra,  turn thee homeward;  thy joy is in thy home,  thy racious  Consort;   
Where  thy tall chariot  hath a place  to rest in, and thy strong  Courser  is set free with guerdon.   
7 Bounteous  are these,  Angirases,  Virupas:  the Asura's  Heroes  and the Sons  of Heaven.   
They,  giving  store  of wealth  to Visvamitra,  prolong  his life through  countless  Soma−pressings.   
8 Maghavan  weareth  every  shape  at pleasure,  effecting  magic  changes  in his body,   
Holy  One,  drinker  out of season,  coming  thrice,  in a moment,  through  fit prayers,  from  heaven.   
9 The mighty  sage,  God−born  and God−incited,  who looks  on men,  restrained  the billowy  river.   
When  Visvamitra  was Sudas's  escort,  then Indra  through  the Kusikas  grew  friendly.   
10 Like swans,  prepare  a song of praise  with pressing−stones,  glad in your hymns  with juice  poured  forth  
in 
sacrif ice.  
Ye singers,  with the Gods,  sages  who look on men,  ye Kutikas  drink  up the Soma's  savoury  meath.   
11 Come  forward,  Kusikas,  and be attentive;  let loose  Sudas's  horse  to win him riches.   
East,  west,  and north,  let the King  slay the foeman,  then at earth's choicest  place  perform  his worship.   
12 Praises  to Indra  have  I sung,  sustainer  of this earth  and heaven.  This prayer  of Visvamitra  keeps  secure
 the 
race of Bharatas.   
13 The Visvamitras  have sung forth  this prayer  to Indra Thunder−aimed:   
So let him make  us prosperous.   
14 Among  the Kikatas  what  do thy cattle?  They  pour no milky  draught,  they heat no caldron.   
Bring  thou to us the wealth  of Pramaganda;give  up to us, O Maghavan,  the low−born.   
15 Sasarpari,  the gift of Jama dagnis,  hath lowed  with mighty  voice  dispelling  famine.   
The Daughter  of the Sun hath spread  our glory  among  the Gods,  imperishable,  deathless.   
16 Sasarpari  brought  glory  speedily  to these,  over the generations  of the Fivefold  Race;   
Daughter  of Paksa,  she bestows  new vital power,  she whom  the ancient  Jamadagnis  gave to me.  
17 Strong  be the pair of oxen,  firm the axles,  let not the pole slip nor the yoke  be broken.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
May Indra,  keep  the yoke−pins  from  decaying:  attend  us, thou whose  fellies  are uninjured.   
18 O Indra,  give our bodies  strength,  strength  to the bulls  who draw  the wains,   
Strength  to our seed and progeny  that they may live, for thou art he who giveth  strength.   
19 Enclose  thee in the heart  of Khayar  timber,  in the car wrought  of Sinsapa  put firmness.   
Show  thyself  strong,  O Axle,  fixed  and strengthened:  throw  us not from  the car whereon  we travel.   
20 Let not this sovran  of the wood  leave  us forlorn  or injure  us.  
Safe may we be until we reach  our homes  and rest us and unyoke.   
21 With  various  aids this day come  to us, Indra,  with best aids speed  us, Maghavan,  thou Hero.   
Let him who hatcth  us fall headlong  downward:  him whom  we hate let vital breath  abandon.   
22 He heats  his very axe, and then cuts a mere  Semal  blossom  off.  
O Indra,  like a caldron cracked  and seething,  so he pours  out foam.   
 
23 Men notice  not the arrow,  O ye people;  they bring  the red beast  deeming  it a bullock.   
A sluggish  steed  men run not with the courser,  nor ever lead an ass before  a charger.   
24 These  men,  the sons of Bharata,  O Indra,  regard  not severance  or close  connexion.   
They  urge their own steed  as it were  another's,  and take him, swift  as the bow's  string,  to battle.   
 
HYMN  LIV. Visvedevas.  
1. To him adorable,  mighty,  meet  for synods,  this strengthening  hymn,  unceasing,  have  they offered.   
May Agni  hear us with his homely  splendours,  hear us, Eternal  One,  with heavenly  lustre.   
2 To mighty  Heaven  and Earth  I sing forth  loudly:  my wish  goes out desirous  and well knowing   
Both,  at whose  laud in synods,  showing  favour, the Gods  rejoice  them  with the living  mortal.   
3 O Heaven  and Earth,  may your great  law he faithful:  he ye our leaders  for our high advantage.   
To Heaven  and Earth  I offer  this my homage,  with food,  O Agni,  as I pray for riches.   
4 Yea, holy Heaven  and Earth,  the ancient  sages  whose  word  was ever true had power  to find you;  
And brave  men in the fightwhere  heroes  conquer,  O Earth,  have  known  you well and paid you honour.   
5 What  pathway  leadeth  to the Gods?  Who  knoweth  this of a truth,  and who will now declare  it?  
Seen  are their lowest  dwelling−places  only,  but they are in remote  and secret  regions.   
6 The Sage  who looketh  on mankind  hath viewed  them  bedewed,  rejoicing  in the seat of Order.   
They  make  a home  as for a bird, though  parted,  with one same  will finding  themselves  together.   
7 Partners  though  parted,  with far−distant  limits,  on one firm place  both stand  for ever watchful,   
And,  being  young  for evermore,  as sisters,  speak  to each other  names  that are united.   
8 All living  things  they part and keep asunder;  though  bearing  up the mighty  Gods  they reel not.  
One All is Lord  of what  is fixed  and moving,  that walks,  that flies,  this multiform  creation.   
9 Afar the Ancient  from  of old I ponder,  our kinship  with our mighty  Sire and Father,−   
Singing  the praise  whereof  the Gods  by custom  stand  on the spacious  far−extended  pathway.   
10 This laud,  O Heaven  and Earth,  to you I utter:  let the kind−hearted  hear,  whose  tongue  is Agni,   
Young,  Sovran  Rulers,  Varuna  and Mitra,  the wise and very glorious  Adityas.   
11 The fair−tongued  Savitar,  the golden−handed,  comes  thrice  from  heaven  as Lord  in our assembly.   
Bear  to the Gods  this song of praise,  and send us, then,  Savitar,  complete  and perfect  safety.   
12 Deft worker,  skiful−handed,  helpful,  holy,  may Tvastar,  God,  give us these  things  to aid us,  
Take  your delight,  Ye Rbhus  joined  with Pusan:  ye have prepared  the rite with stones  adjusted.   
13 Borne  on their flashing  car, the spear−armed  Maruts,  the nimble  Youths  of Heaven,  the Sons  of Order,
  
The Holy,  and Sarasvati,  shall  hear us: ye Mighty,  give us wealth  with noble  offspring.   
14 To Visnu  rich in marvels,  songs  And praises  shall  go as singers  on the road of Bhaga,−   Rig Veda – English Translation  
The Chieftain  of the Mighty  Stride,  whose  Mothers,  the many  young  Dames,  never  disregard  him.  
15 Indra,  who rules  through  all his powers  heroic,  hath with his majesty  filled  earth  and heaven.   
Lord  of brave  hosts,  Fort−crusher,  Vrtra−slayer,  gather  thou up and bring  us store  of cattle.   
16 My Sires  are the Nasatyas,  kind tokinsmen:  the Asvins'  kinship  is a glorious  title.  
For ye are they who give us store  of riches:  ye guard  your gift uncheated  by the bounteous.   
17 This is, ye Wise,  your great  and glorious  title, that all ye Deities  abide  in Indra.   
Friend,  Much−invoked!  art thou with thy dear Rbhus:  fashion  ye this our hymn  for our advantage.   
18 Aryaman,  Aditi  deserve  our worship:  the laws of Varuna  remain  unbroken.   
The lot of childlessness  remove  ye from  us, and let our course  be rich in kine and offspring.   
19 May the Gods'  envoy,  sent to many a quarter,  proclaim  us sinless  for our perfect  safety.   
May Earth  and Heaven,  the Sun, the waters,  hear us, and the wide  firmament  and constellations.   
20 Hear  us the mouatains  which  distil  the rain−drops,  and, resting  firm,  rejoice  in freshening  moistu re.  
May Aditi  with the Adityas  hear us, and Maruts  grant  us their auspicious  shelter.   
21 Soft be our path for ever,  well−provisioned:  with pleasant  meath,  O Gods,  the herbs  besprinkle.   
Safe be my bliss,  O Agni,  in thy friendship:  may I attain  the seat of foodful.  riches,   
22 Enjoy  the offering:  beam  thou strength  upon  us; combine  thou for our good  all kinds  of glory.   
 
Conquer  in battle,  Agni,  all those  foemen,  and light us every  day with loving  kindness.  
 
HYMN  LV. Visvedevas.  
1. AT the first shining  of the earliest  Mornings,  in the Cow's  home  was born the Great  Eternal.   
Now  shall  the statutes  of the Gods  be valid.  Great  is the Gods'  supreme  and sole dominion  −  
2 Let not the Gods  here injure  us, O Agni,  nor Fathers  of old time who know  the region,   
Nor the sign set between  two ancient  dwellings.  Great  is the Gods'  supreme  and sole dominion.   
3 My wishes  fly abroad  to many  places:  I glance  back  to the ancient  sacrifices.   
Let us declare  the truth  when  fire is kindled.  Great  is the Gods'  supreme  and sole dominion.   
4 King  Universal,  born to sundry  quarters,  extended  through  the wood  be lies on couches.   
One Mother  rests:  another  feeds  the Infant.  Great  is the Gods'  supreme  and sole dominion.   
5 Lodged  in old plants,  he grows  again  in younger,  swiftly  within the newly−born  and tender.   
Though  they are unimpregned,  he makes  them  fruitful.  Great  is the Gods'  supreme  and sole dominion.   
6 Now  lying  far away,  Child  of two Mothers,  he wanders  unrestrained,  the single  youngling.   
These  are the laws of Varuna  and Mitra.  Great  is the Gods'  supreme  and sole dominion.   
7 Child  of two Mothers,  Priest,  sole Lord  in synods,  he still precedes  while  resting  as foundation.   
They  who speak  sweetly  bring  him sweet  addresses.  Great  is the Gods'  supreme  and sole dominion.   
8 As to a friendly  warrior  when  he battles,  each thing  that comes  anear  is seen to meet  him.  
The hymn  commingles  with the cow's  oblation.  Great  is the Gods'  supreme  and sole dominion.   
9 Deep  within  these  the hoary  envoy  pierceth;  mighty,  he goeth  to the realm of splendour,   
And looketh  on us, clad in wondrous  beauty.  Great  is the Gods'  supreme  and sole dominion.   
10 Visnu,  the guardian,  keeps  the loftiest  station,  upholding  dear,  immortal  dwelling−places.   
Agni  knows  well all these  created  beings.  Great  is the Gods'  supreme  and sole dominion.   
11 Ye, variant  Pair, have  made  yourselves  twin beauties:  one of the Twain  is dark,  bright  shines  the other;
  
And yet these  two, the dark,  the red, are Sisters.  Great  is the Gods'  supreme  and sole dominion.   
12 Where  the two Cows,  the Mother  and the Daughter,  meet  and give suck yielding  their lordly  nectar,   
I praise  them  at the seat of law eternal.  Great  is the Gods'  supreme  and sole dominion.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
13 Loud  hath she lowed,  licking  the other's  youngling.  On what  world  hath the Milch−cow  laid her udder
?  
This Ila streameth  with the milk of Order.  Great  is the Gods'  supreme  and sole dominion.   
14 Earth  weareth  beauties  manifold:  uplifted,  licking  her Calf of eighteen  months,  she standeth.   
Well−skilled  I seek the seat of law etern al. Great  is the Gods'  supreme  and sole dominion.   
15 Within  a wondrous  place  the Twain  are treasured:  the one is manifest,  the other  hidden.   
One common  pathway  leads  in two directions.  Great  is the Gods'  supreme  and sole dominion.   
16 Let the milch−kine  that have  no calves  storm  downward,  yielding  rich nectar,  streaming,  unexhausted,   
These  who are ever new and fresh  and youthful.  Great  is the Gods'  supreme  and sole dominion.   
17 What  time the Bull bellows  in other  regions,  another  herd receives  the genia l moisture;   
For he is Bhaga,  King,  the earth's  Protector.  Great  is the Gods'  supreme  and sole dominion.   
18 Let us declare  the Hero's  wealth  in horses,  O all ye folk:  of this the Gods  have  knowledge.   
Sixfold  they bear him, or by fives  are harnessed.  Grea t is the Gods'  supreme  and sole dominion.   
19 Tvastar  the God,  the omniform.  Creator,  begets  and feeds  mankind  in various  manner.   
His, verily,  arc all these  living  creatures.  Great  is the Gods'  supreme  dominion.   
20 The two great  meeting  Bowls  hath he united: each of the Pair is laden  with histreasure.   
The Hero  is renowned  for gathering  riches.  Great  is the Gods'  supreme  and sole dominion.   
21 Yea, and on this our earth  the All−Sustainer  dwells  like a King  with noble  friends  about  him.  
In his protection  heroes  rest in safety.  Great  is the Cods'  supreme  and sole dominion.   
22 Rich  in their gifts for thee are herbs  and waters,  and earth  brings  all her wealth  for thee,  O Indra.   
May we as friends  of thine  share  goodly  treasures.  Great  is the Gods'  supreme  and sole dominion.   
 
HYMN  LVI. Visvedevas.  
1. NOT  men of magic  skill,  not men of wisdom  impair  the Gods'  first steadfast  ordinances.   
Ne'er  may the earth  and heaven  which  know  not malice,  nor the fixed  hills,  be bowed  by sage devices.   
2 One,  moving  not away, supports  six burthens:  the Cows  proceed  to him the true, the Highest.   
Near  stand  three  Mighty  Ones  who travel  swiftly:  two are concealed  from  sight,  one is apparent.   
3 The Bull who wears  all shapes,  the triple−breasted,  three−uddered,  with a brood  in many  places,   
Ruleth  majestic  with his triple  aspect,  the Bull,  the Everlasting  Ones'  impregner.   
4 When  nigh them,  as their tracer  he observed  them:  he called  aloud  the dear name  of Adityas.   
The Goddesses,  the Waters,  stayed  to meet  him: they who were  wandering  separate  enclosed  him.  
5 Streams!  the wise Gods  have thrice  three  habitations.  Child  of three  Mothers,  he is Lord  in synods.   
Three  are the holy Ladies  of the Waters,  thrice  here from  heaven  supreme  in our assembly.   
6 Do thou,  O Savitar,  from  heaven  thrice  hither,  three  times  a day, send down  thy blessings  daily.   
Send  us, O Bhaga,  triple  wealth  and treasure;  cause  the two worlds  to prosper  us, Preserver!   
7 Savitar  thrice  from  heaven  pours  down  abundance,  and the fair−handed  Kings  Varuna,  Mitra;   
And spacious  Heaven  and Earth,  yea, and the Waters,  solicit  wealth  that Savitar  may send us.  
8 Three  are the bright  realms,  best, beyond  attainment,  and three,  the Asura's  Heroes,  rule as Sovrans,   
Holy  and vigorous,  never  to be injured.  Thrice  may the Gods  from  heaven  attend  our synod.   
 
HYMN  LVII.  Visvedevas.  
1. MY thought  with fine discernment  hath discovered  the Cow  who wanders  free without  a herdsman,   
Her who hath straightway  poured  me food in plenty:  Indra  and Agni  therefore  are her praisers.   
2 Indra  and Pusan,  deft of hand  and mighty,  well−pleased  have  drained  the heaven's  exhaustless  udder.   
As in this praise  the Gods  have all delighted,  may I win blessing  here from  you, O Vasus.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
3 Fain to lend vigour  to the Bull,  the siste..  with reverence  recognize  the germ  within  him.  
The Cows  come  lowing  hither  to the Youngling,  to him endued  with great  and wondrous  beauties.   
4 Fixing  with thought,  at sacrifice,  the press−stones,  I bid the well−formed  Heaven  and Earth  come  hither
;  
For these  thy flames,  which  give men boons  in plenty,  rise up on high,  the beautiful,  the holy.   
5 Agni,  thy meath−sweet  tongue  that tastes  fair viands,  which  among  Gods  is called  the far−extended,−   
Therewith  make  all the Holy  Odes  be seated  here for our help,  and feed them  with sweet  juices.   
6 Let thy stream  give us drink,  O God,  O Agni,  wonderful  and exhaustless  like the rain−clouds.   
Thus  care for us, O Vasu  Jatavedas,  show  us thy loving−kindness,  reaching  all men.   
 
HYMN  LVIII.  Asvins.  
1. THE  Ancient's  Milch−cow  yields  the things  we long for: the Son of Daksina  travels  between  them.   
She with the splendid  chariot  brings  refulgence.  The praise  of Usas  hath awoke  the Asvins.   
2 They  bear you hither  by well−orderd  statute:  our sacred  offerings  rise as if to parents.   
Destroy  in us the counsel  of the niggard  come  hitherward,  for we have  shown  you favour.   
3 With  lightly−rolling  car and well−yoked  horses  hear this, the press−stone's  song,  ye Wonder−Workers.   
Have  not the sages  of old time,  ye Asvins,  called  you most  prompt  to come and stay misfortune?   
4 Remember  us, and come  to us, for ever men,  as their wont  is, invocate  the Asvins.   
Friends  as it were  have  offered  you these  juices,  sweet,  blent  with milk at the first break  of morning.   
5 Even  through  many  regions,  O ye Asvins  high praise  is yours  among  mankind,  ye Mighty−   
Come,  helpers,  on the paths  which  Gods  have  travelled:  here your libations  of sweet  meath  are ready.   
6 Ancient  your home,  auspicious  is your friendship:  Heroes,  your wealth  is with the house  of Jahnu.   
Form ing again  with you auspicious  friendship,  let us rejoice  with draughts  of meath  together.   
7 O Asvins,  Very  Mighty  ones,  with Vayu  and with his steeds,  one−minded,  ever−youthful,   
Nasatyas,  joying  in the third day's  Soma,  drink  it, not hostile,  Very  Bounte ous Givers.   
 
8 Asvins,  to you are brought  abundant  viands  in rivalry  with sacred  songs,  unceasing.   
Sprung  from  high Law your car, urged  on by press−stones,  goes round  the earth  and heaven  in one brief 
moment.   
9 Asvins,  your Soma  sheds  delicious  sweetnes s: drink  ye thereof  and come  unto our dwelling.   
Your  car, assuming  many  a shape,  most  often  goes to the Soma−presser's  place  of meeting.   
 
HYMN  LIX. Mitra.  
1. MITRA,  when  speaking,  stirreth  men to labour:  Mitra  sustaineth  both the earth  and heaven.   
Mitra beholdeth  men with eyes that close  not. To Mitra  bring,  with holy oil, oblation.   
2 Foremost  be he who brings  thee food,  O Mitra,  who strives  to keep  thy sacred  Law,  Aditya.   
He whom  thou helpest  ne'er  is slain  or conquered,  on him, from  near or far, falls no affliction.   
3 joying  in sacred  food and free from  sickness,  with knees  bent lowly  on the earth's  broad  surface,   
Following  closely  the Aditya's  statute,  may we remain  in Mitra's  gracious  favour.   
4 Auspicious  and adorable,  this Mitra  was born with fair dominion,  King,  Disposer.   
May we enjoy  the grace  of him the Holy,  yea, rest in his propitious  loving−kindness.   
5 The great  Aditya,  to be served  with wor. ship,  who stirreth  men,  is gracious  to the singer.   
To Mitra,  him most  highly  to be lauded,  offer in fire oblation  that he loveth.   
6 The gainful  grace  of Mitra,.  God,  supporter  of the race of man,   
Gives  splendour  of most.glorious  fame.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
7 Mitra  whose  glory  spreads  afar, he who in might  surpasses  heaven,   
Surpasses  earth  in his renown.   
8 All the Five Races  have  repaired  to Mitra,  ever strong  to aid,  
For he sustaineth  all the Gods.   
9 Mitra  to Gods,  to living  men,  to him who strews  the holy grass,   
Gives  food fulfilling  sacred  Law.   
 
HYMN  LX. Rbhus.  
1. HERE  is your ghostly  kinship,  here,  O Men:  they came  desirous  to these  holy rites with store  of wealth,
  
With  wondrous  arts, whereby,  with schemes  to meet  each need,  Ye gained,  Sudhanvan's  Sons!  your share  
in 
sacrifice.   
2 The mighty  powers  wherewith.  ye formed  the chalices,  the thought  by which  ye drew  the cow from  out 
the 
hide,   
The intellect  wherewith  ye wrought  the two Bay Steeds,−through  these,  O Rbhus,  ye attained  divinity.   
3 Friendship  with Indra  have the Rbhus,  fully  gained:  grandsons  of Manu,  they skilfully  urged  the work.   
Sudhanvan's  Children won them  everlasting  life, serving  with holy rites,  pious  with noble  acts.  
4:In company  with Indra  come  ye to the juice,  then gloriously  shall  your wishes  be fulfilled.   
Not to be paragoned,  ye Priests,  are your good  deeds,  nor your heroic  acts, Rbhu s, Sudhanvan's  Sons.   
5 O Indra,  with the Rbhus,  Mighty  Ones,  pour down  the Soma  juice  effused,  well−blent,  from  both thy ha
nds.  
Maghalan,  urged  by song,  in the drink−offerer's  house  rejoice  thee with the Heroes,  with Sudhanvan's  Son
s.  
6 With  Rbhu  near,  and Vaja,  Indra,  here exult,  with Saci,  praised  of many,  in the juice  we pour.   
These  homes  wherein  we dwell  have turned  themselves  to thee,  −devotions  to the Gods,  as laws of men 
ordain.   
7 Come  with the mighty  Rbhus,  Indra,  come  to us, strengthening  with thy help the singer's  holy praise;   
At hundred  eager  calls come  to the living  man,  with thousand  arts attend  the act of sacrifice.   
 
HYMN  LXI. Usas.  
1. O Usas,  strong  with strength,  endowed  witli knowledge,  accept  the singer's  praise,  O wealthy  Lady.   
Thou, Goddess,  ancient,  young,  and full of wisdom,  movest,  all−bounteous!  as the Law ordaineth.   
2 Shine  forth,  O Morning,  thou auspicious  Goddess,  on thy bright  car awaking  pleasant  voices.   
Let docile  horses  of far−reaching  splendour  convey  thee hitherwar d, the goldencoloured.   
3 Thou,  Morning,  turning  thee to every  creature,  standest  on high as ensign  of the Immortal,   
To one same  goal ever and ever wending  now,  like a wheel,  O newly−born,  roll hi ther.  
4 Letting  her reins  drop downward,  Morning  cometh,  the wealthy  Dame,  the Lady  of the dwelling;   
Bringing  forth  light,  the Wonderful,  the Blessed  hath spread  her from  the bounds  of earth  and heaven.   
5 Hither  invoke  the radiant  Goddess  Morning,  and bring  with reverence  your hymn  to praise  her.  
She, droppin g sweets,  hath set in heaven  her brightness,  and, fair to look on, hath beamed  forth  her splend
our.  
6 From  heaven,  with hymns,  the Holy  One was wakened:  brightly  to both worlds  came  the wealthy  Lady.   
To Morning,  Agni,  when  she comes  refulgent,  thou goest  forth  soliciting  fair riches.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
7 On Law's  firm base the speeder  of the Mornings,  the Bull,  hath entered  mighty  earth  and heaven.   
Great  is the power  of Varuna  and Mitra,  which,  bright,  hath spread  in every  place  its splendour.   
 
HYMN  LXII.  Indra  and Othe rs.  
1. YOUR  well−known  prompt  activities  aforetime  needed  no impulse  from  your faithful  servant.   
Where,  Indra−Varuna,  is now that glory  wherewith  ye brought  support  to those  who loved  you?   
2 This man,  most  diligent,  seeking  after riches,  incessantly  invokes  you for your favour.   
Accordant,  Indra−Varuna,  with Maruts,  with Heaven  and Earth,  hear ye mine  invocation.   
3 O Indra−Varuna,  ours be this treasure  ours be wealth,  Maruts,  with full store  of heroes.   
.May  the Varutris  with their shelter  aid us, and Bharat i and Hotri  with the Mornings.   
4 Be pleased!  with our oblations,  thou loved  of all Gods,  Brhaspati:   
Give  wealth  to him who brings  thee gifts.   
5 At sacrifices,  with your hymns  worship  the pure Brhaspati−   
I pray for power  which  none  may bend−   
6 The Bull of men,  whom  none  deceive,  the wearer  of each shape  at will,  
Brhaspati  Most  Excellent.   
7 Divine,  resplendent  Pusan,  this our newest  hymn  of eulogy,   
By us is chanted  forth  to thee.   
8 Accept  with favour  this my song,  be gracious  to the earnest  thought,   
Even  as a bridegroom  to his bride.   
9 May he who sees all living  things,  see, them  together  at a glancc,−   
May lie, may Pusan  be our help.   
10 May we attain  that excellent  glory  of Savitar  the God:   
So May he stimulate  our prayers.   
11 With  understanding,  earnestly,  of Savitar  the God we crave   
Our portion  of prosperity.   
12 Men,  singers  worship  Savitar  the God with hymn  and holy rites,   
Urged  by the impulse  of their thoughts.   
13 Soma  who gives  success  goes forth,  goes to the gathering  place  of Gods,   
To seat him at the seat of Law.   
14 To us and to our cattle  may Soma  give salutary  food,   
To biped  and to quadruped.   
15 May Soma,  strengthening  our power  of life, and conquering  our foes,   
In our assembly  take his seat.  
16 May Mitra−Varuna,  sapient  Pair, bedew  our pasturage  with oil,  
 
With  meatb  the regions  of the air.  
17 Far−ruling,  joyful  when  adored,  ye reign  through  majesty  of might,   
With  pure laws everlastingly.   
18 Lauded  by Jamadagni's  song,  sit in the place  of holy Law:   
Drink  Soma,  ye who strengthen  Law.   
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
RIG VEDA  − BOOK  THE FOURTH  
HYMN  I. Agni.  
1, THEE  Agni,  have  the Gods,  ever of one accord,  sent hither  down,  a God,  appointed  messeng er, yea, wi
th 
their wisdom  sent thee down.   
The Immortal,  O thou Holy  One,  mid mortal  men,  the God−devoted  God,  the wise,  have  they brought  fort
h, 
brought  forth  the omnipresent  God−devoted  Sage.   
2 As such,  O Agni,  bring  with favour  to the Gods  thy Brother  Varuna  who loveth  sacrifice,   
True  to the Law,  the Aditya  who supporteth  men,  the King,  supporter  of mankind.   
3 Do thou,  O Friend,  turn hither  him who is our Friend,  swift  as a wheel,  like two car−steeds  in rapid  cour
se, 
Wondrous!  to us in rapid  course.   
O Agni,  find thou grace  for us with Varuna,  with Maruts  who illumine  all.  
Bless  us, thou Radiant  One,  for seed and progeny,  yea, bless  us, O thou Wondrous  God.   
4 Do thou who knowest  Varuna,  O Agni,  put far away  from  us the God's  displeasure.   
Best Sacri ficer,  brightest  One,  refulgent  remove  thou far from  us all those  who hate us.  
5 Be thou,  O Agni,  nearest  us with succour,  our closest  Friend  while  now this Morn  is breaking.   
Reconcile  to us Varuna,  be bounteous  enjoy  the gracious  juice;  be swift  to hear us.  
6 Excellent  is the glance,  of brightest  splendour,  which  the auspicious  God bestows  on mortals−   
The God's  glance,  longed−for  even  as the butter,  pure,  heated,  of the cow,  the milch−cow's  bounty.   
7 Three  are those  births,  the true, the most  exalted,  eagerly  longed−for,  of the God,  of Agni.   
He came  invested  in the boundless  region,  pure,  radiant,  friendly,  mightily  resplendent.   
8 This envoy  joyeth  in all seats  of worship,  borne  on his golden  car, sweet−tongued  Invoker:   
Lovely  to look on, with red steeds,  effulgent,  like a feast  rich in food,  joyous  for ever.   
9 Allied  by worship,  let him give man knowledge:  by an extended  cord they lead him onward.   
He stays,  effectual  in this mortal's  dwelling,  and the God wins  a share  in his possessions.   
10 Let Agni −for he knows  the way−  conduct  us to all that he enjoys  of God−sent  riches,   
What  all the Immortals  have  prepared  with wisdom,  Dyaus,  Sire, Begetter,  raining  down  true blessings.   
11 In houses  first he sprang  into existence,  at great  heaven's  base,  and in this region's  bosom;   
Footless  and headless,  both his ends concealing,  in his Bull's  lair drawing  himself  together.   
12 Wondrously  first he rose aloft,  defiant,  in the Bull's  lair, the homeof  holy Order,   
Longed−for,  young,  beautiful,  and far−resplende nt: and sevendear  frieuds  sprang  up unto the Mighty.   
13 Here  did our human  fathers  take their places,  fain to fulfil  the sacred  Law of worship.   
Forth  drave  they,  with loud call, Dawn's  teeming  Milch−kine  bid in the mountainstable,  in the cavern.   
14 Splendid were  they when  they had rent the mountain:  others,  around,  shall  tell forth  this their exploit.   
They  sang their song,  prepared  to free the cattle:  they found  the light;  with holy hymns  they worshipped.   
15 Eager,  with thought  intent  upon  the booty,  the men with their celestial  speech  threw  open,   
The solid  mountain  firm,  compact,  enclosing,  confining  Cows,  the stable  full of cattle.   
16 The Milch−cow's  earliest  name  they comprehended:  they found  the Mother's  thrice−seven  noblest  title
s.  
This the band s knew,  and sent forth  acclamation:with  the Bull's  sheen  the Red One was apparent.   
17 The turbid  darkness  fled, the heaven  was sp, endid!  up rose the bright  beam  of celestial  Morning.   
Surya  ascended  to the wide  expanses,  beholding  deeds  of men both good  and evil.  
18 Then,  afterwards  they looked  around,  awakened,  when  first they held that Heaven  allotted  treasure.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Now  all the Gods  abide  in all their dwellings.  Varuna,  Mitra,  be the prayer  effective.   
 
19 I will call hither  brightly−beaming  Agni,  the Herald,  all−supporting,  best at worship.   
He hath disclosed,  like the milch  cows'  pure udder,  the Sorria's  juice  when  cleansed  and poured  from  beak
ers.  
20 The freest  God of all who should  be worshipped,  the guest  who is received  in all men's  houses,   
Agni  who hath secured  the Gods'  high favour,−may  he be gracious,  to us Jatavedas.   
 
HYMN  II. Agni.  
1. THE,  Faithful  One,  Immortal  among  mortals,  a God among  the Gods,  appointed  envoy,   
Priest,  best at worship,  must  shine  forth  in glory  . Agni  shall  be raised  high with man's  oblations.   
2 Born  for us here this day, O Son of Vigour,  between  both races  of born beings,  Agni,   
Thou  farest  as an envoy,  having  harnessed,  Sublime  One!  thy strong−muscled  radiant  stallio ns.  
3 I laud the ruddy  steeds  who pour down  blessing,  dropping  oil, flectest  through  the thoualit  of Order.   
Yoking  red horses  to and fro thou goest  between  you Deities  and mortal  races.   
4 Aryaman,  Mitra,  Varuna,  and Indra  with Visnu,  of the Gods,  Maruts  and Asvins−   
These,  Agni,  with good  car and steeds,  bring  hither,  most  bountiful,  to folk with fair oblations.   
5 Agni,  be this our sacrifice  eternal,  with brave  friends,  rich in kine and sheep  and horses,   
Rich,  Asura!  in sacred  food and children,  in full assembly,  wealth  broad−based  and during.   
6 The man who,  sweating,  brings  for thee the fuel, and makes  his head  to ache,  thy faithful  servant,−   
Agni,  to him be a self−strong  Protector  guard  him from  all who seek to do him mischief.   
7 Who  brings  thee food, though  thou hast food in plenty,  welcomes  his cheerful  guest  and speeds  him 
onward,   
Who  kindles  thee devoutly  in his dwelling,to  him be wealth  secure  and freely  giving.   
8 Whoso  sings  praise  to thee at eve or morning,  and, with oblation,  doth the thing thou lovest,−   
In his own home,  even  as a goId−girt  courser,  rescue  him from  distress,  the bounteous  giver.   
9 Whoso  brings  gifts to thee Immortal,  Agni,  and doth thee service  with uplifted  ladle,−   
Let him not, sorely  toiling,  lose his riches;  let not the sinner's  wickedness  enclose  him.  
10 Whose  well−wrought  worship  thou acceptest,  Agni,  thou God a mortal's  gift, thou liberal  Giver,−   
Dear  be his sacrifice  to thee,  Most  Youthful!  and may we strengthen  him when  he adores  thee.   
11 May he who knows  distinguish  sense  and folly of men,  like straight  and crooked  backs  of horses.   
Lead  us, O God,  to wealth  and noble  offspring:  keep  penury  afar and grant  us plenty.   
12 This Sage  the Sages,  ne'er  deceived,  commanded,  setting  him down  in dwellings  of the living.   
Hence  mayst  thou,  friendly  God,  with rapid  footsteps  behold  the Gods,  wonderful,  fair to look on.  
13 Good  guidance  hast thou for the priest,  O Agni,  who,  Youngest  God!  with outpoured  Soma  serves  thee
.  
Ruler  of men,  thou joyous  God,  bring  treasure  splen did and plentiful  to aid the toiler.   
14 Now  all that we, thy faithful  servants,  Agni,  have  done  with feet, with hands,  and with our bodies,   
The wise,  with toil, the holy rite have guided,  as those  who frame  a car with manual  cunning.   
15 May we, seven  sages first in rank,  engender,  from  Dawn  the Mother,  men to be ordainers.   
May we, Angirases,  be sons of Heaven,  and, radiant,  burst  the wealth−containing  mountain.   
16 As in the days of old our ancient  Fathers,  speeding  the work  of holy worship,  Agni,   
Soug ht pure light and devotion,  singing  praises;  they cleft the ground  and made  red Dawns  apparent.   
17 Gods,  doing  holy acts, devout,  resplendent,  smelting  like ore their human  generations.   
Enkindling  Agni  and exalting  Indra,  they came  encompassing  the stall of cattle.   
18 Strong  One!  he marked  them−and  the Gods  before  them−like  herds  of cattle  in a foodful  pasture.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
There  they moaned  forth  their strong  desire  for mortals,  to aid the True,  the nearest  One,  the Living.   
19 We have worked  for thee,  we have  laboured nobly−bright  Dawns  have  shed their light upon  our worsh
ip−  
Adding  a beauty  to the perfect  Agni,  and the God's  beauteous  eye that shines  for ever.   
20 Agni,  Disposer,  we have sung  these  praises  to thee the Wise:  do thou accept  them  gladly.   
Blaze  up on high and ever make  us richer.  Give  us great  wealth,  O thou whose  boons  are many.   
 
HYMN  III. Agni.  
1. WIN,  to assist  you, Rudra,  Lord  of worship,  Priest  of both worlds,  effectual   
Sacrificer,   
Agni,  invested  with his golden  colours,  before  the thunder  strike  and lay you senseless.   
2 This shrine  have  we made  ready  for thy coming,  as the fond dame  attires  her for her husband.   
Performer  of good  work,  sit down  before  us, invested  while  these  flames  incline  to meet  thee.   
3 A hymn,  O Priest,  to him who hears, the gentle,  to him who looks  on men,  exceeding  gracious,   
A song  of praise  sing to the God Immortal,  whom  the stone,  presser  of the sweet  juice,  worships.   
4 Even  as true knower  of the Law,  O Agni,  to this our solemn  rite he thou attentive.   
When  shall  thy songs  of festival  be sung  thee?  When  is thy friendship  shown  within  our dwelling?   
5 Why  this complaint  to Varuna,  O Agni?  And why to Heaven?  for what  is our transgression?   
How  wilt thou speak  to Earth  and bounteous  Mitra?  What  wilt thou say to Aryam an and Bhaga?   
6 What,  when  thou blazest  on the lesser  altars,  what  to the mighty  Wind  who comes  tobless  us,  
True,  circumambient?  what  to Earth,  O Agni,  what  wilt thou say to man−destroying  Rudra?   
7 How  to great  Pusan  who promotes  our welfare,−  to honour ed Rudra  what,  who gives  oblations?   
What  sin of ours to the far−striding  Visnu,  what,  Agni,  wilt thou tell the Lofty  Arrow.   
8 What  wilt thou tell the truthful  band  of Maruts,  how answer  the great  Sun when  thou art questioned?   
Before  the Free,  before  the Swift,  defend  us: fulfil  heaven's  work,  all−knowing  Jatavedas.   
9 I crave  the cow's  true gift arranged  by Order:  though  raw, she hath the sweet  ripe juice,  O Agni.   
Though  she is black  of hue with milk she teemeth,  nutritious,  brightly  shining,  all−sustai ning.   
10 Agni  the Bull,  the manly,  hath been  sprinkled  with oil upon  his back,  by Law eternal.   
He who gives  vital power  goes on unswerving.  Prsni  the Bull hath milked  the pure wiiite  udder.   
11 By Law the Angirases  cleft the rock asunder,  and sang their hymns  together  with the cattle.   
Bringing  great  bliss the men encompassed  Morning:  light was apparent  at the birth of Agni.   
12 By Law the Immortal  Goddesses  the Waters,  with meath−rich  waves,  O Agni,  and uninjured,   
Like a strong  courser  lauded  in his running,  sped to flow onward  swiftly  and for ever.   
13 Go never  to the feast  of one who harms  us, the treacherous  neighbour  or. unworthy  kinsman.   
Punish  us not for a false  brother's  trespass.  Let us riot feel the might  of friend  or foeman.   
14 O Agni,  keep  us safe with thy protection,  loving  us, honoured  God!  and ever guarding.   
Beat thou away,  destory  severe  affliction  slay e'en the demon  when  he waxes  mighty.   
15 Through  these  our songs  of praise  be gracious,  Agni;  moved  by ourprayers,  O Hero,  touch  our viands.  
Accept,  O Angiras,  these  our devotions,  and let the praise  which  Gods  desire  address  thee.   
16 To thee who knowest,  Agni,  thou Disposer,  all these  wise secret  speeches  have I uttered,   
Sung  to thee,  Sage,  the charming  words  of wisdom,  to thee,  O Singer, with.  my thoughts  and Praises.   
 
HYMN  IV. Agni.  
1. PUT  forth  like a wide−spreading  net thy vigour;  go like a mighty  King  with his attendants.  Thou,  follo
wing  thy swift  net, shootest  arrows:  transfix  the fiends  with darts  that burn most  fiercely.  2 Forth  go in rapRig Veda – English Translation  
id flight  thy whirling  weapons:  follow  them closely,  glowing  in thy fury.  Spread  with thy tongue  the wing
ed flames,  O Agni;  unfettered,  cast thy firebrands  all around  thee.  3 Send  thy spies  forward,  flectest  in thy
 motion;  be, ne'er  deceived,  the guardian  of this people  From  him who,  near or far, is bent on evil, and let 
no trouble  sent from  thee o'ercome  us. 4 Rise up, O Agni,  spread  thee out before  us: burn down  our foes,  t
hou who hast sharpened  arrows.  Him,  blazing  Agni!  who hath worked  us mischief,  consume  thou utterly  l
ike dried−up  stubble.  5 Rise,  Agni,  drive  off those  who fight  against  us: make  manifest  thine  own celestia
l vigour.  Slacken  the strong  bows  of the demondriven:  destroy  our foemen  whether  kin or stranger.  6 Mos
t Youthful  God,  he knoweth  well thy favour  who gave an impulse  to this high devotion.  All fair days and 
magnificence  of riches  hast thou beamed  forth  upon  the good  man's  portals.   
7 Blest,  Agni,  be the man,  the liberal  giver,  who with his lauds  and regular  oblation   
Is fain to please  thee for his life and dwelling.  May all his days be bright:  be this his longing.   
8 I praise  thy gracious  favour:  sing in answer.  May this my song  sing like a loved  one with thee.   
Lords  of good  steeds  and cars may we adorn  thee,  and day by day vouchsafe  thou us dominion.   
9 Here  of free choice  let each one serve  thee richly,  resplendent  day by day at eve and morning.   
So may we honour  thee,  content  and joyous,  passing  beyond  the glories  of the people.   
10 Whoso  with good  steeds  and fine gold,  O Agni,  comes  nigh thee on a car laden  with trcasure,   
His Friend  art thou,  yea, thou art his Protector  whose  joy it is to entertain  thee duly.   
11 Through  words  and kinship  I destroy  the miglity:  this power  I have  from  Gotama  my father.   
Mark  thou this speech  of ours,  O thou Most  Youthfu l, Friend  of the House,  exceeding  wise,  Invoker.   
12 Knowing  no slumber,  speedy  and propitious,  alert and ever friendly,  most  unwearied,   
May thy protecting  powers,  unerring  Agni,  taking  their places  here,  combined,  preserve  us.  
13 Thy guardian  rays,  O Agni, when  they saw him, preserved  blind  Mamateya  from  affliction.   
Lord  of all riches,  he preserved  the pious:  the fees who fain would  harm  them  did no mischief   
14 Aided  by thee with thee may we be wealthy,  may we gain strength  with thee to guide  us onward .  
Fulfil  the words  of both,  O Ever  Truthful:  straightway  do this, thou God whom  power  emboldens.   
15 O Agni,  with this fuel will we serve  thee;  accept  the laud we sing to thee with favour   
Destroy  the cursing  Raksasas:  preserve  us, O rich in friends,  from  guile  and scorn  and slander.   
 
HYMN  V. Agni.  
1. How  shall  we give with one accord  oblation  to Agni,  to Vaisvanara  the Bounteous?   
Great  light,  with full high growth  hath he uplifted,  and, as a pillar  bears  the roof,  sustains  it.  
2 Reproach  not him who,  God and selfreliant,  vouchsafed  this bounty  unto me a mortal,−   
Deathless,  discerner,  wise,  to me the simple,  Vaisvanara  most  manly,  youthful  Aini.   
3 Sharp−pointed,  powerful,  strong,  of boundless  vigour,  Agni  who knows  the lofty hymn,  kept secret   
As the lost milch−cow's  track,  the doubly  Mighty,−he  hath declared  to me this hidden  knowledge.   
4 May he with sharpened  teeth,  the Bounteous  Giver,  Agni,  consume  with flame  most  fiercely  glowing.   
Those  who regard  not Varuna's  commandments  and the dear stedfast  laws of sapient  Mitra.   
5 Like youthful  women  without  brothers,  straying,  like dames  who hate their lords,  of evil conduct,   
They  who are full of sin, untrue,  unfaithful,  they have  engendered  this abysmal  station.   
6 To me, weak,  innocent,  thou,  luminous  Agni,  bast boldly  given  as 'twere  a heavy  burthen,   
This Prstha  hymn,  profound  and strong  and mighty,  of seven  elements,  and with offered  dainties.   
7 So may our song  that purifies,  through  wisdom  reach  in a moment  him the Universal,   
Established  on the height, on earth's  best .station,  above  the beauteous  grassy  skin of Prsni.   
8 Of this my speech  what  shall  I utter further?  They  indicate  the milk stored  up in secret   
When  they have  thrown  as 'twere  the cows'  stalls  open.  The Bird protects  earths'  best and well−loved  stati
on.  Rig Veda – English Translation  
9 This is the Great  Ones'  mighty  apparition  which  from  of old the radiant  Cow  hath followed.   
This,  shining  brightly  in the place  of Order,  swift,  hasting  on in secret,  she discovered.   
10 He then who shone  together  with his Parents  remembered  Prsni's  fair and secret  treasure,   
Which,  in the Mother  Cow's  most  lofty  station,  the Bull's  tongue,  of the flame  bent forward,  tasted.   
11 With  reverence  I declare  the Law,  O Agni;  what  is, comes  by thine  order,  Jatavedas.   
Of this, whate'er  it be, thou art the Sovran,  yea, all the wealth  that is in earth  or  
heaven.   
12 What  is our wealth  therefrom,  and what  our treasure?  Tell us O Jatavedas,  for thou  
knowest,   
What  is our best course  in this secret  passage:  we, unreproached,  have reached  a t)lace far distant.   
13 What  is the limit,  what  the rules,  the guerdon?  Like fleet−foot  coursers  speed  we to the contest.   
When  will the Goddesses,  the Immortal's  Spouses,  the Dawns,  spread  over us the Sun−God's  splendour?   
14 Unsatisfied,  with speech  devoid  of vigour,  scanty  and frivolous  and inconclusive,   
 
Wherefore  do they address  thee here,  O Agni?  Let these  who have  no weapons  suffer  sorrow.  15 Th
e majesty  of him the Good,  the Mighty,  aflame,  hath shone  for glory  in the dwelling.  He, clothed  in l
ight, hath shone  most  fair to look on, wealthy  in boons,  as a home  shines  with riches.  
 
HYMN  VI. Agni.  
1. PRIEST  of our rite, stand  up erect,  O Agni,  in the Gods'  service  best of sacrificers,   
For over evei y thought  thou art the Ruler:  thou furtherest  e'en the wisdom  of the pious.   
2 He was set down  mid men as Priest  unerring,  Agni,  wise,  welcome  in our holy synods.   
Like Savitar  he hath lifted  up his splendour,  and like a builder  raised  his smoke  to heaven.   
3 The glowing  ladle,  filled  with oil, is lifted;  choo sing Gods'  service  to the right  he circles.   
Eager  he rises like the new−wrought  pillar  which,  firmly  set and fixed,  anoints  the victims.   
4 When  sacred  grass  is strewn  and Agni  kindled,  the Adhvaryu  rises to, his task rej o cing.   
Agni  the Priest,  like one who tends  the cattle,  goes three  times  round,  as from  of old he wills  it.  
5 Agni  himself,  the Priest,  with measured  motion,  goes round,  with sweet  speech,  cheerful,  true to Order.   
His fulgent  flames  run forth  like vigorous  horses;  all creatures  are affrighted  when  he blazes.   
6 Beautiful  and auspicious  is thine  aspect,  O lovely  Agni,  terrible  when  spreading.   
Thy splendours  are not covered  by the darkness:  detraction  leaves  no stain  upon  thy body.   
7 Naught  hindered  his production,  Bounteous  Giver:  his Mother  and his Sire were  free to send him.  
Then  as Friend  benevolent,  refulgent,  Agni  shone  forth  in human  habitations.   
8 He, Agni,  whom  the twice−five  sisters,  dwelling  together,  in the homes  of men engendered,   
Bright  like a spear's  tooth,  wakened  in the morning,  with powerful  mouth  and like an axe well−sharpened.
  
9 These  thy Bay Coursers,  Agni,  dropping  fatness,  ruddy  vigorous,  speeding  straightly  forward,   
And red steeds,  wonderful,  of mighty  muscle,  are to this service  of the Gods  invited:   
10 These  brightly−shining  games  of thine,  O Agni,  that move  for ever restless,  allsubduing,   
Like falcons  hasting  eagerly  to the quarry,  roar loudly  like the army  of the Maruts.   
11 To thee,  O flaming  God,  hath prayer  been  offered.  Let the priest  laud thee:  give to him who worships.   
Men have established  Agni  as Invoker,  fain to adore  the glory  of the living.   
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  VII. Agni.  
1. HERE  by ordainers  was this God appointed  first Invoker,  best at worship,  to be praised  at rites:   
Whom  Apnavana,  and the Bhrgus  caused  to shine  bright−coloured  in the wood,  spreading  from  home  to 
home.   
2 When  shall  thy glory  as a God,  Agni,  be suddenly  shown  forth.   
For mortal  men have  held thee fast, adorable  in all their homes,   
3 Seeing  thee faithful  to the Law,  most  sapient,  like the starry  heaven,   
Illumining  with cheerful  ray each solemn  rite in every  house.   
4 Vivasvan's  envoy  living  men have  taken  as their ensign,  swift,   
The ruler  over all mankind,  moving  like Bhrgu  in each home.   
5 Him the intelligent  have  they placed  duly as Invoking  Priest,   
Welcome,  with sanctifying  flame,  best worshipper,  with sevenfold  might;   
6 In his Eternal  Mothers,  in the wood,  concealed  and unapproached,   
Kept  secret  though  his flames  are bright  seekingon  all sides,  quickly  found.   
7 That as food spread s forth  in this earthly  udder,  Gods  may rejoice  them  in the home  of Order,   
Great  Agni,  served  with reverence  and oblation,  flies ever to the sacrifice,  the Faithful.   
8 Bird of each rite, skilled  in an envoy's  duties,  knowing  both worlds  and that which  lies between  them,   
Thou  goest  from  of old a willing  Herald,  knowing  full well heaven's  innermost  recesses.   
9 Bright  God,  thy path is black:  light is before  thee:  thy moving  splendour  is the chief  of wonders.   
When  she, yet unimpregnate,  hath conceived  thee, even  when  newly  born thou art an envoy.   
 
10 Yet newly  born,  his vigour  is apparent  when  the wind  blows  upon  his fiery  splendour,  His sharpened  t
ongue  he layeth  on the brushwood,  and with his teeth  e'en solid  food consumeth.  11 When  he hath borne  
off food with swift  flame  swiftly,  strong  Agni  makes  himself  a speedy  envoy,  Follows  the rustling  of the 
wind,  consuming,  and courser−like,  speeds,  drives  the swift  horse  onward.  
 
HYMN  VIII. Agni.  
1. YOUR  envoy  who possesses  all, Immortal,  bearer  of your gifts,  Best worshipper,  I woo with song.   
2 He, Mighty,  knows  the gift of wealth,  he knows  the deep  recess  of heaven:   
He shall  bring  hitherward  the Gods.   
3 He knows,  a God himself,  to guide  Gods  to the righteous  in his home:   
He gives  e'en treasures  that we love.  
4 He is the Herald:  well−informed,  he doth his errand  to and fro,  
Knowing  the deep  recess  of heaven.   
5 May we be they who gratify  Agni  with sacrificial  gifts,   
Whocherish  and enkindle  him.  
6 Illustrious  for wealth  are they,  and hero deeds,  victorio us,  
Who  have  served  Agni  reverently.   
7 So unto us, day after day, may riches  craved  by many  come,   
And power  and might  spring  up for us.  
8 That holy Singer  in his strength  shoots  forth  his arrows  swifter  than  
The swift  shafts  of the tribes  of men.   
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  IX. Agni.  
1. AGNI,  show  favour:  great  art thou who to this pious  man art come,  To seat thee on the sacred  grass.   
2 May he the Immortal,  Helper,  bard to be deceived  among  mankind,   
Become  the messenger  of all.  
3 Around  the altar is he led, welcome  Chief Priest  at solemn  rites,   
Or as the Potar  sits him down.   
4 Agni  in fire at sacrifice,  and in the house  as Lord  thereof,   
And as a Brahman  takes  his seat.  
5 Thou  comest  as the guide  of folk who celebrate  a sacrifice,   
And to oblations  brought  by men.   
6 Thou  servest  as his messenger  whose  sacrifice  thou lovest  well,   
To bear the mortal's  gifts to heaven.   
7 Accept  our solemn  rite; be pleased,  Angiras,  with our sacrifice:   
Give  ear and listen  to our call.  
8 May thine  inviolable  car, wherewith  thou guard est those  who give,   
Come  near to us from  every  side.  
 
HYMN  X. Agni.  
I. This day with praises,  Agni,  we bring  thee that which  thou lovest.  Right  judgment,  like a horse,  with ou
r devotions.   
2 For thou hast ever been  the Car−driver,  Agni,  of noble   
Stren gth, lofty  sacrifice,  and rightful  judgment.   
3 Through  these  our praises  come  thou to meet  us, bright  as the sunlight,   
 
O Agni,  well disposed,  with all thine  aspects.   
4 Now  may we serve  thee singing  these  lauds  this day to thee,  Agni.   
Loud  as the voice  of Heaven  thy blasts  are roaring.   
5 just at this time of the day and the night  thy look is the sweetest  .  
It shineth  near us even  as gold for glory.   
6 Spotless  thy body,  brilliant  as gold,  like clarified  butter:   
This gleams  like gold on thee,  O Self. dependent.   
7 All hate and mischief,  yea, if committed,  Agni,  thou turnest,   
Holy  One,  from  the man who rightly  worships.   
8 Agni,  with you Gods,  prosperous  be our friendships  and kinships.   
Be this our bond  here by this place,  thine  al tar.  
 
HYMN  XI. Agni.  
1. THY  blessed  majesty,  victorious  Agni,  shines  brightly  in the neighbourhood  of Surya.   
Splendid  to see, it shows  even  at nighttime,  and food is fair to look on in thy beauty.   
2 Agni,  disclose  his thought  for him who singeth,  the well,  Strong  God!  while thou art praised  with fervou
r.  
Vouchsafe  to us that powerful  hymn,  O Mighty,  which,  Radiant  One!  with all the Gods  thou lovest.   
3 From  thee,  O Agni,  springs  poetic  wisdom,  from  thee come  thoughts  and hymns  of praise  that prosper;   
From  thee flows  wealth, with heroes  to adorn  it, to the true−hearted  man who gives  oblation.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
4 From  thee the hero springs  who wins  the booty,  bringer  of help,  mighty,  of real courage.   
From  thee comes  wealth,  sent by the Gods,  bliss−giving;  Agni,  from  thee the fleet impetu ous charger.   
5 Immortal  Agni,  thee whose  voice  is pleasant,  as first in rank,  as God,  religious  mortals   
Invite  with hyrnns;  thee who removest  hatred,  Friend  of the Home,  the household's  Lord,  unerring.   
6 Far from  us thou removest  want  and sorrow,  far from us all ill−will  when  thou protectest.   
Son of Strength,  Agni,  blest  is he at evening,  whom  thou as God attendest  for his welfare.   
 
HYMN  XII. Agni.  
1. WHOSO  enkindles  thee,  with lifted  ladle,  and thrice  this day offiers  thee food,  O Agni,   
May he excel, triumphant  through  thy splendours,  wise through  thy mental  power,  O Jatavedas.   
2 Whoso  with toil and trouble  brings  thee fuel, serving  the majesty  of mighty  Agni,   
He, kindling  thee at evening  and at morning,  prospers,  and comes  to wealth,  and slays  his foemen.   
3 Agni  is Master  of sublime  dominion,  Agni  is Lord  of strength  and lofty  riches.   
Straightway  the self−reliant  God,  Most  Youthful,  gives  treasures  to the mortal  who adores  him.  
4 Most  Youthful  God,  whatever  sin, through  folly,  we here,  as human  beings,  have  committed,   
In sight  of Aditi  make  thou us sinless  remit,  entirely,  Agni,  our offences.   
5 Even  in the presence  of great  sin, O Agni,  free us from  prison  of the Gods  or mortals.   
Never  may we who are thy friends  be injured:  grant  health  and strength  unto our seed and offspring.   
6 Even  as ye here,  Gods  Excellent  and Holy,  have  loosed  the cow that by the foot was tethered,   
So also set us free from  this affliction  long let our life, O Agni,  be extended.   
 
HYMN  XIII. Agni.  
1. AGNI  hath looked,  benevolently−minded,  on the wealth−giving  spring  of radiant  Mornings.   
Come,  Asvins,  to the dwelling  of the pious:  Surya  the God is rising  with his splendour.   
2 Savitar,  God,  hath spread  on high his lustre,  waving  his flag like a spoil−seeking  hero.   
Their stablished  way go Varuna  and Mitra,  what  time they make  the Sun ascend  the heaven.   
3 Him whom  they made  to drive  away  the darkness,  Lords  of sure mansions,  constant  to their object,   
Him who beholds  the universe,  the Sun−God,  seven  strong  and youthful  Coursers  carry  onward.   
 
4 Spreading  thy web with mightiest  Steeds  thou comest,  rending  apart,  thou God,  the black−hued  mantle.   
The rays of Surya  tremulously  shining  sink,  like a hide,  the darkness  in the waters.   
5 How  is it that, unbound  and not support ed, he falleth  not although  directed  downward?   
By what  self power  moves  he? Who  liath seen it? He guards  the vault  of heaven,  a close−set  pillar.   
 
HYMN  XIV. Agni.  
1. THE  God hath looked,  even Agni  Jatavedas,  to meet  the Dawns  refulgent  in their glories .  
Come  on your chariot,  ye who travel  widely,  come  to this sacrifice  of ours,  Nasatyas.   
2 Producing  light for all the world  of creatures,  God Savitar  hath raised  aloft his banner.   
Making  his presence  known  by sunbeams,  Surya  hath filled  the firmament  and earth  and heaven.   
3 Red Dawn.is  come,  riding  with brightness  onward,  distinguished  by her beams,  gay−hued  and mighty.   
Dawn  on her nobly−harnessed  car, the Goddess,  awaking  men to happiness,  approacheth.   
4 May those  most  powerful  steeds  and chariot  bring  you, O Asvins,  hither  at the break  of morning.   
Here  for your drauglit  of meath  are Soma juices:  at this our sacrifice  rejoice,  ye Mighty.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
5 How  is it that, unbound  and unsupported,  he falleth  not although  directed  downward?   
By what  self−power  moves  he? Who  hath seen it? He guards  the vault  of heaven,  a close−set  pillar?   
 
HYMN  XV. Agni.  
1. AGNI  the Herald,  like a horse,  is led forth  at our solemn  rite, God among  Gods  adorable.   
2 Three  times  unto our solemn  rite comes  Agni  like a charioteer,   
Bearing  the viands  to the Gods.   
3 Round  the oblations  hath he paced,  Agni  the Wise,  the Lord  of Strength,   
Giving  the offerer  precious  boons.   
4 He who is kindled  eastward  for Srnjaya,  Devavata's  son,  
Resplendent,  tamer  of the foe.  
5 So mighty  be the Agni  whom  the mortal  hero shall  command,   
With  sharpened  teeth  and bountiful.   
6 Day after day they dress  him, as they clean  a horse  who wins  the prize.   
Dress  the red Scion  of the Sky.  
7 When  Sahadeva's  princely  son with two bay horses  thought  of me,  
Summoned  by him I drew  not back.   
8 And truly  those  two noble  bays I straightway  took when  offered  me,  
From  Sahadeva's  princely  son.  
9 Long,  O ye Asvins,  may he live, your care,  ye Gods,  the princely  son.  
Of Sahadeva,  Somaka.   
10 Cause  him the youthful  prince,  the son of Sahadeva,  to enjoy   
Long  life, O Asvins,  O ye Gods.   
 
HYMN  XVI. Indra.  
1. IMPET UOUS,  true, let Maghavan  come  hither,  and let his Tawny  Coursers  speed  to reach  us.  
For him have  we pressed  juice  exceeding  potent:  here,  praised  with song,  let him effect  his visit.   
2 Unyoke,  as at thy journey's  end, O Hero,  to gladden  thee today  at this libation.   
Like Usana,  the priest  a laud shall  utter,  a hymn  to thee,  the Lord  Divine,  who markest.   
3 When  the Bull,  quaffing,  praises  our Iibation,  as a sage paying  holy rites in secret,   
Seven  singers  here from  heaven  hath he begotten,  who e'en by day have  wrought  their works  while  singin
g.  
4 When  heaven's  fair light by hymns  was made  apparent  (they  made  great  splendour  shine  at break  of 
 
morning),   
He with his succour,  best of Heroes,  scattered  the blinding  darkness  so that men saw clearly.   
5 Indra,  Impetuous  One,  hath waxed  immensely:  he with his vastness  hath filled  earth  and heaven.   
E'en beyond  this his majesty  extendeth  who hath exceeded  all the worlds  in greatness.   
6 Sakra  who knoweth  well all human  actions  hath with his eager  Friends  let loose the waters.   
They  with their songs  cleft e'en the mountain  open  and willingly  disclosed  the stall of cattle.   
7 He smote  away  the floods'  obstructer,  Vrtra;  Earth,  conscious,  lent her aid to speed  thy thunder.   
Thou  sentest  forth  the waters  of the ocean,  as Lord  through  power  and might,  O daring  Hero.   
8 When,  Much−invoked!  the water's  rock thou cleftest,  Sarama  showed  herself  and went  before  thee.   
Hymned  by Angirases,  bursting  the cowstalls,  much  strength  thou foundest  for us as our leader.   
9 Come,  Maghavan,  Friend  of Man,  to aid the singer  imploring  thee in battle  for the sunlight.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Speed  him with help in his irypired  invokings:  down  sink the sorcerer,  the prayerless  Dasyu.   
10 Come  to our home  resolved  to slay the Dasyu:  Kutsa  longed  eagerly  to win thy friendship.   
Alike  in form  ye both sate in his dwelling  the faithful  Lady  was in doubt  between  you.  
11 Thou  comest,  fain to succour  him, with Kutsa,−a  goad  that masters  both the Wind−God's  horses,   
That,  holding  the brown  steeds  like spoil  for capture,  the sage may on the final day be present.   
12 For Kutsa,  with thy thousand,  thou at day−break  didst  hurl down  greedy  Susna,  foe of harvest.   
Quickly  with Kutsa's  friend  destroy  the Dasyus,  and roll the chariot−wheel  of Sarya  near us.  
13 Thou  to the son of Vidathin,  Rjisvan,  gavest  up mighty  Mrgaya  and Pipru.   
Thou  smotest  down  the swarthy  fifty thousand,  and rentest  forts as age consumes  a garment.   
14 What  time thou settest  near the Sun thy body,  thy form,  Immortal  One,  is seen expanding:   
Thou  a wild elephant  with might  invested.  like a dread  lion as thou wieldest  weapons.   
15 Wishes  for wealth  have  gone  to Indra,  longing  for him in war for light and at libation,   
Eager  for glory,  labouring  with praisesongs:  he is like home,  like sweet  and fair nutrition.   
16 Call we for you that Indra,  prompt  to listen,  him who hath done  so much  for men's  advantage;   
Who,  Lord  of envied  bounty,  to a singer  like me brings  quickly  booty  worth  the capture.   
17 When  the sharp−pointed  arrow,  O thou Hero,  flieth  mid any conflic t of the people,   
When,  Faithful  One,  the dread  encounter  cometh,  then be thou the Protector  of our body.   
18 Further  the holy thoughts  of Vamadeva  be thou a guileless  Friend  in fight  for booty.   
We come  to thee whose  providence  protects  us: wide  be thy sway for ever for thy singer.   
19 O Indra,  with these  men who love thee truly,  free givers,  Maghavan,  in every  battle,   
May we rejoice  through  many  autumns,  quelling  our foes,  as days subdue  the nights  with splendour.   
20 Now,  as the Bhrgus  wrought  a car, for Indra  the Strong,  the Mighty,  we our prayer  have  fashioned,   
That he may,  ne'er  withdraw  from  us his friendship,  but be our bodies'  guard  and strong  defender.   
21 Now,  Indra!  lauded,  glorified  with praises,  let power  swell.  high like rivers  for the singe r.  
For thee a new hymn,  Lord  of Bays,  is fashioned.  May we, car−borne,  through  song be victors  ever.   
 
HYMN  XVII.  Indra.  
1. GREAT  art thou,  Indra;  yea, the earth,  with gladness,  and heaven  confess  to thee thine  high dominion.   
Thou  in thy vigour  having  slaughtered  Vrtra  didst  free the floods  arrested  by the Dragon.   
2 Heaven  trembled  at the birth  of thine  effulgence;  Earth  trembled  at the fear of thy displeasure.   
The stedfast  mountains  shook  in agitation  . the waters  flowed,  and desert  spots  were  floode d.  
3 Hurling  his bolt with might  he cleft the mountain,  while,  putting  forth  his strength,  he showed  his vigou
r.  
He slaughtered  Vrtra  with his bolt, exulting,  and, their lord slain,  forth  flowed  the waters  swiftly.   
4 Thy Father  Dyaus  esteemed  himself  a hero:  most  noble  was the work  of Indra's  Maker,   
His who begat  the strong  bolt's  Lord  who roareth,  immovable  like earth  from  her foundation.   
5 He who alone  o'erthrows  the world  of creatures,  Indra  the peoples'  King,  invoked  of many−   
Verily  all rejoice  in him, extolling  the boons  which  Maghavan  the God hath sent them.   
6 All Soma  juices  are his own for ever,  most  gladdening  draughts  are ever his, the Mighty,   
 
Thou  ever wast the Treasure−Lord  of treasures:  Indra,  thou lettest  all folk share  thy bounty.   
7 Moreover,  when  thou first wast born,  O Indra,  thou struckest  terror  into all the people.   
Thou,  Maghavan,  rentest  with thy bolt the Dragon  who lay against  the waterfloods  of heaven.   
8 The ever−slaying,  bold and furious  Indra,  the bright  bolt's  Lord,  infin ite, strong  and mighty,   
Who  slayeth  Vrtra  and acquireth  booty,  giver  of blessings,  Maghavan  the bounteous:   
9 Alone  renowned  as Maghavan  in battles,  he frighteneth  away  assembled  armies.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
He bringeth  us the booty  that he winneth  may we, well−loved,  contin ue in his friendship.   
10 Renowned  is he when  conquering  and when  slaying:  'fis he who winneth  cattle  in the combat.   
When  Indra  hardeneth  his indignation  all that is fixed  and all that moveth  fear him.  
11 Indra  hath won all kine,  all gold,  all horses,−Ma ghavan,  he who breaketh  forts in pieces;   
Most  manly  with these  men of his who help him, dealing  out wealth  and gathering  the treasure.   
12 What  is the care of Indra  for his Mother,  what  cares  he for the Father  who begat  him?   
His care is that which  speeds  his might  in conflicts,  like wind  borne  onward  by the clouds  that thunder.   
13 Maghavan  makes  the settled  man unsettled:  he scatters  dust that he hath swept  together,   
Breaking  in pieces  like Heaven  armed  with lightning:  Maghavan  shall  enrich  the man who lauds  h;m.  
14 He urged  the chariot−wheel  of Surya  forward:  Etasa,  speeding  on his way,  he rested.   
Him the black  undulating  cloud  bedeweth,  in this mid−air's  depth,  at the base of darkness,   
15 As in the night  the sacrificing  priest.   
16 Eager  for booty,  craving  strength  and horses,  we−singers  stir Indra,  the strong,  for friendship,   
Who  gives  the wives  we seek,  whose  succour  fails not, to hasten,  like a pitcher  to the fountain.   
17 Be thou our guardian,  show  thyself  our kinsman,  watching  and blessing  those who pour the Soma;   
As Friend,  as Sire, most  fatherly  of fathers  giving  the suppliant  vital strength  and freedom.   
18 Be helping  Friend  of those  who seek thy friendship  . give life, when  lauded,  Indra,  to the singer.   
For, Indra,  we the priests  have paid thee worship,  exalting  thee with these  our sacrifices.   
19 Alone,  when  Indra  Maghavan  is lauded,  he slayeth  many  ne'er−resisted  Vrtras.   
Him in whose  keeping  is the well−loved  singer  never  do Gods  or mortals  stay or hinder.   
20 E’en  so let Maghavan,  the loud−voiced  Indra,  give us true blessings,  foeless,  men's  upholder.   
King  of all creatures,  give us glory  amply,  exalted  glory  due to him who lauds  thee.   
21 Now,  Indra!  lauded,  glorified  with praises,  let power  swell  high like rivers  for the singer.   
For thee a new hymn,  Lord  of Bays!  is fashioned.  May we, car−borne,  through  song be victors  ever.   
 
HYMN  XVIII.  Indra  and Others.  
1. THIS  is the ancient  and accepted  pathway  by which  all Gods  have  come  into existence.   
Hereby  could  one be born though  waxen  mighty.  Let him not, otherwise,  destroy  his Mother.   
2 Not this way go I forth:  hard is the passage.  Forth  from  the side obliquely  will I issue.   
Much  that is yet undone  must  I accomplish;  one must  I combat  and the other  question.   
3 He bent his eye upon  the dying  Mother:  My word  I now withdraw.  That way I follow.   
In Tvastar's  dwelling  India  drank  the Soma,  a hundredworth  of juice  pressed  from  the mortar.   
4 What  strange  act shall  he do, he whom  his Mother  bore for a thousand  months  and many  autumns?   
No peer hath he among  those  born already,  nor among  those  who shall  be born hereafter.   
5 Deeming  him a reproach,  his mother  hid him, Indra,  endowed  with all heroic  valour.   
Then  up he sprang  himself,  assumed  his vesture,  and filled,  as soon  as born,  the earth  and heaven.   
6 With  lively  motion  onward  flow these  waters,  the Holy  Ones,  shouting,  as 'twere,  together.   
Ask them  to. tell thee what  the floods  are saying,  what  girdling  rock the waters  burst  asunder.   
7 Are they addressing  him with words  of welcome?  Will the floods  take on them  the shame  of Indra?   
With  his great  thunderbolt  my Son hath slaughtered  Vrtra,  and set these  rivers  free to wander.   
8 I cast thee from  me, mine,−thy  youthful  mother:  thee,  mine  own offspring,  Kusava  hath swallowed.   
To him, mine  infant,  were  the waters  gracious.  Indra,  my Son, rose up in conquering  vigour.   
9 Thou  art mine  own,  O Maghavan,  whom  Vyamsa  struck  to the ground  and smote  thy jaws in pieces.   
 
But, smitten  through,  the mastery  thou wonnest,  and with thy bolt the Dasa's  head thou crushedst.
 10 The Heifer  hath brought  forth  the Strong,  the Mighty,  the unconquerable  Bull,  the furious  IndRig Veda – English Translation  
ra. The Mother  left her unlicked  Calf to wander,  seeking  himself,  the path that he would  follow.  1
1 Then  to her mighty  Child  the Mother  turne d her, saying,  My son, these  Deities  forsake  thee.  Th
en Indra  said, about  to slaughter  Vrtra,  O my friend  Vrtra,  stride  full boldly  forward.  12 Who  was
 he then who made  thy Mother  widow?  Who  sought  to stay thee lying  still or moving?  What  God
, when  by the foot thy Sire thou tookest  and slewest,  was at hand  to give thee comfort?  13 In dee
p distress  I cooked  a dog's  intestines.  Among  the Gods  I found  not one to comfort.  My consort  I b
eheld  in degradation.  The Falcon  then brought  me the pleasant  Soma.  
 
HYMN  XIX. Indra.  
1. THEE,  verily,  O Thunder−wielding  Indra,  all the Gods  here,  the Helpers  swift  to listen,   
And both the worlds  elected,  thee the Mighty,  High,  waxen  strong,  alone  to slaughter  Vrtra.   
2 The Gods,  as worn  witheld,  relaxed  their efforts:  thou,  Indra,  born of truth,  wast Sovran  Ruler.   
Thou  slewest  Ahi who besieged  the waters,  and duggest  out their all−supporting  channels.   
3 The insatiate  one, extended,  hard to waken,  who slumbered  in perpetual  sleep,  O Indra,−   
The Dragon  stretched  against  the seven  prone  rivers,  where  no joint was, thou rentest  with thy thunder.   
4 Indra  with might  shook  earth  and her foundation  as the wind  stirs the water  with its fury.   
Striving,  with strength  he burst  the firm asunder,  and tore away  the summits  of the mountai ns.  
5 They  ran to thee as mothers  to their offspring:  the clouds,  like chariots,  hastened  forth  together.   
Thou  didst  refresh  the streams  and force  the billows:  thou,  Indra,  settest  free obstructed  rivers.   
6 Thou  for the sake of Vayya  and Turviti  didst  stay the great  stream,  flowing,  allsustaining:   
Yea, at their prayer  didst  check  the rushing  river  and make  the floods  easy to cross,  O Indra.   
7 He let the young  Maids  skilled  in Law,  unwedded,  like fountains,  bubbling,  flow forth  streaming  onwar
d.  
He inundated  thirsty  plains  and deserts,  and milked  the dry Cows  of the mighty  master.   
8 Through  many  a morn  and many  a lovely  autumn,  having  slain  Vrtra,  lie set free the rivers.   
Indra  hath set at liberty  to wander  on earth  the streams  encompassed  pressed  together.   
9 Lord  of Bay Steeds,  thou broughtest  from  the ant−hill  the unwedded  damsel's  son whom  ants were  eatin
g.  
The blind  saw clearly,  as he grasped  the serpent,  rose,  brake  the jar: hisjoints  again  united.   
10 To the wise man,  O Sage  and Sovran  Ruler,  the man who knoweth  all thine  ancient  exploits.   
Hath  told these  deeds  of might  as thou hast wrought  them,  great  acts, spontaneous,  and to man's  advantag
e.  
11 Now,  Indra!  lauded,  glorified  with praises,  let powers  swell  high,  like rivers,  for the singer.   
For thee a new hymn,  Lord  of Bays!  is fashioned.  May we, car−borne,  through  song be victors  ever.   
 
HYMN  XX. Indra.  
1. FROM  near or far away  may mighty  Indra  giver  of succour,  come  for our protection  Lord  
of men,  armed  with thunder,  with the Strongest,  slaying  his foes in conflict,  in the battles.  2 
May Indra  come  to us with Tawny  Coursers,  inclined  to us, to favour  and enrich  us. May Ma
ghavan,  loud−voiced  and wielding  thunder,  stand  by us at this sacrifice,  in combat.  3 Thou,  h
onouring  this our sacrifice , O Indra,  shalt  give us strength  and fill us full of courage.  To win t
he booty,  Thunder−armed!  like hunters  may we with thee subdue  in fight  our foemen.  4 Lovi
ng us well,  benevolent,  close  beside  us, drink,  Godlike  Indra,  of the wellpressed  Soma.  Drink
 of the meath  we offer,  and delight  thee with food that cometh  from  the mountain  ridges.  5 HRig Veda – English Translation  
im who is sung  aloud  by recent  sages,  like a ripe−fruited  tree, a scythe−armed  victor,−  I, like
 a bridegroom  thinking  of his consort,  call hither  Indra,  him invoked  of many;  6 Him who in 
native  strength  is like a mountain,  the lofty  Indra  born or old for conquest,  Terrific  wielder  of
 the ancient  thunder.  filled  full with splendour  as a jar with water.  7 Whom  from  of old there  
is not one to hinder,  none  to curtail  the riches of his bounty.   
Pouring  forth  freely,  O thou Strong  and Mighty,  vouchsafe  us riches,  God invoked  of many!   
8 Of wealth  and homes  of men thou art the ruler,  and opener  of the stable  of the cattle.   
Helper  of men,  winner  of spoil  in combats,  thou leades t to an ample  heap  of riches.   
9 By what  great  might  is he renowned  as strongest,  wherewith  the Lofty  One stirs up wild battles?   
Best soother  of the worshipper's  great  sorrow,  he gives  possessions  to the man who lauds  him.  
10 Slay us not; bring,  bestow  onus the ample  gift which  thou hast to give to him who offers.   
At this new gift, with this laud sung  before  thee,  extolling  thee,  we, Indra,  will declare  it.  
11 Now,  Indra!  lauded,  glorified  with praises,  let power  swell  high,  like rivers,  for the singer.   
A new hymn,  Lord  of Bays!  for thee is fashioned.  May we, car−born,  through  song be victors  ever.   
 
HYMN  XXI. Indra.  
1. MAY  Indra  come  to us for our protection;  here be the Hero,  praised,  our feast−companion.   
May he whose  powers  are many,  waxen  mighty,  cherish,  like Dyaus,  his own supreme  dominion.   
2 Here  magnify  his great  heroic  exploits,  most  glorious  One,  enriching  men with bounties,   
Whose  will is like a Sovran  in assembly,  who rules  the people,  Conqueror,  all−surpassing.   
3 Hither  let Indra  come  from earth  or heaven,  hither  with speech  from  firmament  or ocean;   
With  Maruts,  from  the realm  of light to aid us, or from  a distance,  from  the seat of Order.   
4 That Indra  will we laud in our assemblies,  him who is Lord  of great  and lasting  riches,   
Victor  with Vayu  where  the herds  are gathered,  who leads  with boldness  on to higher  fortune.   
5 May the Priest,  Lord  of many  blessings,  striving,−who  fixing  reverence  on reverence,  giving   
Vent  to his voice,  inciteth  men to worshipwith  lauds  bring  Indra  hither  to our dwellings.   
6 When  sitting  pondering  in deep  devotion  in Ausija's  abode  they ply the press−stone,   
May he whose  wrath  is fierce,  the mighty  bearer,  come  as the house−lord's  priest  within  our chambers.   
7 Surely  the power  of Bharvara  the mighty  for ever helpeth  to support  the singer;   
That which  in Ausija's  abode  lies hidden,  to come  forth  for delight  and for devotion.   
8 When  he unbars  the spaces  of the mountains,  and quickens  with his floods  the water−torrents,   
He finds  in lair the buffalo  and wild− ox when  the wise lead him on to vigorous  exploit.   
9 Auspicious  are thy hands,  thine  arms  wellfashioned  which  proffer  bounty,  Indra,  to thy praiser.   
What  sloth  is this?  Why  dost thou not rejoice  thee?  Why  dost thou not delight  thyself  with giving?   
10 So Indra  is the truthful  Lord  of treasure.  Freedom  he gave to man by slaying  Vrtra.   
Much−lauded!  help us with thy power  to riches:  may I be sharer  of thy Godlike  favour.   
11 Now,  Indra!  lauded,  glorified  with praises,  let power  swell  high,  like rivers,  for,the singer.   
For thee a new hymn,  Lord  of Bays!  is fashioned.  May we, care−borne,  through  song be victqrs  ever.   
 
HYMN  XXII.  Indra.  
1. THAT  gift of ours which  Indra  loves  and welcomes,  even  that he makes  for us, the Great  and Strong  O
ne.  
He who comes  wielding  in his might  the thunder,  Maghavan,  gives  prayer,  praise,  and laud,  and Soma.   
2 Bull,  hurler  of the four−edged  rain−producer  with both his arms,  strong,  mighty,  most  heroic;   
Wearing  as wool  Parusni  for adornment,  whose  joints  for sake of friendship  he hath covered.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
3 God who of all the Gods  was born divinest,  endowed  with ample  strength  and mighty  powers,   
And bearing  in his arrns  the yearning  thunder,  with violent  rush caused  heaven  and earth  to tremble.   
4 Before  the High  God,  at his birth,  heave n trembled,  earth,  many  floods  and all the precipices.   
The Strong  One bringeth  nigh the Bull's  two Parents:  loud sing the winds,  like men,  in air's mid−region.   
5 These  are thy great  deeds,  Indra,  thine,  the Mighty,  deeds  to be told aloud  at all libations,   
That thou,  O Hero,  bold and boldly  daring,  didst  with thy bolt, by strength,  destroy  the Dragon.   
6 True  are all these  thy deeds,  O Most  Heroic.  The Milch−kine  issued  from  the streaming  udder.   
In fear of thee,  O thou of manly  spirit,  the rivers  swiftly  set themselves  in motion.   
7 With  joy, O Indra,  Lord  of Tawny  Coursers,  the Sisters  then,  these  Goddesses,  extolled  thee,   
 
When  thou didst  give the prisoned  ones their freedom  to wander  at their will in long succession.   
8 Pressed  is the gladdening  stalk  as 'twere  a river:  so let the rite, the toiler's  power,  attract  thee  
To us−ward,  of the Bright  One,  as the courser  strains  his. exceedingly  strong  leather  bridle.   
9 Ever  by us perform  thy most  heroic,  thine  highest,  best victorious  deeds,  O Victor.   
For us make  Vrtras  easy to be conquered:  destroy  the weapon  of our mortal  foeman.   
10 Graciously  listen  to our prayer,  O Indra,  and strength of varied  sort bestow  thou on us.  
Send  to us all intelligence  arid wisdom  O Maghavan,  be he who gives  us cattle.   
11 Now,  Indra!  lauded,  glorified  with praises,  let wealth  swell  hiah like rivers  to the singer.   
For thee a new hymn,  Lord  of Bays,  is fashioned.  May we, car−borne,  through  song be victors  ever.   
 
HYMN  XXIII.  Indra.  
1. How,  what  priest's  sacrifice  hath he made  mighty,  rejoicing  in the Soma  and its fountain?   
Delighting  in juice,  eagerly  drinking,  the Lofty  One hath waxed  for splendid  riches.  
2 What  hero hath been  made  his feast−companion?  Who  hath been  partner  in his loving−kindness?   
What  know  we of his wondrous  acts?  How  often  comes  he to aid and speed  the pious  toiler?   
3 How  heareth  Indra  offered  invocation?  How,  hearing,  marketh  he the invoker's  wishes?   
What  are his ancient  acts of bounty?  Wherefore  call they him One who filleth  full the singer?   
4 How  doth the priest  who laboureth,  ever longing,  win for himself  the wealth  which  he possesseth?   
May he, the God,  mark  well my truthful  praises,  having  received  the homage  which  he loveth.   
5 How,  and what  bond  of friendship  with a mortal  hath the God chosen  as this morn  is breaking?   
How,  and what  love hath he for those  who love him, who have  entwined  in him their firm affection?   
6 Is then thy friendship  with thy friends  most  mighty?  Thy brotherhood  with us, −when  may we tell it?  
The streams  of milk move,  as most  wondrous  sunlight,  the beauty  of the Lovely  One for glory.   
7 About  to stay the Indra−less  destructive  spirit  he sharpens  his keen  arms  to strike  her.  
Whereby  the Strong,  although  our debts'  exactor,  drives  in the distant  mornings  that we know  not.  
8 Eternal  Law hath varied  food that strengthens;  thought  of eternal  Law,  removes  transgressions.   
The praise−hymn  of eternal  Law,  arousing,  glowing,  hath oped  the deaf ears of the living.   
9 Firm−seated  are eternal  Law's  foundations  in its fair form  are many  splendid  beauties.   
By holy Law long lasting  food they bring  us; by holy Law have  cows  come  to our worship.   
10 Fixing  eternal  Law he, too, upholds  it swift  moves  the might  of Law and wins  the booty.   
To Law belong  the vast deep  Earth  and Heaven:  Milch−kine  supreme,  to Law their milk they render.   
11 Now,  Indra!  lauded,−  glorified  with praises,  let power  swell  high like rivers  to the singer.   
For thee a new hymn,  Lord  of Bays,  is fashioned.  May we, car−borne,  through  song be victors  ever.   
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  XXIV.  Indra.  
1. WHAT  worthy  praise  will bring  before  us Indra,  the Son of Strength,  that he may grant  us riches;   
For he the Hero,  gives  the singer  treasures:  he is the Lord  who sends  us gifts,  ye people.   
2 To be invoked  and hymned  in fight  with Vrtra,  that well−praised  Indra  gives  us real bounties.   
That Maghavan  brings  comfort  in the foray  to the religious  man who pours  libations.   
3 Him, verily,  the men invoke  in combat;  risking  their lives  they make  him their protector,   
When  heroes,  foe to foe, give up their bodies,  fighting,  each side, for children  and their offspring.   
4 Strong  God!  the folk at need  put forth  their vigour,  striving  together  in the whirl  of battle.   
When  warrior  bands  encounter  one another  some  in the grapple  quit themselves  like Indra.   
5 Hence  many  a one worships  the might  of Indra:  hence  let the brew  succeed  the meal−oblation.   
Hence  let the Soma  banish  those  who pour not: even  hence  I joy to pay the Strong  One worship.   
6 Indra  gives  comfort  to the man who truly  presses,  for him who longs  fot it, the Soma,   
Not disaffected,  with devoted  spirit  this man he takes  to be his friend  in battles.   
7 He who this day for Indra presses  Soma,  prepares  the brew  and fries the grains  of barley−   
 
Loving  the hymns  of that devoted  servant,  to him may Indra  give heroic  vigour.   
8 When  the impetuous  chief  hath sought  the confliet,  and the lord looked  upon  the long−drawn  battle,   
The matron  calls to the Strong  God whom  pressers  of Soma  have  encouraged  int the dwelling.   
9 He bid a small  price  for a thing  of value:  I was content,  returning,  still unpurchased.   
He heightened  not his insufficient  offer.  Simple  and clever,  both milk out the udder.   
10 Who  for ten milch−kine  purchaseth  from  rne this Indra  who is mine?   
When  he hath slain  the Vrtras  let the buyer  give him back  to me.  
11 Now,  Indra!  lauded,  glorified  with praises,  let wealth  swell  high like rivers  for the singer.   
For thee a new hymn,  Lord  of Bays,  is fashioned.  May we, car−borne,  through  song be victors  ever.   
 
HYMN  XXV.  Indra.  
1. WHAT  friend  of man,  God−loving,  hath delighted,  yearning  therefor,  this day in Indra's  friendship?   
Who  with enkindled  flame  and flowing  Soma  laudeth him for his great  protecting  favour?   
2 Who  hath with prayer  bowed  to the Soma−lover?  What  pious  man endues  the beams  of morning?   
Who  seeks  bond,  fritridship,  brotherhood  with Indra?  Who  hath recourse  unto the Sage  for succour?   
3 Who  claims  to−day  the Deities'  protection,  asks Aditi  for light,  or the Adityas?   
Of whose  pressed  stalk  of Soma  drink  the Asvins,  Indra,  and Agni,  well−inclined  in spirit?   
4 To him shall  Agni  Bharata  give shelter:  long shall  he look upon  the Sun up−rising,   
Who  sayeth,  Let us press  the juice  for Indra,  man's  Friend,  the Hero  manliest  of heroes.   
5 Him neither  few men overcome,  nor many  to him shall  Aditi  give spacious  shelter.   
Dear  is the pious,  the devout,  to Indra  dear is the zealous,  dear the Soma−bringer.   
6 This Hero  curbs  the mighty  for the zealous:  the presser's  brew  Indra  possesses  solely:   
No brother,  kin, or friend  to him who pours  not, destroyer  of the dumb  who would  resist  him.  
7 Not with the wealthy  churl  who pours  no Soma  doth Indra,  Soma−drinker,  bind allian ce.  
He draws  away  his wealth  and slays  him naked,  own Friend  to him who offers,  for oblation.   
8 Highest  and lowest,  men who stand  between  diem,  going,  returning,  dwelling  in contentment,   
Those  who show  forth  their strength  when  urged  to battle−these  are the men who call for aid on Indra.   
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  XXVI.  Indra.  
1. I WAS  aforetime  Manu,  I was Surya:  I am the sage Kaksivan,  holy singer.   
Kutsa  the son of Arjuni  I master.  I am the sapient  Usana  behold  me.  
2 I have  bestowed  the earth  upon  the Arya,  and rain upon the man who brings  oblation.   
I guided  forth  the loudly−roaring  waters,  and the Gods  moved  according  to my pleasure.   
3 In the wild joy of Soma  I demolished  Sambara's  forts,  ninety−and−nine,  together;   
And,  utterly,  the hundredth  habitation,  when  helpi ng Divodasa  Atithigva.   
4 Before  all birds  be ranked  this Bird,  O Maruts;  supreme  of falcons  be this fleet−winged  Falcon,   
Because,  strong−  pinioned,  with no car to bear him, he brought  to Manu  the Godloved  oblation.   
5 When  the Bird brought  it, hence  in rapid motion  sent on the wide  path fleet as thought  he hurried.   
Swift  he returned  with sweetness  of the Soma,  and hence  the Falcon  hath acquired  his glory.   
6 Bearing  the stalk,  the Falcon  speeding  onward,  Bird bringing  from  afar the draught  that gladdens,   
Friend  of the Gods,  brought,  grasping  fast, the Soma  which  be bad taken  from  yon loftiest  heaven.   
7 The Falcon  took and brought  the Soma,  bearing  thousand  libations  with him, yea, ten thousand.   
The Bold  One left Malignities  behind  him, wise,  in wild joy of Soma,  left the foolish.   
 
HYMN  XXVII.  The Falcon.  
1. I, As I lay within  the womb,  considered  all generations  of these  Gods  in order.  A h
undred  iron fortresses  confined  me but forth  I flew with rapid  speed  a Falcon.   
2 Not at his own free pleasure  did he bear me: he conquered  with his strength  and manly  courage.   
Straightway  the Bold  One left the fiends  behind  him and passed  the winds  as he grew  yet more  mighty.   
3 When  with loud cry from  heaven  down  sped the Falcon,  thence  hasting  like the wind  he bore the Bold  
One.   
Then,  wildly  raging  in his mind,  the archer  Krsanu  aimed  and loosed  the string  to strike  him.  
4 The Falcon  bore him from  heaven's  lofty  summit  as the swift  car of Indra's  Friend  bore Bhujyu.   
Then  downward  bither  fell a flying  feather  of the Bird hasting  forward  in his journey.   
5 And now let Maghavan  accept  the beaker,  white,  filled  with milk,  filled  with the shining  liquid;   
The best of sweet  meath  which  the priests  have offered:  that Indra  to his joy may drink,  the Hero,  that he 
may 
take and drink  it to his rapture.   
 
HYMN  XXVIII.  Indra−Soma.  
1. ALLIED  with thee,  in this thy friendship,  Soma,  Indra  for man made  waters  flow together,   
Slew  Ahi, and sent forth  the Seven  Rivers,  and opened  as it were  obstructed  fountains.   
2 Indu,  with thee for his confederate,  Indra  swiftly  with might  pressed  down  the wheel  of Surya.   
What  rolled,  all life's  support,  on heaven's  high summit  was separated  from  the great  oppressor.   
3 Indra  smote  down,  Agni  consumed,  O Indu,  the Dasyus  ere the noontide  in the conflict.   
Of those  who gladly  sought  a hard−won  dwelling  he cast down  many  a thousand  with his arrow.   
4 Lower  than all besides  hast thou,  O Indra,  cast down  the Dasyus,  abject  tribes  of Dasas.   
Ye drave  away,  ye put to death  the foemen,  and took great vengeance  with your murdering  weapons.   
5 So, of a truth,  Indra  and Soma,  Heroes,  ye burst  the stable  of the kine and horses,   
The stable  which  the bar or stone  obstructed;  and piercing  through  set free the habitations.   
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  XXIX.  Indra.  
1. COME,  lauded, unto us with powers  and succours,  O Indra,  with thy Tawny  Steeds;  exulting,   
Past even  the foeman's  manifold  libations,  glorified  with our hymns,  true Wealth−bestower.   
2 Man's  Friend,  to this our sacrifice  he cometh  marking  how he is called  by Soma−pressers.   
Fearless,  and conscious  that his Steeds  are noble,  he joyeth  with the Soma−pouring  heroes.   
3 Make  his cars hear,  that he may show  his vigou r and may be joyful  in the way he loveth.   
May mighty  Indra  pouring  forth  in bounty  bestow  on us good  roads  and perfect  safety;   
4 He who with succour  comes  to his implorer,  the singer  here who with his song  invites  him;  
He who himself  sets to the pole swift Coursers,  he who hath hundreds,  thousands,  Thunder−wielder.   
5 O Indra  Maghavan,  by thee protected  may we be thine,  princes  and priests  and singers,   
Sharing  the riches  sent from  lofty  heaven  which  yields  much  food,  and all desire  its bounty.   
 
HYMN  XXX. Indra.  
1. O INDRA,  Vrtra−slayer,  none  is better,  mightier  than thou:  Verily  there  is none  like thee.   
2 Like chariot−wheels  these  people  all together  follow  after thee:   
Thou  ever art renowned  as Great.   
3 Not even  all the gathered  Gods  conquered  thee, Indra,  in the war,  
When  thou didst  lengthen  days by night.   
4 When  for the sake of those  oppressed,  and Kutsa  as he battled,   
Thou  stolest  away  the Sun's  car−wheel.   
5 When,  fighting  singly,  Indra.  thou o'ercamest  all the furious  Gods,  thou slewest  those who strove  with t
hee.  
6 When  also for a mortal  man,  Indra,  thou speddest  forth  the Sun,  
And holpest  Etasa  with might.   
7 What?  Vrtra−slayer,  art not thou,  Maghavan,  fiercest  in thy wrath?   
 
So hast thou quelled  the demon  too.  
8 And this heroic  deed  of might  thou,  Indra,  also hast achieved,   
That thou didst  smite  to death  the Dame,  Heaven's  Daughter,  meditating  ill.  
9 Thou,  Indra,  Mighty  One,  didst  crush  Usas,  though  Daughter  of the Sky.  
When  lifting  up herself  in pride.   
10 Then  from  her chariot  Usas  fled, affrighted,  from  her ruined  car.  
When  the strong  God had shattered  it.  
11 So there  this car of Usas  lay, broken  to pieces,  in Vipas,   
And she herself  fled far away.   
12 Thou,  Indra,  didst.  with magic  power  resist  the overflowing  stream   
Who  spread  her waters  o'er the land.   
13 Valiantly  didst  thou seize  and take the store  which  Susna  had amassed,   
When  thou didst  crush  his fortresses.   
14 Thou,  Indra,  also smotest  down  Kulitara's  son Sambara,   
The Dasa,  from  the lofty  hill.  
15 Of Dasa  Varcin's  thou didst  slay the hundred  thousand  and the five,  
Crushed  like the fellies,  of a car.  
16 So Indra,  Lord  of Heroes,  Powers,  caused  the unwedded  damsel's  son,  
The castaway,  to share  the lauds.   
17 So sapient  Indra,  Lord  of Might,  brought  Turvaga  and Yadu,  those  Rig Veda – English Translation  
Who  feared  the flood,  in safel  o'er.  
18 Arpa  and Citraratha,  both Aryas,  thou,  Indra,  slewest  swift,   
On yonder  side of Sarayu,   
19 Thou,  Vrtra−slayer,  didst  conduct  those  two forlorn,  the blind,  the lame.   
None  may attain  this bliss of thine.   
20 For Divodasa,  him who brought  oblationt,  1ndra  overthrew   
A hundred  fortresses  of stone.   
21 The thirty  thousand  Disas  he with magic  power  and weapons  sent  
To slumber,  for Dabhiti's  sake.   
22 As such,  O Vrtra−slayer,  thou art general  Lord  of kine for all,  
Thou  Shaker  of all things  that be.  
23 Indra,  whatever  deed  of might  thou hast this day to execute,   
None  be there  now to hinder  it.  
24 O Watchful  One,  may Aryaman  the God give thee all goodly  things.   
May Risan,  Bhaga,  and the God Karulati  give all things fair.  
 
HYMN  XXXI.  Indra.  
1. WITH  what  help will he come  to us, wonderful,  ever−waxing  Friend;  With  what  most  mighty  company
?  
2 What  genuine  and most  liberal  draught  will spirit  thee with juice  to burst   
Open  e'en strongly−guarded  wealth?   
3 Do thou who art Protector  of us thy friends who praise  thee  
With  hundred  aids approach  us.  
4 Like as a courser's  circling  wheel,  so turn thee hitherward  to us,  
Attracted  by the hymns  of men.   
5 Thou  seekest  as it were  thine  own stations  with swift  descent  of powers:   
I share  thee even  with the Sun.  
6 What  time thy courage  and his wheels  together,  Indra,  run their course   
With  thee and with the Sun alike,   
 
7 So even,  Lord  of Power  and Might,  the people  call thee Maghavan,   
Giver,  who pauses  not to think.   
8 And verily  to him who toils and presses  Soma  juice  for thee  
Thou  quickly  givest  ample  wealth.   
9 No, not a hundred  hinderers  can check  thy gracious  bounty's  flow,   
Nor thy great  deeds  when  thou wilt act.  
10 May thine  assistance  keep  us safe, thy hundred  and thy thousand  aids:   
May all thy favours  strengthen  us.  
11 Do thou elect  us this place  for friendship  and prosperity,   
And great  celestial  opulence.   
12 Favour  us, Indra,  evermore  with overflowing  store  of wealth:   
With  all thy succours  aid thou us.  
13 With  new protections,  Indra,  like an archer,  open  thou forus   
The stables  that are filled  with kine.   
14 Our chariot,  Indra,  boldly  moves  endued  with splendour,  ne'er  repulsed,   
Winning  for us both kine andsteeds.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
15 O Surya,  make  our fame  to be most  excellent  among  the Gods,   
Most  lofty as the heaven  on high.   
 
HYMN  XXXII.  Indra.  
1. O THOU  who slewest  Vrtra,  come,  O Indra,  hither  to our side, Mighty  One with thy mighty  aids.  
2 Swift  and impetuous  art thou,  wondrous  amid  the well−dressed  folk:   
Thou  doest  marvels  for our help.   
3 Even  with the weak  thou smitest  down  him  
who is stronger,  with thy strength   
The mighty,  with the Friends  thou hast.  
4 O Indra,  we are close  to thee;  to thee we sing aloud  our songs:   
Help  hnd defend  us, even  us.  
5 As such,  O Caster  of the Stone,  come  with thy succours  wonderful,   
Blameless,  and irresist ible.  
6 May we be friends  of one like thee,  O Indra,  with the wealth  of kine,   
Comrades  for lively  energy.   
7 For thou,  O Indra,  art alone  the Lord  of strength  that comes  from  kine  
So grant  thou us abundant  food.   
8 They  turn thee not another  way,  when,  lauded,  Lover  of the Song,   
Thou  wilt give wealth  to those  who praise.   
9 The Gotamas  have  sung  their song  of praise  to thee that thou mayst  give,   
Indra,  for lively  energy.   
10 We will declare  thy hero deeds,  what  Disa forts thou brakest  down,   
Attacking  them  in rapturous  joy.  
11 The sages  sing those  manly  deeds  which,  Indra,  Lover  of the Song,   
Thou  wrougbtest  when  the Soma  flowed.   
12 Indra,  the Gotamas  who bring  thee praises  have  grown  strong  by thee.   
Give  them  renown  with hero sons.   
13 For, Indra,  verily thou art the general  treasure  even  of all .  
Thee,  therefore,  do we invocate.   
14 Excellent  Indra,  turn to us: glad thee among  us with the juice   
Of Somas,  Soma−drinker  thou.   
 
15 May praise  from  us who think  Qn thee,  O Indra,  bring  thee near to us.  
Turn  thy two Bay Steeds  hitherward.   
16 Eat of our sacrificial  cake:  rejoice  thee in the songs  we sing.   
Even  as a lover  in his bride.   
17 To India  for a thousand  steeds  well−trained  and fleet of foot we pray,   
And hundred  jars of Soma  juice.   
18 We make  a hundred  of thy kine,  yea, and a thousand,  hasten  nigh:   
So let thy bounty  come  to us.  
19 We have obtained,  a gift from  thee,  ten water−ewers  wrought  of gold:   
Thou,  Vrtra−slayer,  givest  much.   
20 A bounteous  Giver,  give us much,  bring  much  and not a trifling  gift:  
Much,  Indra,  wilt thou fain bestow.   
21 O Vrtra−slayer,  thou art famed  in many  a place  as bountiful   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Hero,  thy bounty  let us share.   
22 I praise  thy pair of Tawny  Steeds,  wise Son of him who giveth  kine  
Terrify  not the cows  with these.   
23 Like two slight  images  of girls,  unrobed,  upon  a new−wrought  post,   
So shine  the Bay Steeds  in their course.   
24 For me the Bays  are ready  when  I start,  or start not, with the dawn,  Innocuous  in the ways  they take.   
 
HYMN  XXXIII.  Rbhus.  
I. I SEND  my voice  as herald  to the Rbhus;  I crave  the white  cow for the overspreading.   
Wind−sped,  the Skillful  Ones  in rapid  motion  have  in an instant  compassed  round  the heaven.   
2 What  time the Rbus  had with care and marvels  done  proper  service  to assist  their Parents,   
They  won the friendship  of the Gods;  the Sages  carried  away  the fruit of their devotion.   
3 May they who made  their Parents,  who were  lying  like posts  that moulder,  young  again  for ever,−   
May Vaja,  Vibhvan,  Rbhu,  joined  with Indra  , protect  our sacrifice,  the Soma−lovers.   
4 As for a year the Rbhus  kept the Milch−cow,  throughout  a year fashioned  and formed  her body,   
And through  a year's  space  still sustained  her brightness,  through  these  their labours  they were  made  
immortal.   
5 Two beakers  let us make,−  thus said the eldest.  Lct us make  three,−  this was the younger's  sentence.   
Four  beakers  let us make,−  thus spoke  the youngest.  Tvastar  approved  this rede of yours,  O Rbhus.   
6 The men spake  truth  and even  so they acted:  this Godlike  way of theirs  the Rbhu s followed.   
And Tvastar,  when  he looked  on the four beakers  resplendent  as the day, was moved  with envy.   
7 When  for twelve  days the Rbhus  joyed  reposing  as guests  of him who never  may be hidden,   
lley made  fair fertile  fields,  they brought  the rivers.  Plants spread  o'er deserts,  waters  filled  the hollows.   
8 May they who formed  the swift  car, bearing  Heroes,  and the Cow  omniform  and all−impelling,   
Even  may they form  wealth  for us,−the  Rbhus,  dexterous−handed,  deft in work  and gracious.   
9 So in their work the Gods  had satisfaction,  pondering  it with thought  and mental  insight.   
The Gods'  expert  artificer  was Vaja,  Indra's  Rbhuksan,  Varuna's  was Vibhvan.   
10 They  whol  made  glad with sacrifice  and praises,  wrought  the two Bays,  his docile  Steeds,  for Indra, −  
Rbhus,  as those  who wish  a friend  to prosper,  bestow  upon  us gear and growth  of riches.   
11 This day have  they set gladdening  drink  before  you. Not without  toil are Gods  inclined  to friendship.   
Therefore  do ye who are so great,  O Rbhus,  vouchsafe  us treasures  at this third  libation.   
 
HYMN  XXXIV.  Rbhus.  
1. To this our sacrifice  come  Rbhu,  Vibhvan,  Vaja,  and Indra  with the gift of riches,   
Because  this day hath Dhisana  the Goddess  set drink  for you: the gladdening  draughts  have  reached  you.  
 
2 Knowing  your birth  and rich in gathered  treasure,  Rbhus,  rejoice  together  with the Rtus.   
The gladdening  draughts  and wisdom  have  approached  you: send ye us riches  with good  store  of heroes.   
3 For you was made  this sacrifice,  O Rbhus,  which  ye, like men,  won for yourselves  aforetime.   
To you come  all who find in you their pleasure:  ye all were−even  the two elder−Vajas.   
4 Now  for the mortal  worshipper,  O Heroes,  for him who served  you, was the gift of riches.   
Drink,  Vajas,  Rbhus!  unto you is offered,  to gladden  you, the third  and great  libation.   
5 Come  to us, Heroes,  Vajas  and Rbhuksans,  glorified  for the sake of mighty  treasure.   
These  draughts  approach  you as the day is closing,  as cows,  whose  calves  are newly−born,  their stable.   
6 Come  to this sacrifice  of ours, ye Children  of Strength,  invoked  with humble  adoration.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Drink  of this meath,  Wealth−givers,  joined  with Indra  with whom  ye are in full accord,  ye Princes.   
7 Close  knit with Varuna  drink  the Soma,  Indra;  close−knit,  ilymn−lover!  with the Maruts  drink  it:  
Close−knit  with drinkers  first, who drink  in season;  close−knit  with heavenly  Dames  who give us treasure
s.  
8 Rejoice  in full accord  with the Adityas,  in concord  with the Parvatas,  O Rbhus;   
In full accord  with Savitar,  Divine  One;  in full accord  with floods  that pour forth  riches.   
9 Rbhus,  who helped  their Parents  and the Asvins,  who formed  the Milch−cow  and the pair of horses,   
Made  armour,  set the heaven  and earth  asunder,−far−  reaching  Heroes,  they have  made  good  offspring.   
10 Ye who have  wealth  in cattle  and in booty,  in heroes,  in rich sustenance  and treasure,   
Such,  O ye Rbhus,  first to drink,  rejoicing,  give unto us and those  who laud our present.   
11 Ye were  not far: we have  not left you thirsting,  blameless  in this our sacrifice,  O Rbhus.   
Rejoice  you with the Maruts  and with Indra,  with the Kings,  Gods!  that ye may give us riches.   
 
HYMN  XXXV.  Rbhus.  
1. Come  hither,  O ye Sons  of Strength,  ye Rbhus;  stay not afar, ye Children  of Sudhanvan.   
At this libation  is your gift of treasure.  Let gladdening  draughts  approach  you after Indra's.   
2 Hither  is come  the Rbhus'  gift of riches;  here was the drinking  of the well−pressed  Soma,   
Since  by dexterity  and skill as craftsmen  ye made  the single  chalice  to be fourfold   
3 Ye made  fourfold  the chalice  that wag single:  ye spake  these  words  and said, O Friend,  assist  us;  
Then,  Vajas!  gained  the path of life eternal,  deft−handed  Rbhus,  to the Gods'  assembly.   
4 Out of what  substance  was that chalice  fashioned  which  ye made  fourfold  by your art and wisdom?   
Now  for the gladdening  draught  press  out the liquor,  and drink,  O Rbhus,  of die meath  of Soma.   
5 Ye with your cunning  made  your Parents  youthful;  the cup, for Gods  to drink,  ye formed  with cunning;   
With  cunning,  Rbhus,  rich in treasure,  fashioned  the two swift  Tawny  Steeds  who carry  Indra.   
6 Whoso  pours  out for you, when  days are closing,  the sharp  libation  for your joy, O Vajas,   
For him, O mighty  Rbhus,  ye, rejoicing,  have  fashioned  wealth  with plenteous  store  of heroes.   
7 Lord  of Bay Steeds,  at dawn thejuice  thou drankest:  thine,  only thine,  is the noonday  libation.   
Now  drink  thou with the wealth−bestowing  Rbhus,  whom  for their skill thou madest  friends,  O Indra.   
8 Ye, whom  your artist  skill hath raised  to Godhead  have set you down  above  in heaven  like falcons.   
So give us riches,  Children  of Sudhanvan,  O Sons  of Strength;  ye have  become  immortal.   
9 The third  libation,  that bestoweth  treasure,  which  ye have  won by skill,  ye dexterous−handed,−   
This drink  hath been  effused  for you, O Rbhus  . drink  it with high delight,  with joy like Indra's.   
 
HYMN  XXXVI.  Rbhus.  
1. THia  car that was not made  for horses  or for reins,  three−wheeled,  worthy  of lauds,  rolls round  the 
firmament.   
That is the great  announcement  of your Deity,  that, O ye Rbhus,  ye sustai n the earth  and heaven.   
2 Ye Sapient  Ones  who made  the lightly−rolling  car out of your mind,  by thought,  the car that never  errs,  
You,  being  such,  to drink  of this drinkoffering,  you, O ye Vajas,  and ye Rbhus,  we invoke.   
3 O Vajas,  Rbhus,  reaching  far, among  the Gods  this was your exaltation  gloriously  declared,   
 
In that your aged  Parents,  worn  with length  of days,  ye wrought  again  to youth  so that they moved  at will.
  
4 The chalice  that wag single  ye have  made  fourfold,  and by your wisdom  brought  the Cow forth  from  the 
hide.   