Rig Veda – English Translation  
5 May precious  treasures  come  to us−so  will I pray.  Come  to the votary's  gift offered  with beauteous  laud.
  
Thou  art the Lord,  as such sit on this holy grass:  thy vessels  are inviolate  as Law commands.   
6 Far went  our earlist  invocation  of the Gods,  and won us glories  that can never  be surpassed.   
They  who could  not ascend  the ship of sacrifice,  sink down  in desolation,  trembling  with alarm.   
7 So be the others,  evil−hearted,  far away,  whose  horses,  difficult  to harness,  have been  yoked.   
Here  in advance  men stand  anear  to offer  gifts,  by whom  full many  a work  that brings  reward  is done.   
8 He firmly  fixed  the plains  and mountains  as they shook.  Dyaus  thundered  forth  and made  the air's 
mid−region  quake.   
He stays  apart  the two confronting  bowls;  he sings  lauds  in the potent  Soma's  joy when  he hath drunk.   
9 I bear this deftly−fashion ed goad  of thine,  wherewith  thou,  Maghavan,  shalt  break  the strikers  with the 
hoof.   
At this libation  mayst  thou be well satisfied.  Partake  the juice,  partake  the worship,  Maghavan.   
10 O Much−invoked,  may we subdue  all famine  and evil want  with store  of grain and cattle.   
May we allied,  as first in rank,  with princes  obtain  possessions  by our own exertion.   
11 Brhaspati  protect  us from  the rearward,  and from  above,  and from  below,  from  sinners.   
May Indra  from  the front  and from  the centre,  as Friend  to friends,  vouchsafe  us room  and freedom.   
 
HYMN  XLV.  Agni.  
1. FIRST  Agni  sprang  to life from  out of Heaven:  the second  time from  us came  Jatave
das. Thirdly  the Manly−souled  was in the waters.  The pious  lauds  and kindles  him the 
Eternal.   
2 Agni,  we know  thy three  powers  in three  stations,  we know  thy forms  in many  a place  divided.   
We know  what  name  supreme  thou hast in secret:  we know  the source  from  which  thou hast proceeded.   
3 The Manly−souled  lit thee in sea and waters,  man's  Viewer  lit thee in the breast  of heaven,   
There  as thou stoodest  in the third  high region the Steers  increased  thee in the water's  bosom.   
4 Agni  roared  out, like Dyaus  what  time he thunders:  he licked  the ground  about  the plants  he flickered.   
At once,  when  born,  he looked  around  enkindled,  and lightened  heaven  and earth  within  with splen dour.   
5 The spring  of glories  and support  of riches,  rouser  of thoughts  and guardian  of the Soma,   
Good  Son of Strength,  a King  amid  the waters,  in forefront  of the Dawns  he shines  enkindled.   
6 Germ  of the world,  ensign  of all creation,  be sprang  to life and filled  the earth  and heavens.   
Even  the firm rock he cleft when  passing  over,  when  the Five Tribes  brought  sacrifice  to Agni.   
7 So among  mortals  was Immortal  Agni  stablished  as holy wise and willing  envoy.   
He waves  the red smoke  that he lifts above  him, striving  to reach  the heavens  with radiant  lustre.   
8 Like gold to look on, far he shone  refulgent,  beaming  imperishable  life for glory,   
Agni  by vital powers  became  immortal  when  his prolific  Father  Dyaus  begat  him.  
9 Whoso  this day, O God whose  flames are lovely,  prepares  a cake,  O Agni,  mixt with butter,   
Lead  thou and further  him to higher  fortune,  to bliss bestowed  by Gods,  O thou Most  Youthful.   
10 Endow  him, Agni,  with a share  of glory,  at every  song  of praise  sung  forth  enrich  him.  
Dear  let him be to Surya,  dear to Agni,  preeminent  with son and children's  children.   
11 While,  Agni,  day by day men pay thee worship  they win themselves  all treasures  worth  the wishing.   
Allied  with thee,  eager  and craving  riches,  they have  disclosed  the stable  filled with cattle.   
12 Agni,  the Friend  of men,  the Soma's  keeper,  Vaisvanara,  hath been  lauded  by the Rsis.   
We will invoke  benignant  Earth  and Heaven:  ye Deities,  give us wealth  with hero children.   
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  XLVI.  Agni.  
1. STABLISHED  for thee,  to lend thee vital forces,  Giver  of wealth,  Guard  of his servant's  body.   
The Great  Priest,  born,  who knows  the clouds,  Abider  with men,  is seated  in the lap of waters.   
2 Worshipping,  seeking  him with adoration  like some  lost creature  followed  by its footprints,   
Wise  Bhrgus,  yearning  in their hearts,  pursued  him, and found  him lurking  where  the floods  are gathered.   
3 On the Cow's  forehead,  with laborious  searching,  Trita,  the offspring  of Vibhiavas,  found  him.  
Born  in our houses,  Youthful,  joy−bestower,  he now becom es the central  point  of brightness.   
4 Yearning,  with homage,  they have  set and made  him blithe  Priest  among  mankind,  oblation−bearer,   
Leader  of rites and Purifier,  envoy  of men,  as sacrifice  that still advances.   
5 The foolish  brought  the ne'er−bewildere d forward,  great,  Victor,  Song−inspirer,  Fort−destroyer.   
Leading  the Youth  gold−bearded,  like a courser  gleaming  with wealth,  they turned  their hymn  to profit.   
6 Holding  his station  firmly  in the houses,  Trita  sat down  within  his home  surrounded   
Thence,  as Law bids,  departs  the Tribes'  Companion  having  collected  men with no compulsion.   
7 His are the fires,  eternal,  purifying,  that make  the houses  move,  whose  smoke  is shining,   
White,  waxing  in their strength,  for ever stirring,  and sitting  in the wood;  like winds  are Somas.   
8 The tongue  of Agni  bears  away  the praisesong,  and, through  his care for Earth,  her operations.   
Him,  bright  and radiant,  living  men have  stablished  as their blithe  Priest,  the Chief  of Sacrificers.   
9 That Agni,  him whom  Heaven  and Earth  engendered,  the Waters.  Tvastar,  and with might,  the Bhrgus,   
Him Matarisvan  and the Gods  have  fashioned  holy for man and first to be entreated.   
10 Agni,  whom  Gods  have  made  oblationbearer,  and much−desiring  men regard  as holy,   
Give  life to him who lauds  thee when  he worships,  and then shall  glorious  men in troops  adore  thee.   
 
HYMN  XLVII.  Indra  Vaikuntha.  
1. THY  right  hand  have  we grasped  in ours,  O Indra,  longing  for treasure,  Treasure−Lord  of treasures!   
Because  we know  thee,  Hero,  Lord  of cattle: vouchsafe  us mighty  and resplendent  riches.   
2 Wealth,  fully  armed,  good  guard  and kind protector,  sprung  from  four seas,  the prop and stay of treasure
s,  
Fraught  with great  bounties,  meet  for praise  and glory;  vouchsafe  us mighty  and resplendent  riches.  
3 Wealth,  with good  Brahmans,  Indra!  God−attended,  high,  wide,  and deep,  arid based  on broad  foundati
ons,  
Strong,  with famed  Rsis,  conquering  our foemen:  vouchsafe  us mighty  and resplendent  riches.   
4 Victorious,  winning  strength,  with hero sages,  confirmed  in power,  most  useful,  wealth−attracting,   
True,  Indra!  crushing  forts and slaying  Dasyus:  vouchsafe  us mighty  and resplendent  riches.   
5 Wealthy  in heroes  and in cars and horses,  strength  hundredfold  and thousandfold,  O Indra,   
With  manly  sages,  happy  troops,  Iight−winning:  vouchsafe  us mighty  and resplentdent  riches.   
6 To Saptagu  the sage,  the holy−minded,  to him, Brhaspati,  the song approaches,   
Angiras'  Son who must  be met with homage:  vouchsafe  us mighty  and reslendent  riches.   
7 My lauds,  like envoys,  craving  loving−kindness,  go forth  to Indra  with their strong  entreaty,   
Moving  his heart  and uttered  by my spirit:  vouchsafe  us mighty  and resplendent  riches.   
8 Grant  us the boon  for which  I pray,  O Indra,  a spacious  home  unmatched  among  the people.  
To this may Heaven  and Earth  accord  approval:  vouchsafe  us mighty  and resplendent  riches.   
 
HYMN  XLVIII.  Indra  Vaikuntha.  
1. I WAS  the first possessor  of all precious  gear:  the wealth  of every  man I win and gather  up.  Rig Veda – English Translation  
On me as on a Father  living  creatures  call; I deal enjoyment  to tho. man who offers  gifts.   
2 I, Indra,  am Atharvan's  stay and firm support:  I brought  forth  kine to Trita  from  the Dragon's  grasp.   
I stripped  the Dasyus  of their manly  might,  and gave the cattle−stalls  to Matarigvan  and Dadhyac.   
3 For me hath Tvastar  forged  the iron thunderbolt:  in me the Gods  have  centred  intellectual  power.   
My sheen  is like the Sun's  insufferably  bright:  men honour  me as Lord  for past and future  deeds.   
4 I won myself  these  herdi  of cattle,  steeds  and kine,  and gold in ample  store,  with my destructive  bolt.  
I give full many  a thousand  to the worshipper,  what  time the Somas  and the lauds  have  made  me glad.   
5 Indra  am I none  ever wins  my wealth  from  me never  at any time am I a thrall  to death.   
Pressing  the Soma,  ask riches  from  me alone:  ye, Purus,  in my friendship  shall  not suffer  harm.   
6 These,  breathing  loud in fury,  two and two, who caused  Indra  to bring  his bolt of thunder  to the fray,  
The challengers,  I struck  with deadly  weapon  down:  firm stand  what  words  the God speaks  to his 
worshippers.   
This One by stronger  might  I conquered  singly;  yea, also two: shall  three  prevail  against  me?  
Like many  sheaves  upon  the floor  I thrash them.  How  can my foes,  the Indraless,  revile  me?  
8 Against  the Gungus  I made  Atithigva  strong,  and kept him mid the folk like Vrtra−conquering  strength,   
When  I won glory  in the great  foe−slaying  fight,  in battle  where  Karanja  fell, and Parnaya.   
9 With food for mine  enjoyment  Sapya  Nami  came:  he joined  me as a friend  of old in search  of kine.   
As I bestowed  on him an arrow  for the fight  I made  him worthy  of the song apd hymn  of praise.   
10 One of the two hath Soma,  seen within  it; the Herdsman  with the bone  shows  forth  the other.   
He, fain to fight  the Bull whose  horns  were  sharpened,  stood  fettered  in the demon's  ample  region.   
11 I, as a God,  ne'er  violate  the statutes  of Gods,  of Vasus,  Rudriyas,  Adityas.   
These  Gods  have  formed  me for auspicious  vigour,  unconquered  and invincible  for ever.   
 
HYMN  XLIX.Indra  Vaikuntha.  
1. I HAVE  enriched  the singer  with surpassing  wealth;  I have  allowed  the holy hymn  to strengthen  me.  
I, furtherer  of him who offers  sacrifice,  have  conquered  in each fight  the men who worship  not.  
2 The People  of the heavens,  the waters,  and the earth  have  stablished  me among  the Gods  with Indra's  na
me.  
I took unto myself  the two swift  vigorous  Bays  that speed  on divers  paths,  and the fierce  bolt for strength.
  
3 With  deadly  blows  I smote  Atka  for Kavi's  sake;  I guarded  Kutsa  well with these  saving  helps.   
As Susna's  slayer  I brandished  the dart of death:  I gave  not up the Aryan  name  to Dasyu  foes.   
4 Smadibha,  Tugra,  and the Vetasus  I gave  as prey to Kutsa,  father−like,  to succour  him.  
I was a worthy  King  to rule the worshipper,  when  I gave  Tuji dear inviolable  gifts.   
5 I gave  up Mrgaya  to Srutarvan  as his prey because  he ever followed  me and kept my laws.   
For Ayu's  sake I caused  Veta  to bend  and bow,  and into Savya's  hand  deliv ered Padgrbhi.   
6 1, I crushed  Navavastva  of the lofty  car, the Dasa,  as the Vrtra−slayer  kills the fiends;   
When  straightway  on the region's  farthest  edge I brought  the God who makes  the lights  to broaden  and 
increase.   
7 I travel  round  about  borne  onward  in my might  by the fleet−footed  dappled  Horses  of the Sun.  
When  man's  libation  calls me to the robe of state I soon  repel  the powerful  Dasyu  with my blows.   
8 Stronger  am I than Nabus,  I who slew the seven:  I glorified  with might  Yadu  and Turvaga.   
I brought another  low, with strength  I bent his strength:  I let the mighty  nine−and−ninety  wax in power.   
9 Bull over all the streams  that flow along  the earth,  I took the Seven  Rivers  as mine  own domain.   
I, gifted  with great  wisdom,  spread  the floods  abroad:  by war I found  for man the way to high success.   
10 I set within  these  cows  the white  milk which  no God,  not even  Tvastar's  self, had there  deposited,−   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Much−longed−for,  in the breasts,  the udders  of the kine,  the savoury  sweets  of meath,  the milk and Soma  
juice.   
11 Even  thus hath Indra  Maghavan,  truly  bounteous,  sped Gods  and men with mighty  operation.   
The pious  glorify  all these  thine  exploits,  Lord  of Bay Coursers,  Strong,  and Selfresplendent.   
 
HYMN  L. Indra  Vaikuntha.  
1. I LAUD  your Mighty  One who joyeth  in the juice,  him who is shared  by all men,  who created  all;  
Indra,  whose  conquering  strength  is powerful  in war, whose  fame  and manly  vigour  Heaven  and Earth  rev
ere.  
2 He with his friend  is active,  lauded,  good  to man,  Indra  who must  be glorified  by one like me.  
Hero,  Lord  of the brave,  all cars are thy delight,  warring  with Vrtra,  or for waters,  or for spoil.   
3 Who  are the men whom  thou wilt further,  Indra,  who strive  to win thy bliss allied  with riches?   
Who  urged  thee forward  to exert  thy power divine,  to valour,  in the war for waters  on their fields?   
4 Thou,  Indra,  through  the holy prayer  art mighty,  worthy  of sacrifice  at all libations.   
In every  fight  thou castest  heroes  on the ground:  thou art the noblest  song,  O Lord  of all the folk.  
5 Help  now,  as Highest,  those  who toil at sacrifice:  well do the people  know  thy great  protecting  might.   
Thou  shalt  be Everlasing,  Giver  of success  yea, on all these  libations  thou bestowest  strength.   
6 All these  libations  thou makest  effectual,  of which  thou art thyself  supporter,  Son of Power.   
Therefore  thy vessel  is to be esteemed  the best, sacrifice,  holy text, prayer,  and exalted  speech.   
7 They  who with flowing  Soma  pray to thee,  O Sage,  to pour on them  thy gifts of opulence  and wealth,   
May they come forward,  through  their spirit,  on the path of bliss,  in the wild joy of Soma  juice  effused.   
 
HYMN  LI. Agni.  Gods.  
1. LARGE  was that covering,  and firm of texture,  folded  wherein  thou enteredst  the waters.  One Deity  alo
ne, O Jatavedas  Agni,  saw all thy forms  in sundry  places.   
2 What  God hath seen me? Who  of all their number  clearly  beheld  my forms  in many  places?   
Where  lie, then,  all the sacred  logs of Agni  that lead him God−ward,  Varuna  and Mitra?   
3 In many  places,  Agni  Jatavedas,  we sought  thee hidden  in the plants  and waters.  
Then  Yama  marked  thee,  God of wondrous  splendour!  effulgent  from  thy tenfold  secret  dwelling,   
4 I fled in fear from  sacrificial  worship,  Varuna,  lest the Gods  should  thus engage  me.  
Thus  were  my forms  laid down  in many  places.  This,  as my goal,  I Agni saw before  me.  
5 Come;  man is pious  and would  fain do worship,  he waits  prepared:  in gloom  thou,  Agni,  dwellest.   
Make  pathways  leading  God−ward  clear  and easy,  and bear oblations  with a kindly  spirit.   
6 This goal mine  elder  brothers  erst selected,  as he who drives  a car the way to travel.   
So,Varuna,  I fled afar through  terror,  as flies the wild−bull  from  an archer's  bowstring.   
7 We give thee life unwasting,  Jatavedas,  so that, employed,  thou never  shalt  be injured.   
So, nobly  born!  shalt  thou with kindly  spirit  bear to the Gods  their share  of men's  oblations.   
8 Grant  me the first oblations  and the latter,  entire,  my forceful  shares  of holy presents,   
The soul of plants,  the fatness  of the waters,  and let there  be long life, ye Gods,  to Agni.   
9 Thin e be the first oblations  and the latter,  entire,  thy forceful  shares  of holy presents.   
Let all this sacrifice  be thine,  O Agni,  and let the world's  four regions  how before  thee.   
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  LII. Gods.  
1. INSTRUCT  me, all ye Gods,  how I, elected  your Priest,  must  seat me here,  and how address  you.  
Instruct  me how to deal to each his portion,  and by what  ' path to bring  you man's  oblation.   
2 I sit as Priest  most  skilled  in sacrificing:  the Maruts  and all Deities  impel  me.  
Asvins,  each day yours  is the Adhvar yu's duty:  Brahman  and wood  are here:  'tis yours  to offer.   
3 Who  is the Priest?  Is he the Priest  of Yama?  On whom  is thrust  this God−appointed  honour?   
He springs  to life each month,  each day that passes;  so Gods  have  made  him their oblation−bearer.   
4 The Gods  have made  me bearer  of oblations,  who slipped  away  and passed  through  many  troubles.   
Wise  Agni  shall  ordain  for us the worship,  whether  five−wayed,  threefold,  or seven−threaded.   
5 So will I win you strength  and life for ever.  O Gods,  that I may give you room  and freedom.   
To Indra's  arms  would  I consign  the thunder;  in all these  battles  shall  he then be victor.   
6 The Deities  three  hundred  and thirty−nine,  have  served  and honoured  Agni,   
Strewn  sacred  grass,  anointed  him with butter,  and seated  him as Priest,  the Gods'  Invoker.   
 
HYMN  LIII. Agni  Saucika  Gods.  
1. HE hath arrived,  he whom  we sought  with longing,  who skilled  in sacrifice  well knows  its courses.   
Let him discharge  his sacrificial  duties:  let him sit down  as Friend  who was before   
Us.  
2 Best Priest,  he hath been  won by being  seated,  for he hath looked  on the well−ordered  viands.   
Come,  let usworship  Gods  who must  be worshipped,  and pouring  oil, laud those  who should  be lauded.   
3 Now  hath he made  the feast  of Gods  effective:  now have  we found  the secret  tongue  of worship.   
Now  hath he come,  sweet,  robed  in vital vigour,  and made  our calling  on the Gods  effective.   
4 This prelude  of my speech  I now will utter,  whereby  we Gods  may quell  our Asura  foemen.   
Eaters  of strengthening  food who merit  worship,  O ye Five Tribes,  be pleased  with mine  oblation.   
5 May the Five Tribes  be pleased  with mine  oblation,  and the Cow's  Sons  and all who merit  worship.   
From  earthly  trouble  may the earth  protect  us, and air's mid realm  from  woe that comes  from  heaven.   
6 Spinning  the thread,  follow  the region's  splendid  light:  guard  thou the path ways  well which  wisdom  hat
h 
prepared.   
Weave  ye the knotless  labour  of the bards  who sing:  be Manu  thou,  and bring  the Heavenly  People  forth.   
 
7 Lovers  of Soma,  bind the chariot  traces  fast: set ye the reins  in order  and embellish  them.   
Bring  hitherward  the car with seats  where  eight  may sit, whereon  the Gods  have brought  the treasure  that 
we 
love.   
8 Here  flows  Asmanvati:  hold fast each other,  keep  yourselves  up, and pass,  my friends,  the river.   
There  let us leave  the Powers  that brought  no profit,  and cross  the flood  to Powers  that are auspicious.   
9 Tvastar,  most  deft of workmen,  knew  each magic  art, bringing  most  blessed  bowls  that hold the drink  of 
Gods.   
His axe, wrought  of good  metal,  he is sharpening  now,  wherewith  the radiant  Brahmanaspati  will cut.  
10 Now,  O ye Sapient  Ones,  make  ye the axes sharp  wherewith  ye fashion  bowls  to hold the Amrta.   
Knowing  the secret  places  make  ye ready  that whereby  the Gods  have gotten  immortality.   
11 Ye with a secret  tongue  and dark intention  laid the maiden  deep  within,  the calf within  the mouth.   
They  evermore  are near us with their gracious  help:  successful  is the song  that strives  for victory.   
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  LIV. Indra.  
1. I SING thy fame  that, Maghavan,  through  thy Greatness  the heavens  and earth  invoked  thee in their terr
or,  
Thou,  aiding  Gods,  didst  quell  the power  of Dasas,  what  time thou holpest  many  a race,  O Indra.   
2 When  thou wast roaming,  waxen  strong  in body,  telling  thy might,  Indra,  among  the people,   
All that men called  thy battles  was illusion:  no foe hast thou to−day,  nor erst hast found  one.  
3 Who  are the Rsis,  then,  who comprehended  before  our time the bounds  of all thy greatness?   
For from  thy body  thou hast generated  at the same  time the Mother  and the Father.   
4 Thou,  Mighty  Steer,  hast four supremest  natures,  Asura  natures  that may ne'er  be injured.   
All these,  O Maghavan,  thou surely  knowest,  wherewith  thou hast performed  thy great  achievements.   
5 Thou  hast all treasures  in thy sole possession,  treasures  made  manifest  and treasures  hidden.   
Defer  not thou,  O Maghavan,  my longing:  thou,  art Director,  Indra,  thou art Giver.   
6 To him who set the light in things  of splendour,  and with all sweetness  blent  essent ial sweetness,   
To Indra  hath this welcome  hymn  that strengthens  been  uttered  by the votary  Brhaduktha.   
 
HYMN  LV. Indra.  
1. FAR  is that secret  name  by which,  in terror,  the worlds  invoked  thee and thou gavest  vigour   
The earth  and heaven  thou settest  near each other,  and Maghavan,  madest  bright  thy Brother's  Children.   
2 Great  is that secret  name  and far−extending,  whereby  thou madest  all that is and shall  be.  
The Five Tribes  whom  he loveth  well have  entered  the light he loveth  that was made  aforetime.   
3 He filled  the heaven  and earth  and all between  them,  Gods  five times  sevenfold  in their proper  seasons.   
With  four−and−thirty  lights  he looks  around  him, lights  of one colour  though  their ways  are divers.   
4 As first among  the lights,  O Dawn,  thou shone st, whereby  thou broughtest  forth  the Stay of Increase,   
Great  art thou,  matchless  is thine  Asura  nature,  who,  high above,  art kin to those  beneath  thee.   
5 The old hath waked  the young  Moon  from  his slumber  who runs his circling  course  with many  round  hi
m.  
Behold  the Gods'  high wisdom  in its greatness:  he who died yesterday  to−day  is living.   
6 Strong  is the Red Bird in his strength,  great  Hero,  who from  of old hath had no nest to dwell  in.  
That which  he knows  is truth  and never  idle: he wins  and gives  the wealth  desired  of many.   
7 Through  these  the Thunderer  gained  strong  manly  vigour,  through  whom  he waxed  in power  to smite  d
own 
Vrtra,−   
Who  through  the might  of Indra's  operation  came  forth  as Gods  in course  of Law and Order.   
8 All−strong,  performing  works  with his companion,  All−marking,  rapid  Victor,  Curse−averter,   
The Hero,  waxing,  after draughts  of Soma,  blew  far from  heaven  the Dasyus  with his weapon.   
 
HYMN  LVI. Visvedevas.  
1. HERE  is one light for thee,  another  yonder:  enter  the third  and he therewith  united.   
Uniting  with a body  be thou welcome,  dear to the Gods  in their sublimest  birthplace.   
2 Bearing  thy body,  Vajin,  may thy body  afford  us blessing  and thyself  protection.   
Unswerving,  stablish  as it were  in heaven  thine  own light as the mighty God's  supporter.   
3 Strong  Steed  art thou:  go to the yearning  Maidens  with vigour,  happily  go to heaven  and praises:   
Fly happily  to the Gods  with easy passage,  according  to the first and faithful  statutes.   
4 Part of their grandeur  have  the Fathers  also gained:  the Gods  have seated  mental  power  in them  as GodsRig Veda – English Translation  
.  
They  have  embraced  within  themselves  all energies,  which,  issuing  forth,  again  into their bodies  pass.   
5 They  strode  through  all the region  with victorious  might,  establishing  the old immeasu rable  laws.   
They  compassed  in their bodies  all existing  things,  and streamed  forth  offipring  in many  successive  forms
.  
6 In two ways  have  the sons established  in his place  the Asura  who finds  the light,  by the third  act,  
As fathers,  they have  set their heritage  on earth,  their offspring,  as a thread  continuously  spun  out.  
7 As in a ship through  billows,  so through  regions  of air, with blessings,  through  toils and troubles   
Hath  Brhaduktha  brought  his seed with glory,  and placed  it here and in the realms  beyond  us.  
 
HYMN  LVIL  Visvedevas.  
1. LET us not, Indra,  leave  the path,  the Soma−presser's  sacrifice:  Let no malignity  dwell  with us.  
2 May we obtain,  completely  wrought,  the thread  spun  out to reach  the Gods,   
That perfecteth  the sacrifice.   
3 We call the spirit  hither  with the Soma  of our parted  sires,   
Yea, with the Fathers'  holy hymns.   
4 Thy spirit  come  to thee again  for wisdom,  energy,  and lire,  
That thou mayst  long behold  the sun!  
5 O Fathers,  may the Heavenly  Folk give us our spirit  once  again,   
That we may be with those  who live.  
6 O Soma  with the spirit  still within  us, blest  with progeny,   
May we be busied  in the law.  
 
HYMN  LVIII.  Manas  or Spirit.  
1. THY  spirit,  that went  far away  to Yama  to Vivasvan's  Son, We cause  to come  to thee again  that thou m
ayst live and sojourn  here. 2 Thy spirit,  that went  far away,  that passed  away  to earth  and heaven,  We cau
se to come  to thee again  that thou mayst  live and sojourn  here.  3 Thy spirit,  that went  far away,  away  to th
e four−cornered  earth,  We cause  to come  to thee again  that thou mayst live and sojourn  here.  4 Thy spirit,
 that went  far away  to the four quarters  of the world,  We cause  to come  to thee again  that thou mayst  live 
and sojourn  here.  5 Thy spirit,  that went  far away,  away  unto the billowy  sea, We cause  to come  to thee a
gain that thou mayst  live and sojourn  here.  6 Thy spirit,  that went  far away  to beams  of light that flash  and
 flow,  We cause  to come  to tbee again  that thou mayst  live and sojourn  here.  7 Thy spirit,  that went  far aw
ay, went  to the waters  and the plants,  We cause to come  to thee again  that thou mayst  live and sojourn  her
e.  
8 Thy spirit,  that went  far away,  that visited  the Sun and Dawn.   
We cause  to come  to thee again  that thou mayst  live and sojourn  here.   
9 Thy spirit,  that went  far away,  away  to lofty  mounta in heights,   
We cause  to come  to thee again  that thou mayst  live and sojourn  here.   
10 Thy spirit,  that went  far away  into this All, that lives  and moves,   
We cause  to come  to thee again  that thou mayst  live and sojourn  here.   
11 Thy spirit,  that went  far away  to distant  realms  beyond  our ken,  
We cause  to come  to thee again  that thou mayst  live and sojourn  here.   
12 Thy spirit,  that went  far away  to all that is and is to be,  
We cause  to come  to thee again  that thou mayst  live and sojourn  heie.   
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  LIX. Nirrti  and Others.  
1. His life hath been  renewed  and carried  forward  as two men,  car−borne,  by the skilful  driver.   
One falls,  then seeks  the goal with quickened  vigour.  Let Nirrti  depart  to distant  places.   
2 Here  is the psalm  for wealth,  and food,  in plenty:  let us do many  deeds  to bring  us glory.   
All these  our doings  shall  delight  the singer.  Let Nirrti  depart  to distant  places.   
3 May we o'ercome  our foes with acts of valour,  as heaven  is over earth,  hills over lowlands.   
All these  our deeds  the singer  hath considered.  Let Nirrti  depart  to distant  places.   
4 Give  us not up as prey to death,  O Sorna  still let us look upon  the Sun arising.   
Let our old age with passing  days be kindly.  Let Nirrti  depart  to distant  places.   
5 O Asuniti,  keep  the soul within  us, and make  the days we have  to live yet longer.   
Grant  that we still may look upon  the sunlight:  strengthen  thy body  with the oil we bring  thee.   
6 Give  us our sight  again,  O Asuniti,  give us again  our breath  and our enjoyment.   
Long  may we look upon  the Sun uprising;  O Anumati,  favour  thou and bless  us.  
7 May Earth  restore  to us our vital spirit,  may Heaven  the Goddess  and mid−air restore  it.  
May Soma  give us once  again  our body,  and Pusan  show  the Path of peace  and comfort.   
8 May both Worlds  bless  Subandhu,  young  Mothers  of everlasting  Law.   
May Heaven  and Earth  uproot  and sweep  iniquity  and shame  away:  nor sin nor sorrow  trouble  thee.   
9 Health−giving  medicines  descend  sent down  from  heaven  in twos  and threes,   
Or wandering  singly  on the earth.  May Heaven  and Earth  uproot  and sweep  iniquity  and shame  away:  nor
 sin 
nor sorrow  trouble  thee.   
10 Drive  forward  thou the wagon−ox,  O Indra,  which  brought  Usinarani's  wagon  hither.   
May Heaven  and Earth  uproot  and sweep  iniquity  and shame  away:  nor sin nor sorrow  trouble  thee.   
 
HYMN  LX. Asamati  and Others.−  
1. BRINGING  our homage  we have  come  to one magnificent  in look.  Glorified  of the mighty  Gods   
2 To Asamati,  spring  of gifts,  lord of the brave,  a radiant  car,  
The conqueror  of Bhajeratha   
3 Who,  when  the spear  hath armed  his hand,  or even  weaponless  o'erthrows   
Men strong  as buffaloes  in fight;   
4 Him in whose  service  flourishes  Iksvaku,  rich and dazzling−bright.   
As the Five Tribes  that are in heaven.   
5 Indra,  support  the princely  power  of Rathaprosthas  matched  by none,   
Even  as the Sun for all to see.  
6 Thou  for Agastya's  sister's  sons yokest  thy pair of ruddy  steeds.   
 
Thou  troddest  niggards  under  foot, all those,  O King,  who brought  no gifts.   
7 This is the mother,  this the sire, this one hath come  to be thy life.  
What  brings  thee forth  is even  this. Now  come,  Subandhu,  get thee forth.   
8 As with the leather  thong  they bind the chariot  yoke  to hold it fast,  
So have  I held thy spirit  fast, held it for life and not for death,  held it for thy security.   
9 Even  as this earth,  the mighty  earth,  holds  fast the monarchs  of the wood.   
So have  I held thy spirit  fast, held it for life and not for death,  held it for thy security.   
10 Subandlin's  spirit  I have  brought  from  Yarna,  from  Vivasvan's  Son,  
Brought  it for life and not for death,  yea, brought  it for security.   
11 The wind  blows  downward  from  on high,  downward  the Sun−God  sends  his heat,   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Downward  the milch−cow  pours  her milk:  so downward  go thy pain and grief.   
12 Felicitous  is this mine  hand,  yet more  felicitous  is this.  
This hand  contains  all healing  balms,  and this makes  whole  with gentle  touch.   
 
HYMN  LXI. Visvedevas.  
1. THE  welcome  speaker  in the storm  of battle  uttered  with might  this prayer  to win the Asvins,   
When  the most  liberal  God,  for Paktha,  rescued  his parents,  and assailed  the seven  Hotras.   
2 Cyavana,  purposing  deceptive  presents,  with all ingredients,  made  the altar ready.   
Most  sweet−voiced  Turvayana  poured  oblations  like floods  of widely  fertilizing  water.   
3 To his oblations,  swift  as thought,  ye hurried,  and welcomed  eagerly  the prayers  he offered.   
With  arrows  in his hand  the Very  Mighty  forced  from  him all obedience  of a servant.   
4 I call on you the Sons  of Dyaus,  the Asvins,  that a dark cow to my red kine be added.   
Enjoy  my sacrifice,  come  to my viands  contented,  not deceiving  expectation.  '  
10 Uttering  praise  to suit the rite Navagvas  came  speedily  to win the damsel's  friendship.   
They  who approached  the twice−strong  stable's  keeper,  meedless  would  milk the rocks  that naught  had 
shaken.   
11 Swift  was new friendship  with the maid  they quickly  accepted  it as genuine  seed and bounty.   
Milk  which  the cow Sabardugha  had yielded  was the bright  heritage  which  to thee they offered.   
12 When  afterwards  they woke−  and missed  the cattle,  the speaker  thus in joyful  mood  addressed  them:   
Matchless  are singers  throulgh  the Vasu's  nature;  he bringeth  them  all food and all possessions.   
13 His followers  then who dwelt  in sundry  places  came  and desired  too slay the son of Nrsad.   
Resistless  foe, be found  the hidden  treasure  of Susna  multiplied  in numerous  offipring.   
14 Thou,  called  Effulgence,  in whose  threefold  dwell ing, as in the light of heaven,  the Gods  are sitting,   
Thou  who art called  Agni  or Jatavedas,  Priest,  hear us, guileless  Priest  of holy worship.   
15 And,  Indra,  bring,  that I may laud and serve  them,  those  Two resplendent  glorious  Nasatyas,   
Blithe,  bounte ous, man−like,  to the sacrificer,  honoured  among  our men with offered  viands.   
16 This King  is praised  and honoured  as Ordainer:  himself  the bridge,  the Sage  speeds  o'er the waters.   
He hath stirred  up Kaksivan,  stirred  up Agni,  as the steed's  swift  wheel  drives  the felly onward.   
17 Vaitarana,  doubly  kinsman,  sacrificer,  shall  milk the cow who ne'er  hath calved,  Sabardhu,   
When  I encompass  Varuna  and Mitra  with lauds,  and Aryaman  in safest  shelter.   
18 Their  kin, the Prince  in heaven,  thy nearest  kinsman,  turning  his thought  to thee thus speaks  in kindnes
s:  
This is our highest  bond:  I am his offspring.  How  many  others  came  ere I succeeded?   
19 Here  is my kinship,  here the place  I dwell  in: these  are my Gods;  I in full strength  am present.   
Twice−born  am I, the first−born  Son of Order:  the Cow milked  this when  first she had her being.   
20 So mid these  tribes  he rests,  the friendly  envoy,  borne  on two paths,  refulgent  Lord  of fuel.  
When,  like a line, the Babe  springs  up erectly,  his Mother  straight  hath borne  him strong  to bless  us.  
21 Then  went  the milch−kine  forth  to please  the damsel,  and for the good  of every  man that liveth.   
Hear  us, O wealthy  Lord;  begin  our worship.  Thou  hast grown  mighty  through  Asvaghna's  virtues.   
 
22 And take thou notice  of us also, Indra,  for ample  riches,  King  whose  arm wields  thunder!   
Protect  our wealthy  nobles,  guard  our princes  unmenaced  near thee,  Lord  of Tawny  Coursers.   
23 When  he goes forth,  ye Pair of Kings,  for booty,  speeding  to war and praise  to please  the singer,−   
I was the dearest  sage of those  about  him,−let  him lead these  away  and bring  them  safely.   
24 Now  for this noble  man's  support  and comfort,  singing  with easy voice  we thus implo re thee:   
Impetuous  be his son and fleet his courser:  and may I be his priest  to win him glory.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
25 If, for our strength,  the priest  with adoration  to win your friendship  made  the laud accepted,   
That laud shall  be a branching  road to virtue  for every  one to whom  the songs  are suited.   
26 Glorified  thus,  with holy hymns  and homage:−Of  noble  race,  with Waters,  God−attended   
May he enrich  us for our prayers  and praises:  now can the cow be milked;  the path is open.   
27 Be to us, then,  ye Gods  who merit  worship , be ye of one accord  our strong  protection,   
Who  went  on various  ways  and brought  us vigour,  ye who are undeceivable  explorers.   
 
HYMN  LXII.  Visvedevas,  Etc.  
1. YE, who,  adorned  with guerdon  through  the sacrifice,  have  won you Indra's  friendship  and eternal life,  
Even  to you be happiness,  Angirases.  Welcome  the son of Manu,  ye who are most  wise.   
2 The Fathers,  who drave  forth  the wealth  in cattle,  have in the year's  courses  cleft Vala  by Eternal  Law:   
A lengthened  life be yours,  O ye Angirases.  Welcome  the son of Manu,  ye who are most  wise.   
3 Ye raised  the Sun to heaven  by everlasting  Law,  and spread  broad  earth,  the Mother,  out on every  side.  
Fair wealth  of progeny  be yours,  Angirases.  Welcome  the son of Manu,  ye who are most  wise.   
4 This kinsman  in your dwellingplace  speaks  pleasant  words:  give car to this, ye Rsis,  children  of the God
s.  
High  Brahman  dignity  be yours,  Angirases.  Welcome  the son of Manu,  ye who are most  wise.   
5 Distinguished  by their varied  form,  these  Rsis have  been  deeply  moved.   
These  are the sons of Angirases:  from  Agni  have  they sprung  to life.  
6 Distinguished  by their varied  form,  they sprang  from  Agni,  from  the sky.  
Navagva  and Dasagva,  noblest  Angiras,  he giveth  bounty  with the Gods.   
7 With  Indra  for associate  the priests  have cleared  the stable  full of steeds  and kine,   
Giving  to me a thousand  with their eightmarked  cars, they gained  renown  among  the Gods.   
8 May this man's  sons be multiplied;  like springing  corn may Manu  grow,   
Who  gives  at once  in bounteous  gift a thous and kine,  a hundred  steeds.   
9 No one attains  to him, as though  a man would  grasp  the heights  of heaven.   
Savarnya's  sacrificial  meed  hath broadened  like an ample  flood.   
10 Yadu  and Turva,  too, have given  two Dasas,  well−disposed,  to serve,   
Together  with great  store  of kine.   
11 Blest  be the hamlet's  chief,  most  liberal  Manu,  and may his bounty  rival that of Surya.   
May the God let Ssvarni's  life be leng  
thened,  with whom,  unwearied,  we have  lived  and prospered.   
 
HYMN  LXIII.  Visvedevas.  
1. MAY  they who would  assume  kinship  from  far away,  Vivasvan's  generations,  dearly  loved  of men,   
Even  the Gods  who sit upon  the sacred  grass  of Nahusa's  son Yayati,  bless  and comfort  us.  
2 For worthy  of obeisance,  Gods,  are all your names,  worthy  of adoration  and of sacrifice.   
Ye who were  born from  waters,  and from  Aditi,  and from  the earth,  do ye here listen  to my call.  
3 I will rejoice  in these  Adityas  for my weal,  for whom  the Mother  pours  forth  water  rich in balm,   
And Dyaus  the Infinite,  firm as a rock,  sweet  milk,−Gods  active,  strong  through  lauds,  whose  might  the B
ull 
upholds.   
 
4 Looking  on men,  ne'er  slumbering,  they by their deserts  attained  as Gods  to lofty immortality.   
Borne  on refulgent  cars, sinless,  with serpents'  powers,  they robe them,  for our welfar e, in the height  of Rig Veda – English Translation  
heaven.   
5 Great  Kings  who bless  us, who have  come  to sacrifice,  who,  ne'er  assailed,  have  set their mansion  in the 
sky,−   
These  I invite  with adoration  and with hymns,  mighty  Adityas,  Aditi,  for happiness.   
6 Who  offereth  to you the laud that ye accept,  O ye All−Gods  of Manu,  many  as ye are?  
Who,  Mighty  Ones,  will prepare  for you the sacrifice  to bear us over trouble  to felicity?   
7 Ye to whom  Manu,  by seven  priests,  with kindled  fire, offered  the first oblation  with his heart  and soul,  
Vouchsafe  us, ye Adityas,  sheitcr  free from  fear, and make  us good  and easy paths  to happiness.   
8 Wise  Deities,  who have  dominion  o'er the world,  ye thinkers  over all that moves  not and that moves,   
Save  us from  uncommitted  and committed  sin, preserve  us from  all sin to−day  for happiness.   
9 In battles  we invoke  Indra  still swift  to hear,  and all the holy Host  of Heaven  who banish  grief,   
Agni,  Mitra,  and Varuna  that we may gain,  Dyays,  Bhaga,  Maruts,  Prthivi  for happiness:   
10 Mightily−saving  Earth,  incomparable  Heaven  the good  guide  Aditi  who gives  secure  defence   
The well−oared  heavenly  Ship that lets no waters  in, free from  defect,  will we ascend  for happiness.   
11 Bless  us, all Holy  Ones,  that we may have  your help,  guard  and protect  us from  maligna nt injury.   
With  fruitful  invocation  may we call on you, Gods,  who give ear to us for grace,  for happiness.   
12 Keep  all disease  afar and sordid  sacrifice,  keep  off the wicked  man's  malicious  enmity.   
Keep  far away  from  us all hatred,  O ye Gods,  and give us ample  shelter  for our happiness.   
13 Untouched  by any evil, every  mortal  thrives,  and, following  the Law,  spreads  in his progeny.   
Whom  ye with your good  guidance,  O Adityas,  lead safely  through  all his pain and grief  to happiness.   
14 That which  ye guard and grace  in battle,  O ye Gods,  ye Maruts,  where  the prize  is wealth,  where  heroe
s 
win,  
That conquering  Car, O Indra,  that sets forth  at dawn,  that never  breaks,  may we ascend  for happiness.   
15 Vouchsafe  us blessing  in our paths  and desert  tracts,  blessing in waters  and in battle,  for the light;   
Blessing  upon  the wombs  that bring  male  children  forth,  and blessing,  O ye Maruts,  for the gain of wealth
.  
16 The noblest  Svasti  with abundant  riches,  who comes  to what  is good  by distant  pathway,−   
May she at home  and far away  preserve  us, and dwell  with us under  the Gods'  protection   
17 Thus  hatb the thoughtful  sage,  the son of Plati,  praised  you, O Aditi  and all Adityas,   
Men are made  rich by those  who are Immortal:  the Heavenly  Folk have  been  extolled  by Gaya.  
 
HYMN  LXIV.  Visvedevas.  
1. WHAT  God,  of those  who hear,  is he whose  well−praised  name  we may record  in this our sacrifice;  an
d 
how?   
Who  will be gracious?  Who  of many  give us bliss?  Who  out of all the Host  will come  to lend us aid?  
2 The will and thoughts  within  my breast  exert  their power:  they yearn  with love,  and fly to all the regions  
round.   
None  other  comforter  is found  save only these:  my longings  and my hopes  are fixt upon  the Gods.   
3 To Narasamsa  and to Pusan  I sing forth,  unconcealable  Agni  kindied  by the Gods.   
To Sun and Moon,  two Moons,  to Yama  in the heaven,  to Trita,  Vata,  Dawn,  Night,  and the Atvins  Twain
.  
4 How  is the Sage  extolled  whom  the loud singers  praise?  What  voice,  what  hymn  is used to laud Brhaspa
ti?  
May Aja−Ekapad  with Rkvans  swift  to hear,  and Ahi of the Deep  listen  unto our call.  Rig Veda – English Translation  
5 Aditi,  to the birth  of Daksa  and the vow thou summonest  the Kings  Mitra  and Varuna.   
With  course  unchecked,  with many  chariots  Aryaman  comes  with the seven  priests  to tribes  of varied  sort.
  
6 May all those  vigorous  Cours ers listen  to our cry, hearers  of invocation,  speeding  on their way;   
Winners  of thousands  where  the priestly  meed  is won,  who gather  of themselves  great  wealth  in every  rac
e.  
7 Bring  ye Purandbi,  bring  Vayu  who yokes  his steeds,  for friendship  bring  ye Pusan with your songs  of 
 
praise:   
They  with one mind,  one thought  attend  the sacrifice,  urged  by the favouring  aid of Savitar  the God.   
8 The thrice−seven  wandering  Rivers,  yea, the mighty  floods,  the forest  trees,  the mountains,  Agni  to our 
aid,  
Krsanu,  Tisya,  archers  to our gathering−place,  and Rudra  strong  amid  the Rudras  we invoke.   
9 Let the great  Streams  come  hither  with their mighty  help,  Sindhu,  Sarasvati,  and Sarayu  with waves.   
Ye Goddess  Floods,  ye Mothers,  animating  all, promise  us water  rich in fatness  and in balm.   
10 And let Brhaddiva,  the Mother,  hear our call, and Tvastar,  Father,  with the Goddesses  and Dames.   
Rbhuksan,  Vaja,  Bhaga,  and Rathaspati,  and the sweet  speech  of him who labours  guard  us well!   
11 Pleasant  to look on as a dwelling  rich in food is the blest  favour  of the Maruts,  Rudra's  Sons.   
May we be famed  among  the folk for wealth  in kine.  and ever come  to you, ye Gods,  with sacred  food.   
12 The thought  which  ye, O Maruts,  Indra  and ye Gods  have  given  to me, and ye, Mitra  and Varuna,−   
Cause  this to grow  and swell  like a milchcow  with milk.  Will ye not bear away  my songs  upon  your car?  
13 O Maruts,  do ye never,  never  recollect  and call again  to mind  this our relationship?   
When  next we meet  together  at the central  point,  even  there shall  Aditi  confirm  our brotherhood.   
14 The Mothers,  Heaven  and Earth,  those  mighty  Goddesses,  worthy  of sacrifice,  ecune  with the race of 
Gods.   
These  Two with their support  uphold  both Gods  and men,  and with the Fathers  pour the copious  genial  
strea m.  
15 This invocation  wins  all good  that we desire  Brhaspati,  highly−praised  Aramati,  are here,   
Even  where  the stone  that presses  meath  rings  loudly  out, and where  the sages  make  their voices  heard  wi
th 
hymns.   
16 Thus  hath the sage,  skilled  in loud singers' duties,  desiring  riches,  yearning  after treasure,   
Gaya,  the priestly  singer,  with his praises  and hymns  contented  the Celestial  people.   
17 Thus  hath the thoughtful  sage the son of Plati,  praised  you, O Aaiti  and all Adityas.   
Men are made  rich by those who are Immortal:  the Heavenly  Folk have  been  extolled  by Gaya.   
 
HYMN  LXV.  Visvedevas.  
I. MAY  Agni,  Indra,  Mitra,  Varuna  consent,  Aryaman,  Vayu,  Pusan,  and Sarasvati,   
Adityas,  Maruts,  Visnu,  Soma,  lofty  Sky, Rudra  and Aditi,  and Brahmanaspati.   
2 Indra and Agni,  Hero−lords  when  Vrtra  fell, dwelling  together,  speeding  emulously  on,  
And Soma  blent  with oil, putting  his greatness  forth,  have with their power  filled  full the mighty  firmame
nt.  
3 Skilled  in the Law I lift the hymn  of praise  to these,  Law−strengtheners,  unassailed,  and great  in majest
y.  
These  in their wondrous  bounty  send the watery  sea: may they as kindly  Friends  send gifts to make  us gre
at.  Rig Veda – English Translation  
4 They  with their might  have stayed  Heaven,  Earth,  and Prthivi,  the Lord  of Light,  the firmamen t, −the 
lustrous  spheres.   
Even  as fleet−foot  steeds  who make  their masters  glad,  the princely  Gods  are praised,  most  bountiful  to m
an.  
5 Bring  gifts to Mitra  and to Varuna  who,  Lords  of all, in spirit  never  fail the worshipper,   
Whose  statute  shines  on high through  everlasting  Law,  whose  places  of sure refuge  are the heavens  and ea
rth.  
6 The cow who yielding  milk goes her appointed  way hither  to us as leader  of holy rites,   
Speaking  aloud  to Varuna  and the worshipper,  shall  with oblation  serve  Vivasvan  and the Gods.   
7 The Gods  whose  tongue  is Agni  dwell  in heaven,  and sit, aiders  of Law,  reflecting,  in the seat of Law.   
They  propped  up heaven  and then brought  waters  with their might,  got sacrifice  and in a body  made  it fair
.  
8 Born  in the oldest  time,  the Parents  dwelling  round  are sharers  of one mansion  in the home  of Law.   
Bound  by their common  vow Dyaus,  Prthivi  stream  forth  the moisture  rich in oil to Varuna  the Steer.   
9 Parjanya,  Vata,  mighty,  senders  of the rain, Indra  and Vayu,  Varuna,  Mitra,  Aryaman:   
We call on Aditi,  Adityas,  and the Gods,  those  who are on the earth,  in waters,  and in heaven.   
10 Tvastar  and Vayu,  those  who count  as Rbhus,  both celestial  Hotar−priests,  and Dawn  for happiness,   
Winners  of wealth,  we call, and wise Brhaspati,  destroyer  of our foes,  and Soma  Indra's  Friend.   
 
11 They  generated  prayer,  the cow,  the horse,  the plants,  the forest  trees,  the earth,  the waters,  and the hill
s.  
These  very bounteous  Gods  made  the Sun mount  to heaven,  and spread  the righteous  laws of Aryas  o'er th
e 
land.   
12 O Asvins,  ye delivered  Bhujyu  from  distress,  ye animated  Syava,  Vadhrmati's  son.  
To Vimada  ye brought  his consort  Kamadyu,  and gave his lost Visnapu  back  to Visvaka.   
13 Thunder,  the lightning's  daughter,  Aja−Ekapad,  heaven's  bearer,  Sindhu,  and the waters  of the sea:  
Hear  all the Gods  my words,  Sarasvati  give ear together  with Purandhi  and with Holy  Thoughts.   
14 With  Holy  Thoughts  and with Purandhi  may all Gods,  knowing  the Law immor tal, Manu's  Holy  Ones,
  
Boon−givers,  favourers,  finders  of light,  and Heaven,  with gracious  love accept  my songs,  my prayer,  my 
hymn.   
15 Immortal  Gods  have  I, Vasistha,  lauded,  Gods  set on high above  all other  beings.   
May they this day grant  us wide  space and freedom:  ye Gods,  preserve  us evermore  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  LXVI.  Visvedevas.  
1. I CALL  the Gods  of lofty glory  for our weal,  the makers  of the light,  well−skilled  in sacrifice;   
Those  who have waxen  mightily,  Masters  of all wealth,  Immortal,  strengthening  Law,  the Gods  whom  In
dra 
leads.   
2 For the strong  band  of Maruts  will we frame  a hymn:  the chiefs  shall  bring  forth  sacrifice  for Indra's  tro
op,  
Who,  sent by Indra  and advised  by Varuna,  have gotten  for themselves  a share  of Surya's  light  
3 May Indra  with the Vasus  keep  our dwelling  safe, and Aditi  with Adityas  lend us sure defence.   
May the God Rudra  with the Rudras  favour  us, and Tvastar  with the Dames  further  us to success.   
4 Aditi,  Heaven  and Earth,  the great  eternal  Law,  Indra,  Visnu,  the Maruts,  and the lofty  Sky.  Rig Veda – English Translation  
We call upon  Adityas,  on the Gods,  for help,  on Vasus,  Rudras,  Savitar  of wondrous  deeds.   
5 With  Holy  Thoughts  Sarasvan,  firm−lawed  Varuna,  great  Vayu,  Pusan,  Visnu,  and the Asvins  Twain,   
Lords  of all wealth,  Immortal,  furthe rers of prayer,  grant  us a triply−guarding  refuge  from  distress.   
6 Strong  be the sacrifice,  strong  be the Holy  Ones,  strong  the preparers  of oblation,  strong  the Gods.   
Mighty  be Heaven  and Earth,  true to eternal  Law,  strong  be Parjanya,  strong  be they who laud the Strong.
  
7 To win us strength  I glorify  the Mighty  Twain,  Agni  and Soma,  Mighty  Ones  whom  many  laud.   
May these  vouchsafe  us shelter  with a triple  guard,  these  whom  the strong  have  served  in worship  of the 
Gods.   
8 Potent,  with firm−fixt  laws,  arranging  sacrifice,  visiting  solemn  rites in splendour  of the day,  
Obeying  Order,  these  whose  priest  is Agni,  free from  falsehood,  poured  the waters  out when  Vrtra  died.   
9 The Holy  Ones  engendered,  for their several  laws,  the heavens  and earth,  the water s, and the plants  and 
trees.   
They  filled  the firmament  with heavenly  light for help:  the Gods  embodied  Wish  and made  it beautiful.   
10 May they who bear up heaven,  the Rbhus  deft of hand,  and Vata  and Parjanya  of the thundering  Bull,   
The waters  and the plants,  promote  the songs  we sing:  come  Bhaga,  Rati,  and the Vaijns  to my call.  
11 Sindhu,  the sea, the region,  and the firmament,  the thunder,  and the ocean,  Aja−Ekapad,   
The Dragon  of the Deep,  shall  listen  to my words,  and all the Deities  and Princes  shall give ear.  
12 May we, be yours,  we men,  to entertain  the Gods:  further  our sacrifice  and give it full success.   
Adityas,  Rudras,  Vasus,  givers  of good  gifts,  quicken  the holy hymns  which  we are singing  now  
13 I follow  with success  upon  the path of Law the two celestial  Hotars,  Priests  of oldest  time.   
We pray to him who dwelleth  near,  Guard  of the Field,  to all Immortal  Gods  who never  are remiss.   
14 Vasistha's  sons have  raised  their voices,  like their sire. Rsi−like  praying  to the Gods  for happiness.   
Like friendly−minded  kinsmen,  come  at our desire,  O Gods,  and shake  down  treasures  on us from  above.   
15 Immortal  Gods  have  I, Vasistha,  lauded,  Gods  set on high above  all other  beings.   
May they this day grant  us wide  space  and freedom:  ye Gods,  preserve  us evermore  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  LXVII.  Brhaspati.  
1. THIS  holy hymn,  sublime  and sevenheaded,  sprung  from  eternal  Law,  our sire discovered.   
Ayasya,  friend  of all men,  hath engendered  the fourth  hymn  as he sang his laud to Indra.   
2 Thinking  aright,  praising  eternal  Order,  the sons of Dyaus  the Asura,  those  heroes,   
Angirases,  holding  the rank of sages,  first honoured  sacrifice's  holy statute.   
3 Girt by his friends  who cried  with swanlike  voices,  bursting  the stony  barriers  of the prison,   
Brhaspati  spake  in thunder  to the cattle,  and uttered  praise  and song when  he had found  them.   
4 Apart  from  one, away  from  two above  him, he drave  the kine that stood  in bonds  of falsehood.   
Brhaspati,  seeking  light amid  the darkness,  drave  forth  the bright  cows:  three he made  apparent.   
5 When  he had cleft the lairs and western  castle,  he cut off three  from  him who held the waters.   
Brhaspati  discovered,  while  he thundered  like Dyaus,  the dawn,  the Sun, the cow,  the lightning.   
6 As with a hand,  so with his roaring  Indra  cleft Vala  through,  the guardian  of the cattle.   
Seeking  the milk−draught  with sweatshining  comrades  he stole  the Pani's  kine and left him weeping.   
7 He with bright  faithful  Friends,  winners  of booty,  hath rent the milker  of the cows  asunder.   
Brhas pati with wild boars  strong  and mighty,  sweating  with heat,  hath gained  a rich possession.   
8 They,  longing  for the kine,  with faithful  spirit  incited  with their hymns  the Lord  of cattle.   
Brhaspati  freed  the radiant  cows  with comrades  self−yoked,  averting  shame  from  one another.   
9 In our assembly  with auspicious  praises  exalting  him who roareth  like a lion,  
Maywe,  in every  fight  where  heroes  conquer,  rejoice  in strong  Brhaspati  the Victor.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
10 When  he had won him every  sort of booty  and gone  to heaven  and its most  lofty mansions,   
Men praised  Brhaspati  the Mighty,  bringing  the light within  their mouths  from  sundry  places.   
11 Fulfil  the prayer  that begs for vital vigour:  aid in your wonted  manner  even  the humble.   
Let all our foes be turned  and driven  backward.  Hear  this, O Heaven  and Earth,  ye All−producers.   
12 Indra  with mighty  strength  cleft asunder  the head  of Arbuda  the watery  monster,   
Slain  Ahi, and set free the Seven  Rivers.  O Heaven  and Earth,  with all the Gods  protect  us.  
 
HYMN  LXVIII.  Brhaspa ti.  
1. LIKE  birds  who keep  their watch,  plashing  in water,  like the loud voices  of the thundering  rain−cloud,   
Like merry  streamlets  bursting  from  the mountain,  thus to Brhaspati  our hymns  have sounded.   
2 The Son of Angirases,  meeting  the cattle,  as Bhag a, brought  in Aryaman  among  us.  
As Friend  of men he decks  the wife and husband:  as for the race,  Brhaspati,  nerve  our coursers.   
3 Brhaspati,  having  won them  from  the mountains,  strewed  down,  like barley  out of winnowing−  baskets,
  
The vigorous,  wandering  cows  who aid the pious,  desired  of all, of blameless  form,  well−coloured.   
4 As the Sun dews  with meath  the seat of Order,  and casts  a flaming  meteor  down  from  heaven.   
So from  the rock Brhaspati  forced  the cattle,  and cleft the earth's  skin as it were  with water.   
5 Forth  from  mid air with light he dravc  the darkness,  as the gale blows  a lily from  the fiver.   
Like the wind  grasping  at the cloud  of Vala,  Brhaspati  gathered  to himself  the cattle,   
6 Brhaspati,  when  he with fiery  lightnings  cleft through  the weapon  of reviling  Vala,   
Consumed.him  as tongues  cat what  teeth  have compassed:  he threw  the prisons  of the red cows  open.   
7 That secret  name  borne  by the lowing  cattle  within  the cave Brhaspati  discovered,   
And drave,  himself,  the bright  kine from  the mountain,  like a bird's  young  after the egg's  disclosure.   
8 He looked  around  on rock−imprisoned  sweetness  as one who eyes a fish in scanty  water.   
Brhaspati,  cleaving  through  with varied  clamour,  brought  it forth  like a bowl  from  out the timber.   
9 He found the light of heaven,  and fire, and Morning:  with lucid  rays he forced  apart  the darkness.   
As from  a joint,  Brhaspati  took the marrow  of Vala  as he gloried  in his cattle.   
10 As trees  for foliage  robbed  by winter,  Vala  mourned  for the cows  Brhaspati  had taken.   
He did a deed  ne'er  done,  ne'er  to be equalled,  whereby  the Sun and Moon  ascend  alternate.   
 
11 Like a dark steed  adorned  with pearl,  the Fathers  have decorated  heaven  With  constellation
s. They  set the light in day, in night  the darkness.  Brhaspat i cleft the rock and found  the cattle.
 12 This homage  have  we.offered  to the Cloud  God who thunders  out to many  in succession.  
May this Brhaspati  vouchsafe  us fulness  of life with kine and horses,  men,  and heroes.  
 
HYMN  LXIX.  Agni.  
1. Auspicious  is the aspect  of Vadhryasva's  fire good  is its guidance,  pleasant  are its visitings.   
When  first the people  Of Sumitra  kindle  it, with butter  poured  thercon  it crackles  and shines  bright.   
2 Butter  is that which  makes  Vadhryaiva's  fire growstrong:  the butter  is its food,  the butter  makes  it fat.  
It spreads  abroad  when  butter  hath been  offered  it, and balmed  with streams  of butter  shines  forth  like the 
Sun.  
3 Still newest  is this face of thine,  O Agni,  which  Manu  and Sumitra  have  enkindled.   
So richly  shine,  accep t our songs  with favour,  so give us strengthening  food,  so send us glory.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
4 Accept  this offering,  Agni,  whom  aforetime  Vadhryasva,  hath entreated  and enkindled.   
Guard  well our homes  and ople,  guard  our bodies,  protect  thy girt to us which  thou hast grant ed.  
5 Be splendid,  guard  us Kinsman  of Vadhryasva:  let not the enmity  of men o'ercome  thee,   
Like the bold hero Cyavana,  I Sumitra  tell forth  the title of Vadhryaiva's  Kinsman.   
6 All treasures  hast thou won,  of plains  and mountains,  and quelled  the Dasas ' and Aryas'  hatred.   
Like the bold hero Cyavana,  O Agni,  mayst  thou subdue  the men who long for battle.   
7 Deft Agni  hath a lengthened  thread,  tall oxen,  a thousand  heifers,  numberless  devices.   
Decked  by the men,  splendid  among  the splendid,  shine  bright ly forth  amid  devout  Sumitras.   
8 Thine  is the teeming  cow,  O Jatavedas,  who pours  at once  her ceaseless  flow,  Sabardhuk,   
Thou.  art lit up by men enriched  with guerdon,  O Agni,  by the pious−souled  Sumitras.   
9 Even  Immortal  Gods,  O Jatavedas,  Vadhryasva's  Kinsman,  have  declared  thy grandeur.   
When  human  tribes  drew  near with supplication  thou conqueredst  with men whom  thou hadst  strengthene
d.  
10 Like as a father  bears  his son, O Agni,  Vadhryasva  bare thee in his lap and served  thee.   
Thou,  Youngest  God,  having  enjoyed  his fuel, didst  vanquish  those  of old though  they were  mighty.   
11 Vadhryasva's  Agni  evermore  hath vanquished  his foes with heroes  who had pressed  the Soma.   
Lord  of bright  rays,  thou burntest  up the battle,  subduing,  as our help,  e'en mighty  foemen.   
12 This Agni  of Vadhryasva,  Vrtra−slayer,  lit from  of old, must  be invoked  with homage.   
As such assail  our enemies,  Vadhryasva,  whether  the foes be strangers  or be kinsmen.   
 
HYMN  LXX.  Apris.  
1. ENJOY,  O Agni,  this my Fuel,  welcome  the oil−fil led ladle  where  we pour libation.   
Rise up for worship  of the Gods,  wise Agni,  on the earth's  height,  while  days are bright  with beauty.   
2 May he who goes before  the Gods  come  hither  with steeds  whose  shapes  are varied,  Narasarhsa.   
May he, most  Godlike,  speed  our offered  viands  with homage  God−ward  on the path of Order.   
3 Men with oblations  laud most  constant  Agni,  and pray him to perform  an envoy's  duty.   
With  lightly−rolling  car and best draught−horses,  bring  the Gods  hither  and sit down  as Hotar.   
4 May the delight  of Gods  spread  out transversely:  may it be with us long in length  and fragrant.   
O Holy  Grass  divine,  with friendly  spirit  bring  thou the willing  Gods  whose  Chief  is Indra.   
5 Touch  ye the far−extending  height  of heaven  or spring  apart  to suit the wide  earth's  measure.   
Yearning,  ye Doors,  with those  sublime  in greatness,  seize  eagerly  the heavenly  Car that cometh.   
6 Here  in this shrine  may Dawn  and Night,  the Daughters  of Heaven,  the skilful  Goddesses,  be seated.   
In your wide  lap, auspicio us, willing  Ladies  may the Gods  seat them  with a willing  spirit.   
7 Up stands  the stone,  high burns  the fire enkindled:  Aditi's  lap contains  the Friendly  Natures   
 
Ye Two Chief  Priests  who serve  at this our worship,  may ye, more  skilled,  win for us rich possessions.   
8 On our wide  grass,  Three  Goddesses  be seated:  for you have  we prepared  and made  it pleasant.   
May Ila, she whose  foot drops  oil, the Goddess,  taste,  man−like,  sacrifice  and well−set  presents.   
9 Since  thou,  God Tvastar,  hast made  beauty  perfe ct, since  hou hast been  the Angirases'  Companion,   
Willing,  most  wealthy,  Giver  of possessions,  grant  us the Gods'  assembly,  thou who knowest.   
10 Well−knowing,  binding  with thy cord,  bring  hither,  Lord  of the Wood,  the Deities'  assembly.   
The God prepare  and season  our oblations  may Heaven  and Earth  be gracious  to my calling.   
11 Agni,  bring  hither  Varuna  to help us, Indra  from  heaven,  from  air's mid−realm  the Maruts.   
On sacred  grass  all Holy  ones be seated  and let the Immortal  Gods  rejoice  in Svaha.   
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  LXXI.  Jnanam  
1. WHEN−men,  Brhaspati,  giving  names  to objects,  sent out Vak's  first and earliest  utterances,   
All that was excellent  and spotless,  treasured  within  them,  was disclosed  through  their affection.   
2 Where,  like men cleansing  corn−flour  in a cribble,  the wise in spirit  have  created  language,   
Friends  see and recognize  the marks  of friendship:  their speech  retains  the blessed  sign imprinted.   
3 With  sacrifice  the trace  of Vak they foIlowed,  and found  her harbouring  within  the Rsis.   
They  brought her, dealt  her forth  in many  places:  seven  singers  make  her tones  resound  in concert.   
4 One man hath ne'er  seen Vak,  and yet he seeth:  one man hath hearing  but hath never  heard  her.  
But to another  hath she shown  her beauty  as a fond well−dressed  woma n to her husband.   
5 One man they call a laggard,  dull in friendship:  they never  urge him on to deeds  of valour.   
He wanders  on in profitless  illusion:  the Voice  he heard  yields  neither  fruit,nor  blossom.   
6 No part in Vak hath he who hath abandoned  his own dear friend  who knows  the truth  of friendship.   
Even  if he hears  her still in vain he listens:  naught  knows  he of the path of righteous  action.   
7 Unequal  in the quickness  of their spirit  are friends  endowed  alike  with eyes and hearing.   
Some  look like tanks that reach  the mouth  or shoulder,  others  like pools  of water  fit to bathe  in.  
8 When  friendly  Brahmans  sacrifice  together  with mental  impulse  which  the heart  hath fashioned,   
They  leave  one far behind  through  their attainments,  and some  who count  as Brahmans  wander  elsewhere
.  
9 Those  men who step not back  and move  not forward,  nor Brahmans  nor preparers  of libations,   
Having  attained  to Vak in sinful  fashion  spin out their thread  in ignorance  like spinsters.   
10 All friends  are joyful  in the friend  who cometh  in triumph,  having  conquered  in assembly.   
He is their blame−averter,  food−provider  prepared  is he and fit for deed  of vigour.   
11 One plies  his constant  task reciting  verses.  one sings  the holy psalm  in Sakvari  measures.   
One more,  the Brahman,  tells the lore of being,  and one lays down  the rules  of sacrificing.   
 
HYMN  LXXII.  The Gods.  
1. LET US with tuneful  skill proclaim  these  generations  of the Gods,  That one may see them  when  these  
hymns  are chanted  in a future  age.  
2 These  Brahmanaspati  produced  with blast  and smelting,  like a Smith,   
Existence,  in an earlier  age of Gods,  from  Non−existence  sprang.   
3 Existence,  in the earliest  age of Gods,  from  Non−existence  sprang.   
Thereafter  were  the regions  born.  This sprang  from  the Productive  Power.   
4 Earth  sprang  from  the Productive  Power  the regions  from  the earth  were  born.   
Daksa  was born of Aditi,  and Aditi  was Daksa's  Child.   
5 For Aditi,  O Daksa,  she who is thy Daughter,  was brought  forth.   
After  her were  the blessed  Gods  born sharers  of immo rtal life.  
6 When  ye, O Gods,  in yonder  deep  closeclasping  one another  stood,   
 
Thence,  as of dancers,  from  your feet a thickening  cloud  of dust arose.  7 W
hen, O ye Gods,  like Yatis,  ye caused  all existing  things  to grow,  Then  ye 
brought  Surya  forward  who was lying  hidden  in the sea. 8 Eight  are the So
ns of Adid  who from  her body  sprang  to life. With  seven  she went  to meet  
the Gods  she cast Martanda  far away.  9 So with her Seven  Sons  Aditi  went
 forth  to meet  the earlier  age. She brought  Martanda  thitherwar d to spring  t
o life and die again.  Rig Veda – English Translation  
 
HYMN  LXXIII.  Indra.  
1. THOU  wast born mighty  for victorious  valour,  exulting,  strongest,  full of pride  and courage.   
There,  even  there,  the Maruts  strengthened  Indra  when.  his most  rapid  Mother  stirred  the Hero.   
2 There with fiend's  ways  e'en Prsni  was seated:  with much  laudation  they exalted  Indra.   
As if encompassed  by the Mighty−footed,  from  darkness,  near at hand,  forth  came  the Children.   
3 High  are thy feet when  on thy way thou goest:  the strength  thou foundest  here hath lent thee vigour.   
Thousand  hyenas  in thy mouth  thou holdest.  O Indra,  mayst  thou turn the Asvins  hither.   
4 Speeding  at once  to sacrifice  thou comest  for friendship  thou art bringing  both Nasatyas.   
Thou  hadst  a thousand  treasures  in possession.  The Asvins,  O thou Hero,  gave thee riches.   
5 Glad,  for the race that rests on holy Order,  with friends  who hasten  to their goal,  hath Indra   
With  these  his magic  powers  assailed  the Dasyu:  he cast away  the gloomy  mists,  the darkness.   
6 Two of like name  for him didst  thou demolish,  as Indra  striking  down  the car of Usas.   
With  thy beloved  lofty  Friends  thou camest,  and with the assurance  of thine  heart  thou slewest.   
7 War−loving  Namuci  thou smotest,  robbing  the Dasa  of his magic  for the Rsi.  
For man thou madest  ready  pleasant  pathways,  paths  leading  as it were  directly  God−ward.   
8 These  names  of thine  thou hast fulfilled  completely:  as Lord,  thou boldest  in thine  arm, O Indra.   
In thee,  through  thy great  might,  the Gods  are joyful:  the roots  of trees  hast thou directed  upward.   
9 May the sweet  Soma  juices  make  him happy  to cast his quoit  that lies in depth  of waters.   
Thou  from  the udder  which  o'er earth  is fastened  hast poured  the milk into the kine and herbage.   
10 When  others  call him offspring  of the Courser,  my meaning  is that Mighty  Power  produced  him.  
He came  from  Manyu  and remained  in houses:  whence  he hath sprung  is known  to Indra  only.   
11 Like birds  of beauteous  wing  the Priyamedhas,  Rsis,  imploring,  have  come  nigh to Indra:   
Dispel  the darknes s and fill full our vision  deliver  us as men whom  snares  entangle.   
 
HYMN  LXXIV.  Indra.  
1. I AM prepared  to laud with song  or worship  the Noble  Ones  who are in earth  and heaven,  Or Coursers  
who have  triumphed  in, the contest,  or those  who famed,  have  won the prize  with glory.  2 Their  call, the c
all of Gods,  went  up to heaven:  they kissed  the ground  with glory−seeking  spirit,  There  where  the Gods  lo
ok on for happy  fortune,  and like the kindly  heavens  bestow  their bounties.  3 This is the song of those  Im
mortal Beings  who long for treasures  in their full perfection.  May these,  completing  prayers  and sacrifices
, bestow  upon  us wealth  where  naught  is wanting.  4 Those  living  men extolled  thy deed,  O Indra,  those  w
ho would  fain burst  through  the stall of cattle,  Fain to milk her who bare but once,  great,  lofty,  whose  Son
s are many  and her streams  past number.  5 Sacivan,  win to your assistance  Indra  who never  bends,  who o
vercomes  his foemen.  Rbhuksan,  Maghavan,  the hymn's  upholder,  who,  rich in food,  bears  man's  kind frie
nd, the thunder.  6 Since  he who won of old anew  hath triumphed,  Indra  hath earned  his name  of Vrtra−sla
ycr. He hath appeared,  the mighty  Lord  of Conquest.  What  we would  have  him do let him accomplish.  
 
HYMN  LXXV.  The Rivers.  
1. THE  singer,  O ye Waters in Vivasvan's  place,  shall  tell your grandeur  forth  that is beyond  compare.   
The Rivers  have come  forward  triply,  seven  and seven.  Sindhu  in might  surpasses  all the streams  that flo
w.  
2 Varuna  cut the channels  for thy forward  course,  O Sindhu,  when  thou rannest  on to win the race.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Thou  speedest  o'er precipitous  ridges  of the earth,  when  thou art Lord  and Leader  of these  moving  floods.   
3 His roar is lifted  up to heaven  above  the earth:  he puts forth  endless  vigour  with a flash  of light.   
Like floods  of rain that fall−  in thunder  from  the cloud,  so Sindhu  rushes  on bellowing  like a bull.  
4 Like mothers  to their calves,  like milch  kine with their milk,  so, Sindhu,  unto thee the roaring  rivers  run.
  
Thou  leadest  as a warrior  king thine  army's  wings  what  time thou comest  in the van of these  swift  streams
.  
5 Favour  ye this my laud,  O Ganga,  Yamuna,  O Sutudri,  Parusni  and Sarasvati:   
With  Asikni,  Vitasta,  O Marudvrdha,  O Arjikiya  with Susoma  hear my call.  
6 First with Trstama  thou art eager  to flow forth,  with Rasa,  and Susartu,  and with Svetya  here,   
With  Kubha;  and with these,  Sindhu  and Mehatnu,  thou seekest  in thy course  Krumu  and Gomati.   
7 Flashing  and whitely−gleaming  in her mightiness,  she moves  along  her ample  volumes  through  the real
ms,  
Most  active of the active,  Sindhu  unrestrained,  like to a dappled  mare,  beautiful,  fair to see.  
8 Rich  in good  steeds  is Sindhu,  rich in cars and robes,  rich in gold,  nobly−fashioned,  rich in ample  wealt
h.  
Blest  Silamavati  and young  Urnavati  invest  themselves  with raiment  rich in store  of sweets.   
9 Sindhu  hath yoked  her car, light−rolling,  drawn  by steeds,  and with that car shall she win booty  in this 
fight.   
So have  I praised  its power,  mighty  and unrestrained,  of independent  glory,  roaring  as it runs.   
 
HYMN  LXXVI.  Press−stones.  
1. I GRASP  at you when  power  and strength  begin  to dawn:  bedew  ye, Indra  and the Maruts,  Heaven  and 
Earth,   
That Day and Night,  in every  hall of sacrifice,  may wait on us and bless  us when  they first spring  forth.   
2 Press  the libatio n out, most  excellent  of all: the Pressing−stone  is grasped  like a hand−guided  steed.   
So let it win the valour  that subdues  the foe, and the fleet courser's  might  that speeds  to ample  wealth.   
3 Juice  that this Stone  pours  out removes  defect  of ours,  as in old time it brought  prosperity  to man.   
At sacrifices  they established  holy rites on Tvastar's  milk−blent  juice  bright  with the hue of steeds.   
4 Drive  ye the treacherous  demons  far away  from  us: keep  Nirrti  afar and banish  Penury.   
Pour  riches  forth  for us with troops  of hero sons,  and bear ye up, O Stones,  the song that visits  Gods.   
5 To you who are more  mighty  than the heavens  themselves,  who,  finishing  your task with more  than 
Vibhvan's  speed,   
More  rapidly  than Vayu  seize  the Soma  juice,  better  than Agni  give us food,  to you I sing.   
6 Stirred  be the glorious  Stones:  let it press  out the juice,  the Stone  with heavenly  song  that reaches  up to 
heaven,   
There  where  the men draw  forth  the meath  for which  they long,  sending  their voice  around  in rivalry  of 
speed.   
7 The Stones  press  out the Soma,  swift  as car−borne  men,  and, eager  for the spoil,  drain  forth  the sap ther
eof  
To fill the beaker,  they exhaust  the udder's  store,  as the men purify  oblations  with their lips.  
8 Ye, present  men,  have  been  most  skilful in your work,  even  ye, O Stones  who pressed  Soma  for Indra's  
drink.   
May all ye have of fair go to the Heavenly  Race,  and all your treasure  to the earthly  worshipper.   
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  LXXVII.  Maruts.  
1. As with their voice  from  cloud  they sprinkle  treasure  so are the wise man's  liberal  sacrifices.   
I praise  their Company  that merits  worship  as the good  Martits'  priest  to pay them  honour.   
2 The youths  have  wrought  their ornaments  for glory  through  many  nights,−this  noble  band  of Maruts.   
Like stags  the Sons  of Dyatis  have  striven  onward,  the Sons  of Aditi  grown  strong  like pillars.   
3 They  who extend  beyond  the earth  and heaven,  by their own mass,  as from  the cloud  spreads  Surya;   
Like mighty  Heroes  covetous  of glory,  like heavenly  gallants  who destroy  the wicked.   
4 When  ye come  nigh,  as in the depth  of waters,  the earth  is loosened,  as it were,  and shaken.   
This your all−feedin  sacrifice  approaches:  come  all united,  fraught,  as 'twere  with viands.   
5 Ye are like horses  fastened  to the chariot  poles,  luminous  with your beams,  with splendour  as at dawn;   
Like self−bright  falcons,  punishers  of wicked  men,  like hovering  birds  urged  forw ard, scattering  rain arou
nd.  
6 When  ye come  forth,  O Maruts,  from  the distance,  from  the great  treasury  of rich possessions,   
Knowing,  O Vasus,  boons  that should  be granted,  even  from  afar drive  back  the men who hate us.  
7 He who,  engaged  in the rite's  final duty brings,  as a man,  oblation  to the Maruts,   
Wins  him life's  wealthy  fulness,  blest  with heroes:  he shall  be present,  too, where  Gods  drink  Soma.   
8 For these  are helps  adored  at sacrifices,  bringing  good  fortune  by their name  Adityas.   
Speeding  on cars let them  protect  our praises,  delighting  in our sacrifice  and worship.   
 
HYMN  LXXVIII.  Maruts.  
1. Ye by your hymns  are like high−thoughted  singers,  skilful,  inviting  Gods  with sacrifices;   
Fair to behold,  like Kings,  with bright  adornment,  like spotless gallants,  leaders  of the people:   
2 Like fire with flashing  flame,  breast−bound  with chains  of gold,  like tempest−blasts,  self−moving,  swift
 to 
lend your aid;  
As best of all foreknowers,  excellent  to guide,  like Somas,  good  to guard  the man who follows Law.   
3 Shakers  of all, like gales  of wind  they travel,  like tongues  of burning  fires in their effulgence.   
Mighty  are they as warriors  clad in armour,  and, like the Fathers'  prayers,  Most  Bounteous  Givers.   
4 Like spokes  of car−wheels  in one nave  united, ever victorious  like heavenly  Heroes,   
Shedding  their precious  balm  like youthful  suitors,  they raise  their voice  and chant  their psalm  as singers.   
5 They  who are fleet to travel  like the noblest  steeds,  long to obtain  the prize  like bounteous  chariot eers,  
Like waters  speeding  on with their precipitous  floods,  like omniform  Angirases  with Sama−hymns.   
6 Born  from  the stream,  like press−stones  are the Princes,  for ever like the stones  that crush  in pieces;   
Sons  of a beauteous  Dame,  like playful  childr en, like a great  host upon  the march  with splendour.   
7 Like rays of Dawn,  the visitors  of sacrifice,  they shine  with ornaments  as eager  to be bright.   
Like rivers  hasting  on, glittering  with their spears,  from  far away  they measure  out the distances.   
8 Gods, send us happiness  and make  us wealthy,  letting  us singers  prosper,  O ye Maruts.   
Bethink  you of our praise  and of our friendship:  ye from  of old have  riches  to vouchsafe  us.  
 
HYMN  LXXIX.  Agni.  
1. I HAVE  beheld  the might  of this Great  Being.  Immorta l in the midst  of tribes  of mortals.   
His jaws now open  and now shut together:  much  they devour,  insatiately  chewing.   
2 His eyes are turned  away,  his head  is hidden:  unsated  with his tongue  he eats the fuel.  
With  hands  upraised,  with reverence  in the houses, for him they quickly  bring  his food together.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
3 Seeking,  as 'twere,  his Mother's  secret  bosom,  he, like a child,  creeps  on through  wide−spread  bushes.   
One he finds  glowing  like hot food made  ready,  and kissing  deep  within  the earth's  recmes.   
4 This holy Law I tell you, Earth  and Heaven:  the Infant  at his birth  dovours  his Parents.   
 
No knowledge  of the God have I, a mortal.  Yea, Agni  knoweth  best, for he hath wisdom.   
5 This man who quickly  gives  him food,  who offers  his gifts of oil and butter  and supports  him, −  
Him with his thousand  eyes he closely  looks  on: thou showest  him thy face from  all sides,  Agni.   
6 Agni,  hast thou committed  sin or treason  among  the Gods?  In ignorance  I ask thee.   
Playing,  not playing,  he gold−hued  and toothless,  hath cut his food up as the knife  a victim.   
7 He born in wood  hath yoked  his horses  rushing  in all directions,  held with reins  that glitter.   
The well−born  friend  hath carved  his food with Vasus:  in all his limbs  he hath increased  and prospered.   
 
HYMN  LXXX.  Agni.  
1. AGNI  bestows  the fleet prize−winning  courser:  Agni,  the hero famed  and firm in duty.   
Agni  pervades  and decks  the earth  and heaven,  and fills the fruitful  dame  who teems  with heroes.   
2 Blest  be the wood  that feeds  the active  Agni:  within  the two great worlds  hath Agni  entered.   
Agni  impels  a single  man to battle,  and with him rends  in pieces  many  a foeman.   
3 Agni  rejoiced  the car of him who praised  lim, and from  the waters  burnt  away  jarutha.   
Agni  saved  Atri in the fiery  cavem,  and made  Nrmedha  rich with troops  of children.   
4 Agni  hath granted  wealth  that decks  the hero,  and sent the sage who wins  a thousand  cattle.   
Agni  hath made  oblations  rise to heaven:  to every  place  are Agni's  laws extended.   
5 With  songs  of praise  the Rsis call on Agni;  on Agni,  heroes  worsted  in the foray.   
Birds  flying  in the region  call on Agni  around  a thousand  cattle  Agni  wanders.   
6 Races  of human  birth  pay Agni  worship,  men who have sprung  from  Nahus'  line adore  him.  
Stablished  in holy oil is Agni's  pasture,  on the Gandharva  path of Law and Order.   
7 The Rbhus  fabricated  prayer  for Agni,  and we with mighty  hymns  have  called  on Agni.   
Agni,  Most  Youthful  God,  protect  the singer:  win us by worship,  Agni,  great  possessions.   
 
HYMN  LXXXI.  Visvakarman.  
1. HE who sate down as Hotar−priest,  the Rsi, our Father,  offering  up all things  existing,−   
He, seeking  through  his wish a great  possession,  came  among  men on earth  as archetypal.   
2 What  was the place  whereon  he took his station?  What  was it that supported  him?  How  was it?  
Whence  Visvakarman,  seeing  all, producing  the earth,  with mighty  power  disclosed  the heavens.   
3 He who hath eyes on all sides  round  about  him, a mouth  on all sides,  arms  and feet on all sides,   
He, the Sole God,  producing  earth  and heaven,  weldeth  them, with his arms  as wings,  together.   
4 What  was the tree, what  wood  in sooth  produced  it, from  which  they fashioned  out the earth  and heaven
?  
Ye thoughtful  men inquire  within  your spirit  whereon  he stood  when  he established  all things.   
5 Nine  highest,  lowest,  sacrificial  natures,  and these  thy mid−most  here,  O Visvakarman,   
Teach  thou thy friends  at sacrifice,  O Blessed,  and come  thyself,  exalted,  to our worship.   
6 Bring  thou thyself,  exalted  with oblation,  O Visvakarman,  Earth  and Heaven  to worship.   
Let other  men around  us live in folly  here let us have  a rich and liberal  patron.   
7 Let us invoke  to−day,  to aid our labour,  the Lord  of Speech,  the thought−swift  Visvakarman.   
May he hear kindly  all our invocations  who gives  all bliss for aid, whose  works  are righteous.   
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  LXXXII.  Visvakarman.  
1. THE  Father  of the eye, the Wise  in spirit,  created  both these  worlds  submerged  in fatness.  
Then  when  the eastern  ends were  firmly  fastened,  the heavens  and the earth  were  far extende
d. 2 Mighty  in mind  and power  is Visvakarman,  Maker,  Disposer,  and most  lofty Presence.   
Their  offerings  joy in rich juice  where  they value  One,  only One,  beyond  the Seven  Rsis.   
3 Father  who made  us, he who,  as Disposer,  knoweth  all races  and all things  existing,   
Even  he alone,  the Deities'  narne−giver,him  other  beings  seek for information.   
4 To him in sacrifice  they offered  treasures,−Rsis  of old, in numerous  troops,  as singers,   
Who,  in the distant,  near,  and lower  region,  made  ready  all these  things  that have  existence.   
5 That which  is earlier  than this earth  and heaven,  before  the Asuras  and Gods  had being,−   
What  was the germ  primeval  which  the waters  received  where  all the Gods  were  seen together?   
6 The waters,  they received  that germ  primeval  wherein  the Gods  were  gathef ed all together.   
It rested  set upon  the Unborn's  navel,  that One wherein  abide  all things  existing.   
7 Ye will not find him who produced  these  creatures:  another  thing  hath risen  up among  you.  
Enwrapt  in misty  cloud,  with lips that stammer,  hymn−chanters  wander  and are discontented.   
 
HYMN  LXXXII.  Manyu.  
1. HE who hath reverenced  thee,  Manyu,  destructive  bolt, breeds  for himself  forthwith  all conquering  ene
rgy.  
Arya  and Dasa  will we conquer  with thine  aid, with thee the Conqueror,  with conquest  conques t−sped.   
2 Manyu  was Indra,  yea, the God,  was Manyu,  Manyu  was Hotar,  Varuna,  Jatavedas.   
The tribes  of human  lineage  worship  Manyu.  Accordant  with thy fervour,  Manyu,  guard  us.  
3 Come  hither,  Manyu,  mightier  tham  the mighty;  chase,  with thy fervour  for ally, our foemen.   
Slayer  of foes,  of Vrtra,  and of Dasyu,  bring  thou to us all kinds  of wealth  and treasure.   
4 For thou art, Manyu,  of surpassing  vigour,  fierce,  queller  of the foe, and self−existent,   
Shared  by all men,  victorious,  subduer:  vouchsafe  to us superior  strengith  in battles.   
5 I have  departed,  still without  a portion,  wise God!  according  to thy will, the Mighty.   
I, feeble  man,  was wroth  thee,  O Manyu  I am myself;  come  thou to give me vigour.   
6 Come  hither.  I am all thine  own;  advancing  turn thou to me, Victorious,  All−supporter!   
Come  to me, Manyu,  Wielder  of the Thunder:  bethink  thee of thy friend,  and slay the Dasyus.   
7 Approach,  and on my right  hand  hold thy station:  so shall  we slay a multitude  of foemen.   
The best of meath  I offer  to support  thee:  may we be first to drink  thereof  in quiet.   
 
HYMN  LXXXIV.  Manyu.  
1. BORNE  on with thee,  O Manyu  girt by Maruts,  let our brave  men,  impetuous,  bursting  forward,   
March  on, like flames  of fire in form,  exulting,  with pointed  arrows,  sharpening  their weapons.   
2 Flashing  like fire, be thou,  O conquering  Manyu,  invoked,  O Victor,  as our army's  leader.   
Slay thou our foes,  distribute  their possessions:  show  forth  thy vigour,  scatter  those  who hate us.  
3 O Manyu,  overcome  thou our assailant  on! breaking,  slaying,  crushing  down  the foemen.   
They  have  not hindered  thine  impetuous  vigour:  Mighty,  Sole born!  thou makest  them  thy subjects.   
4 Alone  or many  thou art worshipped,  Manyu:  sharpen  the spirit  of each clan for battle.   
With  thee to aid, O thou of perfect  splendour,  we will uplift  the glorious  shout  for conquest.   
5 Unyielding  bringing  victory  like Indra,  O Manyu,  be thou here our Sovran  Ruler.   
To thy dear name,  O Victor,  we sing praises:  we know  the spring  from  which  thou art come  hither.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
6 Twin−born  with power,  destructive  bolt of thunder,  the highest  conquering  might  is thine,  Subduer!   
Be friendly  to its in thy spirit,  Manyu,  O Much−invoked,  in shock  of mighty  battle.   
7 For spoil  let Varuna  and Manyu  give us the wealth  of both sides  gathere d and collected;   
And let our enemies  with stricken  spirits,  o'erwhelmed  with terror,  slink  away  defeated.   
 
HYMN  LXXXV.  Surya's  Bridal.  
1. TRUTH  is the base that bears  the earth;  by Surya  are the heavens  sustained.   
By Law the Adityas  stand  secure,  and Soma  holds  his place  in heaven.   
2 By Soma  are the Adityas  strong,  by Soma  mighty  is the earth.   
Thus  Soma  in the midst  of all these  constellations  hath his place.   
3 One thinks,  when  they have brayed  the plant,  that he hath drunk  the Soma's  juice;   
Of him whom  Brahmans  truly  know  as Soma  no one ever tastes.   
4 Soma,  secured  by sheltering  rules,  guarded  by hymns  in Brhati,   
Thou  standest  listening  to the stones  none  tastes  of thee who dwells  on earth.   
5 When  they begin  to drink  thee then,  O God,  thou swell est out again.   
Vayu  is Soma's  guardian  God.  The Moon  is that which  shapes  the years.   
6 Raibhi  was her dear bridal  friend,  and Narasamsi  led her home.   
Lovely  was Surya's  robe:  she came  to that which  Gatha  had adorned.   
7 Thought  was the pillow  of her couch, sight  was the unguent  for her eyes:   
Her treasury  was earth  and heaven..when  Surya  went  unto her Lord.   
8 Hymns  were  the cross−bars  of the pole,  Kurira−metre  decked  the car:  
The bridesmen  were  the Asvin  Pair Agni  was leader  of the train.   
9 Soma  was he who wooed  the maid:  the groomsmen  were  both Asvins,  when   
The Sun−God  Savitar  bestowed  his willing  Surya  on her Lord.   
10 Her spirit  was the bridal  car; the covering  thereof  was heaven:   
Bright  were  both Steers  that drew  it when  Surya  approached  her husb and's,  home.   
11 Thy Steers  were  steady,  kept in place  by holy verse  and Sama−hymn:   
All car were  thy two chariot  wheels:  thy path was tremulous  in the sky,  
12 Clean,  as thou wentest,  were  thy wheels  wind,  was the axle fastened  there.   
Surya,  proceeding  to her Lord,  mounted  a spirit−fashioried  car.  
13 The bridal  pomp  of Surya,  which  Savitar  started,  moved  along.   
In Magha  days are oxen  slain,  in Arjuris  they wed the bride.   
14 When  on your three−wheeled  chariot,  O Asvins,  ye came  as wooers  unto Surya's  bridal,  
Then  all the Gods  agreed  to your proposal  Pusan  as Son elected  you as Fathers.   
15 O ye Two Lords  of lustre,  then when  ye to Surya's  wooing  came,   
Where  was one chariot  wheel  of yours?  Where  stood  ye for die Sire's  command?   
16 The Brahmans,  by their seasons,  know,  O Surya,  those  two wheels  of thine:   
One kept concealed,  those  only who are skilled  in highest  truths  have  learned.   
17 To Surya  and the Deities,  to Mitra  and to Varuna.   
Who  know  aright  the thing  that is, this adoration  have I paid.   
18 By their own power  these  Twain  in close  succession  move;   
They  go as playing  children  round  the sacrifice.   
One of the Pair beholdeth  all existing  things;  the other  ordereth  seasons  and is born again.   
19 He, born afresh,  is new and new for ever ensign  of days he goes before  the Mornings   
Coming,  he orders  f6r the Gods  their portion.  The Moon  prolongs  the days of our existence.   
20 Mount  this, all−shaped,  gold−hued,  with strong  wheels,  fashioned  of Kimsuka  and Salmali,  light−rolliRig Veda – English Translation  
ng,  
Bound  for the world  of life immortal,  Surya:  make  for thy lord a happy  bridal  journey.   
21 Rise up from  hence:  this maiden  hath a husband.  I laud Visvavasu  with hymns  and homage.   
Seek  in her father's  home  another  fair one, and find the portion  from  of old assigned  thee.   
22 Rise up from  hence,  Visvavasu:  with reverence  we worship  thee.   
Seek  thou another  willing  maid,  and with her husband  leave  the bride.   
23 Straight  in direction  be the path:s,  and thornless,  whereon  our fellows  travel  to the wooing.   
Let Aryaman  and Bhaga  lead us: perfect,  O Gods,  the union  of the wife and husband.   
24 Now  from  the noose  of Varuna  I free thee,  wherewith  Most  Blessed  Savitar  hath bound  thee.   
 
In Law's  seat, to the world  of virtuous  action,  I give thee up uninjured  with thy consort.   
25 Hence,  and not thence,  I send these  free. I make  thee softly  fettered  there.   
That,  Bounteous  Indra,  she may live blest  in her fortune  and her sons.   
26 Let Pusan  take thy hand  and hence  conduct  thee;  may the two Asvins  on their car transport  thee.   
Go to the hous e to be the household's  mistress  and speak  as lady ito thy gathered  people.   
27 Happy  be thou and prosper  witlh  thy children  here:  be vigilant  to rule thy household  in this home.   
Closely  unite  thy body  with this; man,  thy lord. So shall  ye, full of years,  address  your company.   
28 Her hue is blue and red: the fienod  who clingeth  close  is driven  off.  
Well  thrive  the kinsmen  of this bride  the husband  is bourid  fast in bonds.   
29 Give  thou the woollen  robe away:  deal treasure  to the Brahman  priests.   
This female  fiend  hath got her feet, and as a wife attends  her lord.  
30 Unlovely  is his body  when  it glistens  with this wicked  fiend,   
What  time the husband  wraps  about  his limbs  the garment  of his wife.   
31 Consumptions,  from  her people,  which  follow  the bride' s resplendent  train,−   
These  let the Holy  Gods  again  bear to the place  from  which  they came.   
32 Let not the highway  thieves  who lie in ambush  find the wedded  pair.  
By pleasant  ways  let them  escape  the danger,  and let foes depart.   
33 Signs  of good  fortun e mark  the bride  come  all of you and look at her.  
Wish  her prosperity,  and then return  unto your homes  again.   
34 Pungent  is this, and bitter  this, filled,  as it were,  with arrow−barbs,  Empoisoned  and.not  fit for use.  
The Brahman  who knows  Surya  well deserves  the garment  of the bride.   
35 The fringe,  the cloth  that decks  her head,  and then the triply  parted  robe,−   
Behold  the hues which  Surya  wears  these  doth the Brahman  purify.   
36 I take thy hand  in mine  for happy  fortune  that thou mayst  reach  old age with me thy husband.   
Gods,  Aryaman,  Bhaga,  Savitar,  Purandhi,  have given  thee to be my household's  mistress.   
37 O Pusan,  send her on as most  auspicious,  her who shall  be the sharer  of my pleasures;   
Her who shall  twine  her loving  arms  about  me, and welcom e all my love and mine  embraces.   
38 For thee,  with bridal  train,  they,  first, escorted  Surya  to her home.   
Give  to the husband  in return,  Agni,  the wife with progeny.   
39 Agni  hath given  the bride  again  with splendour  and with ample  life.  
Long  lived  be he who is her lord;  a hundred  autumns  let him live.  
40 Soma  obtained  her first of all; next the Gandharva  was her lord.  
Agai  was thy third  husband:  now one bornof  woman  is thy fourth.   
41 Soma  to the Gandharva,  and to Agni  the Gandharva  gave:   
And Agni  hath bestowed  on me riches  and sons and this my spouse.   
42 Be ye not parted;  dwell  ye here reach  the full time of human  life.  
With  sons and grandsons  sport  and play,  rejoicing  in your own abode.   
43 So may Prajapati  bring  children  forth  to us; may Aryaman  adorn  us till old age come  nigh.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Not inauspicious  enter  thou thy husband's  house:  bring  blessing  to our bipeds  and our quadrupeds.   
44 Not evil−eyed,  no slayer  of thy husband,  bring  weal  to cattle,  radiant,  gentlehearted;   
Loving  the Gods,  delightful,  bearing heroes,  bring  blessing  to our quadrupeds  and bipeds.   
45 O Bounteous  Indra,  make  this bride  blest  in her sons and fortunate.   
Vouchsafe  to her ten sons,  and make  her husband  the eleventh  man.   
46 Over  thy husband's  father  and thy husband's  mother  bear full sway.   
Over  the sister  of tby lord, over his brothers  rule supreme.   
47 So may the Universal  Gods,  so may the Waters  join our hearts.   
May Matarisvan,  Dhatar,  and Destri  together  bind us close.   
 
HYMN  LXXXVI.  Indra.  
1. MEN  have  abstained  from  pouri ng juice  they count  not Indra  as a God.  Where  at the votary's  store  my f
riend  Vrsakapi  hath drunk  his fill. Supreme  is Indra  over all.  
2 Thou,  Indra,  heedless  passest  by the ill Vrsakapi  hath wrought;   
Yet nowhere  else thou findest  place  wherein  to drink  the Soma  juice.  Supreme  is Indra  over all.  
3 What  hath he done  to injure  thee,  this tawny  beast  Vrsakapi,   
With  whom  thou art so angry  now?  What  is the votary's  foodful  store?  Supreme  is Indra  over all.  
4 Soon  may the hound  who hunts  the boar seize  him and bite him in the car,  
O Indra,  that Vrsakapi  whom  thou protectest  as a friend,  Supreme  is Indra  over all.  
5 Kapi  hath marred  the beauteous  things,  all deftly  wrought,  that were  my joy.  
In pieces  will I rend his head;  the sinner's  portion  sball  be woo.  Supreme  is Indra  over all.  
6 No Dame  hath ampler  charms  than 1, or greater  wealth  of love's  delights.   
None  with more  ardour  offers  all her beauty  to her lord's  embrace.  Supreme  is Indra  over all.  
7 Mother  whose  love is quickly  wibn,  I say what  verily  will be.  
My,breast,  O Mother,  and my head  and both my hips seem  quivering.  Supreme  is Indra  over all.  
8 Dame  with the lovely  hands  and arms,  with broad  hair−plaits  add ample  hips,   
Why,  O thou Hero's  wife,  art thou angry  with our Vrsakapi?  Supreme  is Indra over all.  
9 This noxious  creature  looks  on me as one bereft  of hero's  love,   
Yet Heroes  for my sons have I, the Maruts'  Friend  and Indra's  Queen.  Supreme  is Indra  over all.  
10 From  olden  time the matron  goes to feast  and general  sacrifice.   
Mother  of Heroes,  Indra's  Queen,  the rite's  ordainer  is extolled.  Supreme  is Indra  over all.  
11 So have  I heard  Indrani  called  most  fortunate  among  these  Dames,   
For never  shall  her Consort  die in future  time through  length  of days.  Supreme  is Indra  overall.   
12 Never, Indralni,  have  I joyed  without  my friend  Vrsakapi,   
Whose  welcome  offering  here,  made  pure with water,  goeth  to the Gods.  Supreme  is Indra  over all.  
13 Wealthy  Vrsakapayi,  blest  with sons and consorts  of thy sons,   
Indra  will eat thy bulls,  thy dear oblation  that effecteth  much.  Supreme  is Indra  over all.  
14 Fifteen  in number,  then,  for me a score  of bullocks  they prepare,   
And I devour  the fat thereof:  they fill my belly  full with food.  Supreme  is Indra  over all.  
15 Like as a bull with pointed  horn,  loud bellowing  amid  the herds,   
Sweet  to thine  heart,  O Indra,  is the brew  which  she who tends  thee pours.  Supreme  is Indra  over all.  
18 O Indra  this Vrsakapi  hath found  a slain  wild animal,   
Dresser,  and new−made  pan, and knife,  and wagon  with a load of wood.  Supreme  is Indra  over all.  
19 Distinguishing  the Dasa  and the Arya,  viewing  all, I go.  
I look upon  the wise,  and drink  the simple  votary's  Soma  juice.  Supreme  is Indra  over all.  
20 The desert  plains  and steep  descents,  how many  leagues  in length  they spread!   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Go to the nearest  houses,  go unto thine  home,  Vrsakapi.  Supreme  is Indra  over all.  
21 Turn  thee again  Vrsakapi:  we twain  will bring  thee happiness.   
Thou  goest  homeward  on thy way along  this path which  leads  to sleep.  Supreme  is Indra  over all.  
22 When,  Indra  and Vrsakapi,  ye travelled  upward  to your home,   
Where  was that noisome  beast,  to whom  went  it, the beast  that troubles  man?  Supreme  is Indra  over all.  
23 Daughter  of Manu,  Parsu  bare a score  of children  at a birth.   
Her portion  verily  was bliss although  her burthen  caused  her grief.   
 
HYMN  LXXXVII.  Agni.  
1. I BALM  with oil the mighty  Raksas−slayer;  to the most  famous  Friend  I come  for shelter  E
nkindled,  sharpened  by our rites,  may Agni  protect  us in the day and night  from  evil.  
2 O Jatavedas  with the teeth  of iron, enkindled  with thy flame  attack  the demo ns.  
Seize  with thy longue  the foolish  gods'  adorers:  rend,  put within  thy mouth  the raw−flesh  caters.   
3 Apply  thy teeth,  the upper  and the lower,  thou who hast both,  enkindled  and destroying.   
Roam  also in the air, O King,  around  us, and with thy jaws assail the wicked  spirits.   
4 Bending  thy shafts  through  sacrifices,  Agni,  whetting  their points  with song  as if with whetstones,   
Pierce  to the heart  therewith  the Yatudhanas,  and break  their arms  uplifed  to attack  thee.   
5 Pierce  through  the Yatudhana's  skin, O Agni;  let the destroying  dart with fire consume  him.  
Rend  his joints,  Jatavedas,  let the cater  of flesh,  flesh−seeking,  track  his mangled  body.   
6 Where  now thou seest  Agni  Jatavedas,  one of these  demons  standing  still or roaming,   
Or flying  on those  paths  in air's midregion,  sharpen  the shaft  and as an archer  pierce  him.  
7 Tear from  the evil spirit,  Jatavedas,  what  he hath seized  and with his spears  hath captured.   
Blazing  before  him strike  him down,  O Agni;  let spotted  carrion−eating  kites  devour  him.  
8 Here  tell this forth,  O Agni:  whosoever  is, he himself,  or acteth  as, a demon,   
Him grasp,  O thou Most  Youthful,  with thy fuel. to the Mati−seer's  eye give him as booty.   
9 With  keen  glance  guard  the sacrifice,  O Agni:  thou Sage,  conduct  it onward  to the Vasus.   
Let not the fiends,  O Man−beholder,  harm  thee burning  against  the Raksasas  to slay them.   
10 Look  on the fiend  mid men,  as Man−beholder:  rend thou his three  extremities  in pieces.   
Demolish  with thy flame  his ribs, O Agni,  the Yatudhana's  root destroy  thou triply.   
11 Thrice,  Agni,  let thy noose  surround  the demon  who with his falsehood  injures  Holy  Order.   
Loud  roaring  with thy flame,  O Jatavedas,  crush  him and cast him down  before  the singer.   
12 Lead  thou the worshipper  that eye, O Agni,  wherewith  thou lookest  on the hoof−armed  demon.   
With  light celestial  in Atharvan's  manner  burn up the foot who ruins  truth  with falsehood.   
13 Agni,  what  curse  the pair this day have  uttered,  what  heated  word  the worshippers  have spoken,   
Each  arrowy  taunt  sped from  the angry  spirit,−pierce  to the heart  therewith  the Yatudhanas.   
14 With  ferven t heat exterminate  the demons;  destroy  the fiends  with burning  flame,  O Agni.   
Destroy  with fire the foolish  gods'  adorers;  blaze  and destrepy  the insatiable  monsters.   
15 May Gods  destroy  this day the evil−doer  may each hot curse  of his return  and blast  him.  
Let arrows  pierce  the liar in his vitals,  and Visva's  net enclose  the Yatudhana.   
16 The fiend  who smears  himself  with flesh  of cattle,  with flesh  of horses  and of human  bodies,   
Who  steals  the milch−cow's  milk away,  O Agni,−tear  off the heads  of such with fiery  fury.   
17 The cow gives  milk each year,  O Man−regarder:  let not the Yatudhana  ever taste it.  
If one would  glut him with the biesting,  Agni,  pierce  with thy flame  his vitals  as he meets  thee.   
18 Let the fiends  drink  the poison  of the cattle;  may Aditi  cast off the evildoers.   
May the God Savitar  give them  up to ruin, and be their share  of plants  and herbs  denied  them.   
19 Agni,  from  days of old thou slayest  demons:  never  shall  Raksasas  in fight  o'ercome  thee.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Burn  up the foolish  ones,  the flesh−devourers:  let none  of them  escape  thine  heavenly  arrow.   
20 Guard  us, O Agni,  from  above  and under,  protect  us fl−om  behind  us and before  us;  
And may thy flames,  most  fierce  and never  wasting,  glowing  with fervent  heat,  consume  the sinner.   
21 From  rear, from  front,  from  under,  from  above  us, O King,  protect  us as a Sage  with wisdom.   
Guard  to old age thy friend,  O Friend,  Eternal:  O Agni,  as Immortal,  guard  us mortals.   
22 We set thee round  us as a fort, victorious  Agni,  thee a Sage,   
Of hero lineage,  day by day, destroyer  of our treacherous  foes.   
23 Burn  with thy poison  turned  against  the treacherous  brood  of Raksasas,   
O Agni,  with thy sharpened  glow,  with lances  armed  with points  of flame.   
24 Burn  thou the paired  Kimidins,  brun,  Agni,  the Yatudhana  pairs.   
I sharpen  thee,  Infallible,  with hymns.  O Sage,  be vigilant.   
25 Shoot  forth,  O Agni,  with thy flame  demolish  them  on every  side.  
Break  thou the Yatudhana's  strength,  the vigour  of the Raksasa.   
 
HYMN  LXXXVIII.  Agni.  
1. DEAR,  ageless  sacrificia l drink  is offered  in light−discovering,  heaven−pervading  Agni.   
The Gods  spread  forth  through  his Celestial  Nature,  that he might  bear the world  up and sustain  it.  
2 The world  was swallowed  and concealed  in darkness:  Agni  was born,  and light became  appar ent.  
The Deities,  the broad  earth,  and the heavens,  and plants,  and waters  gloried  in his friendship.   
3 Inspired  by Gods  who claim  our adoration,  I now will laud Eternal  Lofty  Agni,   
Him who hath spread  abroad  the earth  with lustre,  this heaven,  and both the worlds,  and air's mid−region.   
4 Earliest  Priest  whom  all the Gods  accepted,  and chose  him, and anointed  him with butter,   
He swiftly  made  all things  that fly, stand,  travel,  all that hath motion,  Agni  Jatavedas.   
5 Because  thou,  Agni,  Jatavedas,  stoodest at the world's  head  with thy refulgent  splendour,   
We sent thee forth  with hymns  and songs  and praises:  thou filledst  heaven  and earth,  God meet  for worshi
p.  
6 Head  of the world  is Agni  in the night−time;  then,  as the Sun, at morn  springs  up and rises.  
Then  to his task goes the prompt  Priest  foreknowing  the wondrous  power  of Gods  who must  be honoured.
  
7 Lovely  is he who,  kindled  in his greatness,  hath shone  forth,  seated  in the heavens,  refulgent.   
With  resonant  hymns  all Gods  who guard  our bodies  have offered  up oblation  in this Agni.   
8 First the Gods  brought  the hymnal  into being;  then they engendered  Agni,  then oblation.   
He was their satrifice  that guards  our bodies:  him the heavens  know,  the earth,  the waters  know  him.  
9 He, Agni,  whom  the Gods have  generated,  in whom  they offered  up all worlds  and creatures,   
He with his bright  glow  heated  earth  and heaven,  urging  himself  right  onward  in his grandeur.   
10 Then  by the laud the Gods  engendered  Agni  in heaven,  who fills both worlds  through  streng th and vig
our.  
They  made  him to appear  in threefold  essence:  he ripens  plants  of every  form  and nature.   
11 What  time the Gods,  whose  due is worship,  set him as Surya,  Son of Aditi,  in heaven,   
When  the Pair, ever wandering,  sprang  to being,  all creatures  that existed  looked  upon  them.   
12 For all the world  of life the Gods  made  Agni  Vaisvanara  to be the days'  bright  Banner,−   
Him who hath spread  abroad  the radiant  Mornings,  and, coming  with his light,  unveils  the darkness.   
13 The wise and holy Deities  engendered  Agni  Vaisvanara  whom  age ne'er  touches.   
The Ancient  Star that wanders  on for ever,  lofty  and. strong,  Lord  of the Living  Being.   
14 We call upon  the Sage  with holy verses,  Agni  Vaisvanara  the ever−beaming,   
Who  hath surpassed  both heaven  and earth in greatness:  lie is a God below,  a God above  us.  Rig Veda – English Translation  
15 I have  heard  mention  of two several  pathways,  ways  of the Fathers  and of Gods  and mortals.   
On these  two paths  each moving  creature  travels,  each thing  between  the Father  and the Mother.   
16 These  two united  paths  bear him who journeys  born from  the head  and pondered  with the spirit   
He stands  directed  to all things  existing,  hasting,  unresting  in his fiery splendour.   
17 Which  of us twain  knows  where  they speak  together,  upper  and lower  of the two rite−leaders?   
Our friends  have helped  to gather  our assembly.  They  came  to sacrifice;  who will announce  it?  
18 How  many  are the Fires  and Suns  in number?  What  is the number  of the Dawns  and Waters?   
Not jestingly  I speak  to you, O Fathers.  Sages,  I ask you this for information.   
19 As great  as is the fair−winged  Morning's  presence  to him who dwells  beside  us, matarisvan!   
Is what  the Brahman  does when  he approaches  to sacrifice  and sits below  the Hotar.   
 
HYMN  LXXXIX.  Indra.  
1. I WILL  extol  the most  heroic  Indra  who with his might  forced  earth  and sky asunder;  Wh
o hath filled  all with width  as man's  Upholder,  surpassing  floods  and rivers  in his greatness.  
2 Surya  is he: throughout  the wide  expanses  shall  Indra  turn him, swift  as car−wheels,  hithe
r, Like a stream  resting  not but ever active  he hath destroyed,  with light,  the blackhued  dark
ness.  3 To him I sing a holy prayer,  incessant  new,  matchless,  common  to the earth  and hea
ven, Who  marks,  as they were  backs,  all living  creatures:  ne'er  doth he fail a friend, the nobl
e Indra.   
4 I will send forth  my songs  in flow unceasing,  like water  from  the ocean's  depth,  to Indra.   
Who  to his car on both its sides  securely  hath fixed  the earth  and heaven  as with an axle.   
5 Rousing  with draughts,  the Shaker,  rushing  onward, impetuous,  very strong,  armed  as with arrows   
Is Soma;  forest  trees  and all the bushes  deceive  not Indra  with their offered  likeness.   
6 Soma  hath flowed  to him whom  naught  can equal,  the earth,  the heavens,  the firmament,  the mountains,
−  
When  height ened  in his ire his indignation  shatters  the firm and breaks  the strong  in pieces.   
7 As an axe fells the tree so be slew Vrtra,  brake  down  the strongholds  and dug out the rivers.   
He cleft the mountain  like a new−made  pitcher.  Indra  brought  forth  the kine with his Companions.   
8 Wise  art thou,  Punisher  of guilt,  O Indra.  The sword  lops limbs,  thou smitest  down  the sinner,   
The men who injure,  as it were  a comrade,  the lofty  Law of Varuna  and Mitra.   
9 Men who lead evil lives,  who break  agreements,  and injure Varuna,  Aryaman  and Mitra,−   
Against  these  foes,  O Mighty  Indra,  sharpen,  as furious  death,  thy Bull of fiery  colour.   
10 Indra  is Sovran  Lord  of Earth  and Heaven,  Indra  is Lord  of waters  and of mountains.   
Indra  is Lord  of prosperers  and sages  Indra  must be invoked  in rest and effort.   
11 Vaster  than days and nights,  Giver  of increase,  vaster  than firmament  and flood  of ocean,   
Vaster  than bounds  of earth  and wind's  extension,  vaster  than rivers  and our lands  is Indra.   
12 Forward,  as herald  of refulgen t Morning,  let thine  insatiate  arrow  fly, O Indra.   
And pierce,  as 'twere  a stone  launched  forth  from  heaven,  with hottest  blaze  the men who love deception.   
13 Him,  verily,  the moons,  the mountains  followed,  the tall trees  followed  and the plants  and herbage.  
Yearning  with love both Worlds  approached,  the Waters  waited  on Indra  when  he first had being.   
14 Where  was the vengeful  dart when  thou,  O Indra,  clavest  the demon  ever beat on outrage?   
When  fiends  lay there  upon  the ground  extended  like cattle  in the place  of immolation?   
15 Those  who are set in enmity  against  us, the Oganas,  O Indra,  waxen  mighty,−   
Let blinding  darkness  follow  those  our fbemen,  while  these  shall  have bright  shining  nights  to light them.   
16 May plentiful  libations  of the people,  and singing  Rsis'  holy prayers  rejoice  thee.   
Hearing  with love this common  invocation,  come  unto us, pass by all those  who praise  thee.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
17 O Indra,  thus may we be made  partakers  of thy new favours  that shall  bring  us profit.   
Singing  with love,  may we the Visvamitras  win daylight  even  now through  thee,  O Indra.   
18 Call we on Maghavan,  auspicious  Indra,  best hero in the fight  where  spoil  is gathered,   
The Strong  who listens,  who gives  aid in battles,  who slays  the Vrtras,  wins  and gathers  riches.   
 
HYMN  XC. Purusa.  
1. A THOUSAND  heads  hath Purusa,  a thousand  eyes,  a thousand  feet. On every  side pervading  earth  he 
fills a space  ten fingers  wide.   
2 This Purusa  is all that yet hath been  and all that is to be;  
The Lord  of Immortality  which  waxes  greater  still by food.   
3 So mighty  is his greatness;  yea, greater  than this is Purusa.   
All creatures  are one−fourth  of him, three−fourths  eternal  life in heaven.   
4 With  three−fourths  Purusa  went  up: onefourth  of him again  was here.   
Thence  he strode  out to every  side over what  cats not and what  cats.  
5 From  him Viraj  was born;  again  Purusa  from  Viraj  was born.   
As soon  as he was born he spread  eastward  and westward  o'er the earth.   
6 When  Gods  prepared  the sacrifice  with Purusa  as their offering,   
Its oil was spring, the holy gift was autumn;  summer  was the wood.   
7 They  balmed  as victim  on the grass  Purusa  born in earliest  time.   
With  him the Deities  and all Sadhyas  and Rsis sacrificed.   
8 From  that great  general  sacrifice  the dripping  fat was gathered  up.  
He formed  the creatures  of−the  air, and animals  both wild and tame.   
 
9 From  that great  general  sacrifice  Rcas  and Sama−hymns  were  born:   
Therefrom  were  spells  and charms  produced;  the Yajus  had its birth  from  it.  
10 From  it were  horses  born,  from  it all cattle with two rows  of teeth:   
From  it were  generated  kine,  from  it the goats  and sheep  were  born.   
11 When  they divided  Purusa  how many  portions  did they make?   
What  do they call his mouth,  his arms?  What  do they call his thighs  and feet?   
12 The Brahman  was his mouth,  of both his arms  was the Rajanya  made.   
His thighs  became  the Vaisya,  from  his feet the Sudra  was produced.   
13 The Moon  was gendered  from  his mind,  and from  his eye the Sun had birth;   
Indra  and Agni  from  his mouth  were  born,  and Vayu  from  his breath.   
14 Forth  from  his navel  came  mid−air  the sky was fashioned  from  his head   
Earth  from  his feet, and from  his car the regions.  Thus  they formed  the worlds.   
15 Seven  fencing−sticks  had he, thrice  seven  layers  of fuel were  prepared,   
When  the Gods,  offering  sacrifice,  bound,  as their victim,  Purusa.   
16 Gods,  sacrificing,  sacrificed  the victim  these  were  the carliest  holy ordinances.   
The Mighty  Ones  attained  the height  of heaven,  there  where  the Sidhyas,  Gods  of old, are dwelling.   
 
HYMN  XCI. Agni.  
1. BRISK,  at the place  of Ila, hymned  by men who wake,  our own familiar  Friend  is kindled  in the house;   
Hotar  of all oblation,  worthy  of our choice,  Lord,  beaming,  trusty  friend  to one who loveth  him.  
2 He, excellent  in glory,  guest  in every  house,  finds like a swift−winged  bird a home  in every  tree.  
Benevolent  to men,  he scorns  no living  man:  Friend  to the tribes  of men he dwells  with every  tribe.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
3 Most  sage with insight,  passing  skilful  with thy powers  art thou,  O Agni,  wise with wisdom,  knowing  al
l.  
As Vasu,  thou alone  art Lord  of all good  things,  of all the treasures  that the heavens  and earth  produce.   
4 Foreknowing  well,  O Agni,  thou in Ila's place  hast occupied  thy regular  station  balmed  with oil.  
Marked  are thy comings  like the comings  of the Dawns,  the rays of him who shineth  spotless  as the Sun.  
5 Thy glories  are, as lightnings  from  the rainy  cloud,  marked,  many−hued,  like heralds  of the Dawns'  
approach,   
When,  loosed  to wander  over plants  and forest  trees,  thou crammest  by thyself  thy food into thy mouth.   
6 Him,  duly coming  as their germ,  have  plants  received:  this Agni  have maternal  Waters  brought  to life.  
So in like manner  do the forest  trees  and plants  bear him within  them  and produce  him evermore.   
7 When,  sped and urged  by wind,  thou spreadest  thee abroad,  swift  piercing  through  thy food according  to 
thy will,  
Thy never−ceasing  blazes,  longing  to consume,  like men on chariots,  Agni,  strive  on every  side.  
8 Agni,  the Hotar−priest  who fills the assembly  full, Waker  of knowledge,  chief  Controller  of the thought,
−  
Him,  yea, none  other  than thyself,  doth man elect  at sacrificial  offerings  great  and small  alike.   
9 Here,  Api, the arrangers,  those  attached  to thee,  elect  thee as their Priest  in sacred  gatherings,   
When  men with strewn  clipt grass  and sacrificial  gifts offer  thee entertainment,  piously  inclined.   
10 Thine  is the Herald's  task and Cleanser's  duly timed;  Leader  art thou,  and Kindler  for the pious  man.   
Thou  art Director,  thou the ministering  Priest:  thou art the Brahman,  Lord  and Master  in our home.   
11 When  mortal  man presents  to thee Immortal  God,  Agni,  his fuel or his sacrificial  gift,  
Then  thou art his Adhvaryu,  Hotar,  messenger,  callest  the Gods  and orderest  the sacrifice.   
12 From  us these  hymns  in concert  have  gone  forth to him, these.  holy words,  these  Rcas,  songs  and eulo
gies,  
Eager  for wealth,  to Jatavedas  fain for wealth:  when  they have  waxen  strong  they please  their Strengthene
r.  
13 This newest  eulogy  will I speak  forth  to him, the Ancient  One who loves  it. May he hear our voice.   
May it come  near his heart  and make  it stir with love,  as a fond well−dressed  matron  clings  about  her lord
.  
14 He in whom  horses,  bulls,  oxen,  and barren  cows,  and rams,  when  duly set apart,  are offered  up,−  
To Agni,  Soma−sprinkled,  drinker of sweet  juice,  Disposer,  with my heart  I bring  a fair hymn  forth.   
 
15 Into thy mouth  is poured  the offering,  Agni,  as Soma  into cup, oil into ladle.   
Vouchsafe  us wealth.  strength−winning,  blest  with heroes,  wealth  lofty,  praised  by men,  and full of 
splendour.   
 
HYMN  XCII.  Visvedevas.  
1. I PRAISE  your Charioteer  of sacrifice,  the Lord  of men,  Priest  of the tribes,  refulgent,  Guest  of night.   
Blazing  amid  dry plants,  snatching  amid  the green,  the Strong,  the Holy  Herald  hath attained  to heaven.   
2 Him, Agni,  Gods  and men have  made  their chief  support,  who drinks  the fatness  and completes  the 
sacrifice.   
With  kisses  they caress  the Grandson  of the Red, like the swift  ray of light,  the Household  Priest  of Dawn
.  
3 Yea, we discriminate  his and the nigga rd's ways:  his branches  evermore  are sent forth  to consume.   
When  his terrific  flames  have reached  the Immortal's  world,  then men remember  and extol  the Heavenly  
Folk.   