Rig Veda – English Translation  
Giving  his praiser  hero strength.   
 
HYMN  LXIII.  Soma  Pavanana.  
1. POUR  hitherward,  O Soma,  wealth  in thousands  and heroic  strength,  And keep renown  secure  for us.  
2 Thou  makest  food and vigour  swell  for Indra,  best of gladdeners!   
Within  the cups thou seatest  thee.  
3 For Indra  and for Visnu  poured,  Soma  hath flowed  into the jar:  
May Vayu  find it rich in sweets.   
4 These  Somas  swift  and brown  of hue, in stream  of solemn  sacrifice   
Have  flowed  through  twisted  obstacles,   
5 Performing  every  noble  work,  active,  augmenting  Indra's  strength,   
Driving  away  the godless  ones.   
6 Brown  Soma−drops,  effused  that seek Indra,  to their appropriate  place   
Flow  through  the region  hitherward.   
7 Flow  onward  with that stream  of thine  wherewith  thou gavest  Surya  light,   
Urging  on waters  good  to men.   
8 He, Pavamana,  high o'er man yoked  the Sun's  courser  Etasa   
To travel  through  the realm  of air.  
 
9 And those  ten Coursers,  tawny−hued,  he harnessed  that the Sun might  come   
Indu,  he said, is Indra's  self.  
10 Hence,  singers,  pour the gladdeningjuice  to Vayu  and to Indra,  pour  
The drops  upon  the fleecy  cloth.   
11 O Soma  Pavamana,  find wealth  for us not to be assailed,   
Wealth  which  the foeman  may not win.  
12 Send  riches  hither  with thy stream  in thousands,  both of steeds  and kine,   
Send spoil  of war and high renown.   
13 Soma  the God,  expressed  with stones,  like Surya,  floweth  on his way,   
Pouring  the juice  within  the jar.  
14 These  brilliant  drops  have poured  for us, in stream  of solemn  sacrifice,   
Worshipful  laws and strength  in kine.  
15 Over  the cleansing  sieve  have  flowed  the Somas,  blent  with curdled  milk,   
Effused  for Indra  Thunder−armed.   
16 Soma,  do thou most  rich in sweets,  a gladdening  drink  most  dear to Gods,   
Flow  to the sieve  to bring  us wealth.   
17 For Indra,  living  men adorn the Tawny  Courser  in the streams,  Indu,  the giver  of delight.   
18 Pour  for us, Soma,  wealth  in gold,  in horses  and heroic  sons,   
Bring  hither  strength  in herds  of kine.   
19 For Indra  pour ye on the fleece  him very sweet  to taste,  who longs.   
For battle as it were  in war.  
20 The singers,  seeking  help,  adorn  the Sage  who must  be decked  with songs:   
Loud  bellowing  the Steer  comes  on,  
21 The singers  with their thoughts  and hymns  have,  in the stream  of sacrifice,   
Caused  Soma,  active  Steer,  to roar.  
22 God, working  with mankind,  flow on; to Indra  go thy gladdening  juice:   
To Vayu  mount  as Law commands   Rig Veda – English Translation  
23 O Soma,  Pavamana,  thou pourest  out wealth  that brings  renown:   
Enter  the lake,  as one we love.   
24 Soma  thou flowest  chasing  foes and bringing  wisdom  and delight:   
Drive  off the folk who love not Gods.   
25 The Pavamanas  have  been  poured,  the brilliant  drops  of Soma  juice,   
For holy lore of every  kind.   
26 The Pavamanas  have  been  shed,  the beautiful  swift Soma−drops,   
Driving  all enemies  afar.  
27 From,  heaven,  from  out the firmament,  hath Pavamana  been  effused   
Upon  the summit  of the earth.   
28 O Soma,  Indu,  very wise,  drive,  being  purified,  with thy stream   
All foes,  all Raksasas  away.   
29 Driving  the Raksasas  afar, O Soma,  bellowing,  pour for us  
Most  excellent  and splendid  strength.   
30 Soma,  do thou secure  for us the treasures  of the earih  and heaven,   
Indu,  all boons  to be desired.   
 
HYMN  LXIV.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. Soma,  thou art a splendid  Steer,  a Steer, O God,  with steerlike  sway:   
Thou  as a Steer  ordainest  laws.   
2 Steer−strong  thy might  is as a steer's,  steerstrong  thywood,  steer−like  thy drink   
 
A Steer  indeed,  O Steer,  art thou.   
3 Thou,  Indu,  as a vigorous  horse,  hast neighed  together  steeds  and kine:   
Unbar  for us the doors  to wealth.   
4 Out of desire  of cows  and steeds  and horses.  potent  Soma−drops,   
Brilliant  and swift,  have been  effused.   
5 They  purified  in both the hands,  made  beautiful  by holy men,   
Flow  onward  to the fleecy  cloth.   
6 Thes e Soma  juices  shall  pour forth  all treasures  for the worshipper   
From  heaven  and earth  and firmament.   
7 The streams  of Pavamana,  thine,  Finder  of all, have  been  effused,   
Even  as Surya's  rays of light.   
8 Making  the light that shines  from  heaven  thou flowest on to every  form   
Soma,  thou swellest  like a sea.  
9 Urged  on thou sendest  out thy voice,  O Pavamana;  thou hast moved,   
Like the God Surya,  to the sieve.   
10 Indu,  Enlightener,  Friend,  hath been  purified  by the sages'  hymns:   
So starts  the charioteer  his steed−   
11 Thy God−delighting  wave  which  hath flowed  to purifying  seive,   
Alighting  in the home  of Law.   
12 Flow  to our sieve,  a gladdening  draught  that hath most  intercourse  with Gods,   
Indu,  to Indra  for his drink.   
13 Flow  onward  with a stream  for food, made  beautiful  by sapient  men:   
Indu with sheen  approach  the milk.   
14 While  thou art cleansed,  Song−Lover,  bring  comfort  and vigour  to the folk,  Rig Veda – English Translation  
Poured,  Tawny  One!  on milk and curds.   
15 Purified  for the feast  of Gods,  go thou to Indra's  special  place,  
Resplendent,  guided  by the strong.   
16 Accelerated  by the hymn,  the rapid  drops  of Soma  juice   
Have  flowed,  urged  onward,  to the lake.   
17 Easily  have  the living  drops,  made  beautiful,  approached  the lake,   
Yea, to the place  of sacrifice.   
18 Compass  about,  our faithful  Friend,  all our possessions  with thy might:   
Guard,  hero like, our sheltering  home.   
19 Loud  neighs  the Courser  Etasa,  with singers,  harnessed  for the place,   
Guided  for travel  to the lake.   
20 What  time the Swift  One resteth  in the golden place  of sacrifice,   
He leaves  the foolish  far away.   
21 The friends  have  sung  in unison,  the prudent  wish  to sacrifice:   
Down  sink the unintelligent.   
22 For Indra  girt by Maruts,  flow,  thou Indu,  very rich in sweets,   
To sit in place  of sacrifice.   
23 Controlling  priests  and sages  skilled  in holy song  adorn  thee well:   
The living  make  thee beautiful.   
24 Aryaman,  Mitra,  Varuna  drink  Pavamana's  juice,  yea, thine:   
O Sage,  the Maruts  drink  thereof.   
25 O Soma,  Indu,  thou while  thou art purified  urgest  onward  speech.   
Thousandfold,  with the lore of hymns.   
26 Yea, Soma,  Indu,  while  thou art purified  do thou bring  to us  
Speech  thousandfold  that longs  for war.  
27 O Indu,  Much−invoked,  while  thou art purifying,  as the Friend.   
Of these  men enter  thou the lake.  
 
28 Bright  are these  Somas  blent  with milk,  with light that flashes  brilliantly.  And form  that utters  loud 
acclaim.   
29 Led by his drivers,  and sent forth,  the Strong  Steed  hath come  nigh for spoil,   
Like warriors  when  they stand  arrayed.   
30 Speciall y, Soma,  coming  as a Sage  from  heaven  to prosper  us,  
Flow  like the Sun for us to see.  
 
HYMN  LXV.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. THE,  glittering  maids  send Sura forth,  the glorious  sisters,  close−allied,   
Send  Indu forth,  their mighty  Lord.   
2 Pervade,  O Pavamana,  all our treasures  with repeated  light,   
God,  coming  hither  from  the Gods.   
3 Pour  on us, Pavamana,  rain, as service  and rain praise  for Gods:   
Pour  all to be our nourishment.   
4 Thou  art a Steer  by lustre:  we, O Pavamana,  faithfully   
Call upon  thee the Splendid  One.   
5 Do thou,  rejoicing,  nobly−armed!  pour upon  us heroic  strength:   
O Indu,  come  thou bitherward.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
6 When  thou art cleansed  with both the hands  and dipped  in waters,  with the wood.   
Thou  comest  to the gathering−place.   
7 Sing forth  your songs,  as Vyasva  sang,  to Soma  Pavamana,  to,  
The Mighty  One with thousand  eyes;   
8 Whose  coloured  sap they drive  with stones,  the yellow  meath−distilling  juice,   
Indu for Indra,  for his drink.   
9 We seek to gain the friendly  love of thee that Strong  and Mighty  One,   
Of thee the winner  of all wealth.   
10 Flow  onward  with thy stream,  a Steer,  inspiriting  the Maruts'  Lord,   
Winning  all riches  by thy might.   
11 I send thee forth  to battle  from  the press,  O Pavamana,  Strong,   
Sustainer,  looker  on the light.   
12 Acknowledged  by this song of mine,  flow,  tawny−coloured,  with thy stream   
Incite  to battle  thine  ally.  
13 O Indu,  visible  to all pour out for us abundant  food:   
Soma,  be thou our prosperer.   
14 The pitchers,  Indu,  with thy streams  have  sung  aloud  in vigorous  might   
Enter  them,  and let Indra  drink.   
15 O thou whose  potent  gladdening  juice  they milk out with the stones,  flow on,  
Destroyer  of our enemies.   
16 King  Pavamana  is implored  with holy songs,  on man's  behalf,   
To travel  through  the firmament.   
17 Bring  us, O Indu,  hundredfold  increase  of kine,  and noble  steeds,   
The gift of fortune  for our help.   
18 Pressed  for the banque t of the Gods,  O Soma,  bring  us might,  and speed,   
Like beauty  for a brilliant  show.   
19 Soma,  flow on exceeding  bright  with loud roar to the wooden  vats,  
Falcon−like  resting  in thine  home.   
20 Soma,  the Water−winner  flows  to Indra,  Vayu,  Varuna,   
To Visn u and the Marut  host.   
 
21 Soma  , bestowing  food upon  our progeny,  from  every  sides,   
Pour  on us riches  thousandfold   
22 The Soma  juices  which  have  been  expressed  afar or near at hand,   
Or there  on Saryanavan's  bank,   
23 Those  pressed  among  Arjikas,  presse d among  the active,  in men's  homes,   
Or pressed  among  the Races  Five−   
24 May these  celestial  drops,  expressed,  pour forth  upon  us, as they flow,   
Rain  from  the heavens  apd hero strength.   
25 Urged  forward  o'er the ox−hide  flows  the Lovely  One of tawny  hue,  
Lauded  by Jamadagni's  song.   
26 Like horses  urged  to speed,  the drops,  bright,  stirring  vital power,  when  blent   
With  milk,  are beautified  in streams.   
27 So they who toil with juices  send thee forward  for the Gods'  repast:   
So with this splendour  flow thou on.  
28 We choose  to−day  that chariot−steed  of thine,  the Strong,  that brings  us bliss,   
The Guardian,  the desire  of all,  
29 The Excellent,  the Gladdener,  the Sage  with heart  that understands,   Rig Veda – English Translation  
The Guardian,  the desire  of all;  
30 Who  for ourselves,  O thou Most  Wise,  is wealth  and fair intelligence,   
The Guardian,  the desire  of all.  
 
HYMN  LXVI.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. FOR  holy lore of every  sort, flow onward  thou whom  all men love.  A Friend  to be besought  by friends.
  
2 O'er all thou rulest  with these  Two which,  Soma  Pavamana,  stand,   
Turned,  as thy stations,  hitherward.   
3 Wise  Soma  Pavamana,  thou encompassest  on every  side  
Thy stations  as the seasons  come.   
4 Flow  onward,  generating  food,  for precious  boons  of every  kind,   
A Friend  for friends,  to be our help.   
5 Upon  the lofty  ridge  of heaven  thy bright  rays with their essences,   
Soma,  spread  purifying  power.   
6 O Soma,  these  Seven  Rivers  flow,  as being  thine,  to give command:   
The Streams  of milk run forth  to thee.   
7 Flow  onward,  Soma  in a stream,  effused  to gladden  Indra's  heart,   
Bringing  imperishable  fame.   
8 Driving  thee in Vivasvan's  course,  the Seven  Sisters  with their hymns   
Made  melody  round  thee the Sage.   
9 The virgins  deck thee o'er fresh  streams  to drive  thee to the sieve  when  thou,   
A singer, bathest  in the wood.   
10 The streams  of Pavamana,  thine,  Sage,  Mighty  One,  have  pouredthem  forth.   
Like coursers  eager  for renown.   
11 They  have  been  poured  upon  the fleece  towards  the meath−distilling  vat:  
The holy songs  have  sounded  forth.   
12 Like milch−kine  coming  home,  the drops  of Soma  juice  have  reached  the lake,   
Have  reached  the place  of sacrifice.   
13 O Indu,  to our great  delight  the running  waters  flow to us,  
When  thou wilt robe thyself  in milk.   
 
14 In this thy friendship,  and with thee to help us, fain to sacrifice,   
Indu,  we crave  thy friendly  love.   
15 Flow  on, O Soma,  for the great  Viewer  of men,  for gain of Idne  
Enter  thou into Indra's  throat.   
16 Best art thou,  Soma,  of the great,  Strongest  of strong  ones,  Indu:  thou  
As Warrior  ever hast prevailed.   
17 Mightier  even  than the strong,  more  valiant  even  than the brave,   
More  libpral  than the bountiful,   
18 Soma,  as Sura,  bring  us food,  win offspring  of our bodies:  we  
Elect  thee for our friendship,  we elect  thee for companionship.   
19 Agni,  thou pourest  life; send down  upon  us food and vigorous  strength;   
Drive  thou misfortune  far away,   
20 Agni  is Pavamana,  Sage,  Chief  Priest  of all the Races  Five:   
To him whose  wealth  is great  we pray.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
21 Skilled  in thy task, O Agni,  pour splendour  with hero strength  on us,  
Granting  me wealth  that nourishes.   
22 Beyond  his enemies  away  to sweet  praise  Pavamana  flows,   
Like Surya  visible to all.  
23 Adorned  by living  men,  set forth  for entertainment,  rich in food,   
Far−sighted  Indu is a Steed.   
24 He, Pavamana,  hath produced  the lofty  Law,  the brilliant  light,   
Destroying  darkness  black  of hue.  
25 From  tawny  Pavamana,  the Destroyer,  radiant  streams  have  sprung,   
Quick  streams  from  him whose  gleams  are swift.   
26 Best rider  of the chariot,  praised  with fairest  praise  mid beauteous  ones,   
Gold−gleaming  with the Marut  host,   
27 May Pavamana,  best to win the booty,  penetrate  with rays,   
Giving  the singer  hero strength.   
28 Over  the fleecy  sieve  hath flowed  the drop effused:  to Indra  comes   
Indu while  he is purified   
29 This Soma,  through  the pressing−stones,  is sporting  on the oxhide,  and  
Summoning  Indra  to the draught.   
30 O Pavamana,  bless us, so that we may live, with that bright  milk  
Of thine  which  hath been  brought  from  heaven.   
 
HYMN  LXVII.  Soma  and Others.  
1. THOU,  Soma,  hast a running  stream,  joyous,  most  strong  at sacrifice:  Flow  bounteously  bestowing  we
alth.  
2 Effused  as cheerer of the men,  flowing  best gladdener,  thou art  
A Prince  to Indra  with thy juice.   
3 Poured  forth  by pressing−stones,  do thou with loud roar send us in a stream   
Most  excellent  illustrious  might.   
4 Indu,  urged  forward,  floweth  through  the fleecy  cloth:  the Tawny  One  
With  his loud roar hath brought  as strength.   
5 Indu,  thou flowest  through  the fleece,  bringing  felicities  and fame,   
And,  Soma,  spoil  and wealth  in kine.   
6 Hither,  O Indu,  bring  us wealth  in steeds  and cattle  hundredfold:   
Bring  wealth,  O Soma,  thousandfold.   
 
7 In purifying,  through  the sieve  the rapid  drops  of'Soma  juice   
Come  nigh to Indra  in their course.   
8 For Indra  floweth  excellent  Indu,  the noblest  Soma  juice   
The Living  for the Living  One.   
9 The glittering  maids  send Sura forth  they with their song have  sung  aloud   
To Pavamana  dropping  meath.   
10 May Pusan,  drawn  by goats,  be our protector,  and on all his paths   
Bestow  on us our share  of maids.   
11 This Soma  flows  like gladdening  oil for him who wears  the braided  locks:   
He shall  give us our share  of maids.   
12 This Soma  juice,  O glowing  God,  flows  like pure oil, effused  for thee:   Rig Veda – English Translation  
He shall  give us our share  of maids.   
13 Flow  onward,  Soma,  in thy stream,  begetter  of the sages'  speech:   
Wealth−giver  among  Gods  art thou.   
14 The Falcon dips within  the jars: he wrap.him  in his robe and goes  
Loud  roaring  to the vats of wood.   
15 Soma,  thy juice  hath been effused  and poured  into the pitcher:  like  
A rapid  hawk  it rushes  on.  
16 For Indra  flow most  rich in sweets,  O Soma,  bringing  him delight.   
17 They  were  sent forth  to feast  the Gods,  like chariots  that display  their strength.   
18 Brilliant,  best givers  of delight,  these  juices  have  sent Vayu  forth.   
19 Bruised  by the press−stones  and extolled,  Soma,  thou goest  to the sieve,   
Giving  the worshipper  hero strength.   
20 This juice  bruised  by the pressing−stones  and lauded  passes  through  the sieve,   
Slayer  of demons,  through  the fleece.   
21 O Pavamana,  drive  away  the danger,  whether  near at hand   
Or far remote,  that finds  me here.   
22 This day may Pavamana  cleanse  us with his purifying  power,   
Most  active  purifying  Priest.   
23 O Agni,  with the cleansing  light diffused  through  all thy fiery  glow,   
Purify  thou this prayer  of ours.   
24 Cleanse  us with thine  own cleansing  power,  O Agni,  that is bright  with flame,   
And by libations  poured  to thee.   
25 Savitar,  God,  by both of these,  libation,  purifying  power,   
Purify  me on every  side.  
26 Cleanse  us, God Savitar,  with Three,  O Soma,  with sublimest  forms,   
Agni,  with forms  of power  and might.   
27 May the Gods'  company  make  me clean,  and Vasus  make  rue pure by song.   
Purify  me, ye General  Gods;  O Jatavedas,  make  me pure.   
28 Fill thyself  full of juice,  flow forth,  O Soma,  thou with all thy stalks,   
The best oblation  to the Gods.   
29 We with our homage  have  approached  the Friend  who seeks  our wondering  praise,   
Young,  strengthener  of the solemn  rite.  
30 Lost is Alayya's  axe. O Soma,  God do thou send it back  hither  in thy flow  
Even,  Soma,  God,  if 'twere  a mole.   
31 The man who reads  the essence  stored  by saints,  the Pavamani  hymns,   
Tastes  food completely  purified,  made  sweet  by Matarisvan's  touch.   
32 Whoever  reads  the essence  stored  by saints,  the Pavamani  hymns,   
Sarasvati  draws  forth  for him water  and butter,  milk and meath.   
 
HYMN  LXVIII.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. THE  drops  of Soma  juice  like cows  who yield  their milk have  flowed  forth,  rich in meath,  unto the Shi
ning 
One,   
And,  seated  on the grass,  raising  their voice,  assumed  the milk,  the covering  robe wherewith  the udders  
stream.   
2 He bellows  with a roar arourd  the highest  twigs:  the Tawny  One is sweetened  as he breaks  them  up.  Rig Veda – English Translation  
Then  passing  through  the sieve  into the ample  room,  the God throws  off the dregs  according  to his wish.   
3 The gladdening  drink  that measured  out the meeting  Twins  fills full with milk the Eternal  Ever−waxing  
Pair.  
Bringing  to light the Two great  Regions  limitless,  moving  above  them  he gained  sheen  that never  fades.   
4 Wandering  through,  the Parents,  strengthening  the floods,  the Sage  makes  his place  swell  with his own 
native  might.   
The stalk  is mixed  with grain:  he comes  led by the men together  with the sisters,  and preserves  the Head.   
5 With  energetic  intellect  the Sage  is born,  deposited  as germ  of Law,  far from  the Twins.   
They  being  young  at first showed  visibly  distinct  the Creature  that is half−concealed  and half−exposed.   
6 The sages  knew  the form  of him the Gladdener,  what  time the Falcon  brought  the plant  from  far away.   
Him who assures  success  they beautified  in streams,  the stalk  who yearned  therefor,  mighty  and meet for 
praise.   
7 Together  with the Rsis,  with their prayers  and hymns  ten women  deck  thee,  Soma,  friendly  when  effuse
d.  
Led by the men,  with invocations  of the Gods,  through  the fleece,  thou hast given  us strength  to win the s
poil.  
8 Songs  resonant  with praise  have  celebrated  him. Soma,  Friend,  springing  forth  with his fair company.   
Even  him who rich in meath,  with undulating  stream,  Winnner  of Wealth,  Immortal,  sends  his voice  from  
heaven,   
9 He sends  it into all the region  forth  from  heaven.  Soma,  while he is filtcred,  settles  in the jars.  
With  milk and waters  is he decked  when  pressed  with stones:  Indu,  when  purified,  shall  find sweet  rest an
d 
room.   
10 Even  thus poured  forth  How  on thy way,  O Soma,  vouchsafing  us most  manifold  lively  vigour.   
We will invoke  benevolent  Earth  and Heaven.  Give  us, ye Gods,  riches  with noble  heroes.   
 
HYMN  LXIX.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. LAID  like an arrow  on the bow the hymn  hath been  loosed  like a young  calf to the udder  of its dam.   
As one who cometh  first with full stream  she is milked  the Soma  is impelled  to this man's  holy rites.   
2 The thought  is deeply  fixed;  the savoury  juice  is shed;  the tongue  with joyous  sound  is stirring  in the 
mouth;   
And Pavamana,  like the shout  of combatants,  the drop rising  in sweet  juice,  is flowing  through  the fleece.   
3 He flows  about  the sheep−skin,  longing  for a bride:  he looses  Aditi's  Daughters  for the worshipper.   
The sacred  drink  hath come,  gold−tinted,  well−restrained:  like a strong  Bull he shines,  whetting  his manly  
might.   
4 The Bull is bellowing;  the Cows  are coming  nigh:  the Goddesses  approach  the God's  own resting−place.
  
Onward  hath Soma  passed  through  the sheep's  fair bright  fleece,  and hath,  as 'twere,  endued  a garment  ne
wly 
washed.   
5 The golden−hued,  Immortal,  newly  bathed,  puts on a brightly  shining  vesture  that is never  harmed.   
He made  the ridge  of heaven  to be his radiant  robe,  by sprinkling  of the bowls  from  moisture  of the sky.  
6 Even  as the beams  of Surya,  urging  men to speed,  that cheer  and send to sleep,  together  rush they forth,   
These  swift  outpourings  in long course  of holy rites:  no form  save only Indra  shows  itself  so pure.   
7 As down  the steep  slope  of a river  to the vale,  drawn  from  the Steer  the swift  strong  draughts  have  foun
d a Rig Veda – English Translation  
way.   
 
Well  be it with the men and cattle  in our home.  May powers,  O Soma,  may the people  stay with us.  
8 Pour  out upon  us wealth  in goods,  in gold,  in steeds,  in cattle  and in corn,  and great  heroic  strength.   
Ye, Soma,  are my Fathers,  lifted  up on high as heads  of heaven  and makers  of the strength  of life.  
9 These  Pavamanas  here,  these  drops  of Soma,  to Indra  have  sped forth  like cars to booty.   
Effused,  they pass the cleansing  fleece,  while,  gold−hued,  they cast their covering  off to pour the rain do
wn.  
10 O Indu,  flow thou on for lofty  Indra,  flow blameless,  very gracious,  foe−destroyer.   
Bring  splendid  treasures  to the man who lauds  thee.  O Heaven  and Earth,  with all the Gods  protect.  us.  
 
HYMN  LXX.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. THE  three  times  seven  Milch−kine  in the eastern  heaven  have  for this Soma  poured  the genuine  milky  
draught.   
Four  other  beauteous  Creatures  hath he made  for his adornment,  when  he waxed  in strength  through  holy 
rites.   
2 Longing  for lovely  Amrta,  by his wisdom  he divided,  each apart  from  other,  earth  and heaven.   
He gladly  wrapped  himself  in the most  lucid  floods,  when  through  their glory  they found  the God's  
resting−place.   
3 May those  his brilliant  rays he ever free from  death,  inviolate,  for both classes  of created  things,−   
Rays  wherewith  powers  of men and Gods  are purified.  Yea, even  for this have  sageswelcomed  him as Kin
g.  
4 He, while  he is adorned  by the ten skilful  ones,  that he too in the Midmost  Mothers  may create,   
While  he is watching  o'er the lovely  Amrta's  ways,  looks  on both races  as Beholder  of mankin d.  
5 He, while  he is adorned  to stream  forth  mighty  strength,  rejoices  in his place  between  the earth  and heav
en.  
The Steer  dispels  the evil−hearted  with his might,  aiming  at offerings  as an archer  at the game.   
6 Beholding,  as it were,  Two Mother  Cows,  the Steer  goes roaring  on his way even  as the Maruts  roar.  
Knowing  Eternal  Law,  the earliest  light of heaven,  he, passing  wise,  was chosen  out to tell it forth.   
7 The fearful  Bull is bellowing  with violent  might,  far−sighted,  sharpening  his yellowcoloure d horns.   
Soma  assumes  his seat in the well−fashioned  place:  the cowhide  and the sheepskin  are his ornament.   
8 Bright,  making  pure his body  free from  spot and stain,  on the sheep's  back  the Golden−coloured  hath 
flowed  down.   
Acceptable  to Mitra,  Vayu,  Varuna, he is prepared  as threefold  meal  by skilful  men.   
9 Flow  on for the God's  banquet,  Soma,  as a Steer,  and enter  Indra's  heart,  the Soma's  reservoir.   
Bear  us beyond  misfortune  ere we be oppres.  sed. the man who knows  the land directs  the man who asks.   
10 Urged  like a car−steed  flow to strength,  O Soma:  Indu,  flow onward  to the throat  of Indra.   
Skilled,  bear us past, as in a boat o'er water:  as battling  Hero  save us from  the foeman.   
 
HYMN  LXXI.  Soma  Pavamana,  
1. THE  guerdon  is bestowed:  the Mighty  takes his Seat,  and, ever−Watchful,  guards  from  fiend  and evil 
sprite.   
Gold−hued,  he makes  the cloud  his diadem,  the milk his carpet  in both worlds,  and prayer  his robe of stat
e.  
2 Strong,  bellowing,  he goes,  like one who slays  the folk; he lets this hue of Asuras  flow off from  him,  Rig Veda – English Translation  
Throws  off his covering,  seeks  his father's  meeting−place,  and thus makes  for himself  the bright  robe he 
assumes.   
3 Onward  he flows,  from  both the hands,  pressed  out with stones:  excited  by the prayer,  the water  makes  
him 
wild.  
He frolics  and draws  near,  completes  his work  with song,  and bathes  in streams  to satisfy  the worshipper.   
4 They  pour out meath  around  the Master  of the house,  Celestial  Strengthener  of the mountain  that gives  
might;   
 
In whom,  through  his great  power s, oblation−eating  cows  in their uplifted  udder  mix their choicest  milk.   
5 They,  the ten sisters,  on the lap of Aditi,  have sent him forward  like a car from  both the arms.   
He wanders  and comes  near the Cow's  mysterious  place,  even  the place  which  his inventions  have produc
ed.  
6 Like as a falcon  to his home,  so speeds  the God to his own golden  wisely−tashioned  place  to rest.  
With  song  they urge the darling  to the sacred  grass:  the Holy  One goes like a courser  to the Gods.   
7 From  far away,  from  heaven,  the redhued  noted  Sage,  Steer  of the triple  height,  hath sung  unto the kine.
  
With  thousand  guidings  he, leading  this way and that, shines,  as a singer,  splendidly  through  many  a morn
.  
8 His covering  assumes  a radiant  hue; where'er  he comes  into the fight  he drives  the foe afar.  
The Winner  of the Floods,  with food he seeks  the host of heaven,  he comes  to praises  glorified  with milk.   
9 Like a bull roaming  round  the herds  he bellows:  he hath assumed  the brilliancy  of Surya.   
Down  to the earth  hath looked  the heavenly  Falcon:  Soma  with wisdom  views  all living  creatures.   
 
HYMN  LXXII.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. THEY  cleanse  the Gold−hued:  like a red Steed  is he yoked,  and Soma  in the jar is mingled  with the mil
k.  
He sendeth  out his voice,  and many  loving  friends  of him the highly  lauded  hasten  with their songs.   
2 The many  sages  utter words  in unison,  while  into Indra's  throat  they pour the Soma  juice,   
When,  with the ten that dwell  together  closely  joined,  the men whose  hands  are skilful  cleanse  the lovely  
meath.   
3 He goes upon  his way,  unresting,  to the cows,  over the roaring  sound  which  Sarya's  Daughter  loves.   
The Falcon  brought  it to him for his own delight:  now with the twofold  kindred  sisters  is his home.   
4 Wash ed by the men,  stone−pressed,  dear on the holy grass,  faithful  to seasons,  Lord  of cattle  from  of ol
d,  
Most  liberal,  completing  sacrifice  for men,  O Indra,  pure bright  Soma,  Indu,  flows  for thee.   
5 O Indra,  urged  by arms  of men and poured  in streams,  Soma flows  on for thee after.his  Godlike  kind.   
Plans  thou fulfillest,  gatherest  thoughts  for sacrifice:  in the bowls  sits the Gold−hued  like a roosting  bird.  
6 Sages  well−skilled  in work,  intelligent,  drain  out the stalk  that roars,  the Sage,  the Everlastin g One.   
The milk,  the hymns  unite  them  with him in the place  of sacrifice,  his seat who is produced  anew.   
7 Earth's  central  point,  sustainer  of the mighty  heavens,  distilled  into the streams,  into the waters'  wave,   
As Indra's  thunderbolt,  Steer  with farspreading  wealth,  Soma  is flowing  on to make  the heart  rejoice.   
8 Over  the earthly  region  flow thou on thy way,  helping  the praiser  and the pourer,  thou Most  Wise.   
Let us not lack rich treasure  reaching  to our home,  and may we clothe  ourselves  in manifold  bright  wealth
.  
9 Hither,  O Indu,  unto us a hundred  gifts of steeds,  a thousand  gifts of cattle  and of gold,   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Measure  thou forth,  yea, splendid  ample  strengthening  food do thou,  O Pavamana,  heed  this laud of ours.   
 
HYMN  LXXIII.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. THEY  from the spouting  drop have sounded  at the rim: naves  speed  together  to the place  of sacrifice.   
That Asura  hath formed,  to seize,  three  lofty heights.  The ships  of truth  have  borne  the pious  man across.   
2 The strong  Steers,  gathering,  have  duly stirred  themselves,and  over the stream's  wave  the friends  sent fo
rth 
the song.   
Engendering  the hymn,  with flowing  streams  of meath,  Indra's  dear body  have  they caused  to wax in stren
gth.  
3 With  sanctifying  gear they sit around  the song:  their ancient  Father  guards  their holy work  from  harm.   
Varuna  hath o'erspread  the mighty  sea of air. Sages  had power  to hold him in sustaining  floods.   
4 Sweet−tongued,  exhaustless,  they have  sent their voices  down  togetlier,  in heaven's  vault  that pours  a 
thousand  streams.   
His wildly−restless  warders  never  close  an eye: in every  place  are found  the bonds  that bind man last.  
5 O'er Sire and Mother  they have  roared  in unison  bright  with the verse  of praise,  burning  up riteless  men,
  
Blowing  away  with supernatural  might  from  earth  and from  the heavens  the swarthy  skin which  Indra  hat
es.  
 
6 Those  which,  as guides  of song  and counsellors  of speed,  were  manifested  from  their ancient  dwelling  
place,−   
From  these  the eyeless  and the deaf have  turned  aside:  the wicked  travel  not the pathw ay of the Law.   
7 What  time the filter  with a thousand  streams  is stretched,  the thoughtful  sages  purify  their song therein.   
Bright−coloured  are their spies,  vigorous,  void of guile,  excellent,  fair to see, beholders  of mankind.   
8 Guardian  of Law,  most  wise, he may not be deceived:  three  Purifiers  hath he set within  his heart.   
With  wisdom  he beholds  all creatures  that exist:  he drives  into the pit the hated  riteliess  ones.   
9 The thread  of sacrifice  spun  in the cleansing  sieve,  on Varuna's  tongue−tip,  by supernatural  might,−   
This,  by their striving,  have  the prudent  ones attained:  he who hath not this power  shall  sink into the pit.  
 
HYMN  LXXIV.  Soma  Pavamana  
1. BORN  like a youngling  he hath clamoured  in the wood,  when  he, the Red, the Strong,  would  win the li
ght 
of heaven.   
He comes  with heavenly  seed that makes  the water  swell:  him for wide−spreading  shelter  we implore  wit
h 
prayer.   
2 A far−extended  pillar  that supports  the sky the Soma−stalk,  filled  full, moves  itself  every  way.   
He shall  bring  both these  great  worlds  while  the rite proceeds:  the Sage  holds  these  who move!  together  a
nd 
all food.   
3 Wide  space  hath he who follows  Aditi's  right  path,  and mighty,  well−made  food,  meath  blent  with Som
a 
juice;   
He who from  hence  commands  the rain, Steer  of the kine,  Leader  of floods,  who helps  us hence,  who claiRig Veda – English Translation  
ms 
our laud.   
4 Butter  and milk are drawn  from  animated  cloud;  thence  Amrta  is produced,  centre  of sacrifice.   
Hini the Most  Bounteous  Ones,  ever united,  love;  him as ouir Friend  the Men who make  all swell  rain do
wn.  
5 The Soma−stalk  hath roared,  following  with the wave:  he swells  with sap for man the skin which  Gods  
enjoy.   
Upon  the lap of Aditi  he lays the germ,  by means  whereof  we gain children  and progeny.   
6 In the third  region  which  distils  a thousand  streams,  may the Exhaustless  Ones  descend  with procreant  
power.   
The kindred  Four  have  been  sent downward  from  the heavens:  dropping  with oil they bring  Amrta  and sa
cred 
gifts.   
7 Soma  assumes  white  colour  when  he strives  to gain:  the bounteous  Asur a knows  full many  a precious  b
oon.  
Down  the steep  slope,  through  song,  he comes  to sacrifice,  and he will burst  the water−holding  cask of 
heaven,   
8 Yea, to the shining  milk−anointed  beaker,  as to his goal,  hath stepped  the conquering  Courser.   
Pious−soul ed men have  sent their giffi of cattle  unto Kaksivan  of the hundred  winters.   
9 Soma,  thy juice  when  thou art blended  with the streams,  flows,  Pavamana,  through  the long wool  of the 
sheep.   
So, cleansed  by sages.  O best giver  of delight,  grow  sweet  for Indra, Pavamana!  for his drink.   
 
HYMN  LXXV.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. GRACIOUSLY−MINDED  he is flowing  on his way to win dear names  o'er which  the Youthful  One gr
ows 
great.   
The Mighty  and Far−seeing  One hath mounted  now the mighty  Surya's  car which  moves  to every  side.  
2 The Speaker,  unassailable  Master  of this hymn,  the Tongue  of sacrifice  pours  forth  the pleasant  meath.   
Within  the lustrous  region  of the heavens  the Son makes  the third  secret  name  of Mother  and of Sire.  
 
3 Sending  forth  flashes  he hath bellowed  to the jars, led by the men into the golden  reservoir.   
The milky  streams  of sacrifice  have sung  to him: he of the triple  height  shines  brightly  through  the morns.
  
4 Pressed  by the stones,  with hymns,  and graciously  inclined,  illuminating  both the Parents,  Heaven  and 
Earth,   
He flows  in ordered  season  onward  through  the flee, a current  of sweet  juice  still swelling  day by day.  
5 Flow  onward,  Soma,  flow to bring  prosperity:  cleansed  by the men,  invest  thee with the milky  draught.   
What  gladdening  drinks  thou hast, foaming,  exceeding  strong,  even  with these  incite  Indra  to give us weal
th.  
 
HYMN  LXXVI.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. ON flows  the potent  juice,  sustainer  of the heavens,  the strength  of Gods,  whom  men must  hail with sh
outs 
of joy.  Rig Veda – English Translation  
The Gold−hued,  started  like a courser  by brave  men,  impetuously  winneth  splendour  in the streams.   
2 He takes  his weapons,  like a hero,  in his hands,  fain to win light,  car−borne,  in forays  for the kine.   
Indu,  while  stimulating  India's  might,  is urged  forward  and balmed  by sages  skilful  in their task.  
3 Soma,  as thou art purified  with flowing  wave,  exhibiting  thy strength  enter  thou Indra' s throat.   
Make  both worlds  stream  for us, as lightning  doth the clouds:  mete  out exhaustless  powers  for us, as 'twer
e 
through  song.   
4 Onward  he flows,  the King  of all that sees the light:  the Rsis'  Lord  hath raised  the song  of sacrifice;   
Even  he who is adorned  with Surya's  arrowy  beam,  Father  of hymns,  whose  wisdom  is beyond  our reach.   
5 Like as a bull to herds,  thou flowest  to the pail, bellowing  as a steer  upon  the water's  lap.  
So, best of Cheerers,  thou for Indra  flowest  on that we, with thy protect ion, may o'ercome  in fight.   
 
HYMN  LXXVII.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. MORE  beauteous  than the beautiful,  as Indra's  bolt, this Soma,  rich in sweets,  hath clamoured  in the va
t.  
Dropping  with oil, abundant,  streams  of sacrifice  flow unto him like milch−kine,  lowin g, with their milk.   
2 On flows  that Ancient  One whom,  hitherward,  from  heaven,  sped through  the region  of the air, the Falc
on 
snatched.   
He, quivering  with alarm  and terrified  in heart  before  bow−armed  Krsanu,  holdeth  fast the sweet.   
3 May those  first freshest  drops  of Soma  juice  effused  flow on, their way to bring  us mighty  strength  in ki
ne.  
Beauteous  as serpents,  worthy  to be looked  upon,  they whom  each sacred  gift and all our prayers  have 
pleased.   
4 May that much−lauded  Indu,  with a heart  inclined  to us, well−knowing,  fight  against  our enemies.   
He who hath brought  the germ  beside  the Strong  One's  seat moves  onward  to the widely−opcned  stall of k
ine.  
5 The active  potent  juice  of heaven  is flowing  on, great  Varuna  whom  the forward  man can ne'er  deceiv e.  
Mitra,  the Holy,  hath been  pressed  for troubled  times,  neighing  like an impatient  horse  amid  the herd,   
 
HYMN  LXXVIII.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. RAISING  his voice  the King  hath flowed  upon  his way:  invested  with the waters  he would  win the kin
e.  
The fleece  retains  his solid  parts  as though  impure,  and bright  and cleansed  he seeks  the special  place  of 
Gods.   
2 Thou,  Soma,  art effused  for Indra  by the men,  balmed  in the wood  as wave,  Sage,  Viewer  of mankind.   
Full many  are the paths  whereon  thou mayest  go: a thousand  bay steeds  hast thou resting  in the bowls.   
3 Apsarases  who dwell  in waters  of the sea, sitting  within,  have  flowed  to Soma  wise of heart.   
They  urge the Master  of the house  upon  his way,  and to the Eternal  Pavamana  pray for bliss.   
 
4 Soma  flows  on for u's as winner  of the kine,  winner  of thousands,  cars, water,  and light,  and gold;   
He whom  the Gods  have  made  a gladdening  draught  to drink,  the drop most  sweet  to taste,  weal−bringing
, 
red of hue.  
5 Soma,  as Pavamana  thou,  our faithful  Friend,  making  for us these  real treasures,  flowest  on.  Rig Veda – English Translation  
Slay thou the enemy  both near and,far  away:  grant  us security  and ample  pasturage.   
 
HYMN  LXXI X. Soma  Pavamana.  
1. SPONTANEOUS  let our drops  of Soma  juice  flow on, pressed,  golden−hued,  among  the Gods  of lofty  
heaven.   
Perish  among  us they who give no gifts of food!  perish  the godless!  May our prayers  obtain  success.   
2 Forward  to us the drops,  distilling  meath,  shall  flow,  like riches  for whose  sake we urge the horses  on.  
Beyond  the crafty  hindering  of all mortal  men may we continually  bear precious  wealth  away.   
3 Yea, yerily,  foe of hate shown  to himself  is he, yea, verity,  destroyer  too of other hate.   
As thirst  subdueth  in the desert,  conquer  thou,  O Soma  Pavarnana,  men of evil thoughts.   
4 Near  kin to thee is he, raised  loftiest  in the heavens:  upon  the earth's  high ridge  thy scions  have grown  f
orth.  
The press−stones  chew  and crunch  thee on the ox's hide:  sages  have  milked  thee with their hands  into the 
streams.   
5 So do they hurry  on thy strong  and beauteous  juice,  O Indu,  as the first ingredient  of the draught.   
Bring  low, thou Pavamana,  every  single  foe, and be thy might  shown  forth  as sweet  and gladdening  drink.
  
 
HYMN  LXXX.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. ON flows  the stream  of Soma  who beholds  mankind:  by everlasting  Law he calls the Gods  from heave
n.  
He lightens  with the roaring  of Br aspati:  h the lakes  have not contained  the pourings  of juice.   
2 Thou,  powerful  Soma,  thou to whom  the cows  have  −lowed,  ascendest  bright  with sheen,  thine  
iron−fashioned  home.   
Thou,  lengthening  our princes'  life and high renown,  flowest  for Indra  as his might  to gladdening  drink.   
3 Best giver  of delight,  he flows  to Indra's  throat,  robing  himself  in might,  Auspicious  One,  for fame.   
He spreads  himself  abroad  to meet  all things  that be: the vigorous  Tawny  Steed flows  sporting  on his way
.  
4 The men,  the ten swift  fingers,  milk thee out for Gods,  even  thee most  rich in meath,  with thousand  flo
wing  
streams.   
Soma  who winnest  thousands,  driven  by the men,  expressed  with stones,  bring,  as thou flowest,  all the Go
ds.  
5 Deft−handed  men with stones,  the ten swift  fingers,  drain  thee into waters,  thee,  the Steer  enriched  with 
sweets.   
Thou,  Soma,  gladdening  Indra,  and the Heavenly  Host,  flowest  as Pavamana  like a river's  wave.   
 
HYMN  LXXXI.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. ONWARD  to Indra's  throat  move,  beauteously  adorned,  the waves  of Soma  as he purifies  himself,   
When  they,  brought  forward  with the lovely  curd of kine,  effused,  have  cheered  the Hero  to bestow  his gif
ts.  
2 Hither  hath Soma  flowed  unto the beakers,  like a chario t−horse,  a stallion  swift  upon  his way.   
Thus,  knowing  both the generations,  he obtains  the rights  and dues of Gods  from  yonder  and from  hence.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
3 While  thou art cleansed,  O Soma,  scatter  wealth  on us; Indu,  bestow  great  bounty  as a liberal  Prince.   
Giver  of life, with wisdom  help to opulence;  strew  not our home  possessions  far away  from  us.  
4 Hither  let Pusan  Pavamana  come  to us, Varuna,  Mitra,  bountiful,  of one accord,   
The Maruts,  Asvins,  Vayu,  and Brhaspati,  Savitar,  Tvastar,  tractable  Sarasvati.   
 
5 Both Heaven  and Earth,  the all−invigorating  Pair, Vidhatar,  Aditi,  and Aryaman  the God,
 Bhaga  who blesses  men,  the spacious  Firmament,−let  all the Gods  in Pavamana  take delig
ht. 
 
HYMN  LXXXII.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. 1. EVEN  as a King  hath Soma,  red and tawny  Bull,  been pressed:  the Wondrous  One hath bellow
ed to the 
kine.   
While  purified  he passes  through  the filtering  fleece  to seat him hawk−like  on the place  that drops  with oi
l.  
 
2. 2. To glory  goest  thou,  Sage  with disposing  skill,  like a groomed  steed  thou rusbest  forward  to the
 prize.   
O Soma,  be thou gracious,  driving  off distress:  thou goest,  clothed  in butter,  to a robe of state.   
3 Parjanya  is the Father  of the Mighty  Bird:  on mountains,  in earth's  centre  hath he made  his home.   
The waters  too have flowed,  the Sisters,  to the kine:  he meets  the pressing−stones  at the beloved  rite.  
4 Thou  givest  pleasure  as a wife delights  her lord. Listen,  O Child  of Pajri,  for to thee I speak.   
Amid  the holy songs  go on that we may live: in time of trouble,  Soma,  watch  thou free from  blame.   
5 As to the men of old thou camest,  Indu unharmed,  to strengthen,  winning  hundreds,  thousands,   
So now for new felicity  flow onward:  the waters  follow  as thy law ordaineth.   
 
 
HYMN  LXXXIII.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. SPREAD  is thy cleansing  filter, Brahmanaspati:  as Prince,  thou enterest  its limbs  from  every  side.  
The raw, whose  mass  hath not been  heated  gains  not this: they only which  are dressed,  which  bear,  attain  t
o 
it.  
2 High  in the seat of heaven  is spread  the Scorcher's  sieve:  its threads  are standing  separate,  glittering  wit
h 
light.   
The Swift  Ones  favour  him who purifieth  this: with consciousness  they stand  upon  the height  of heaven.   
3 The foremost  spotted  Steer  hath made  the Mornings  shine,  and yearning  after strength  sustains  all things 
that be.  
By his high wisdom  have  the mighty  Sages  wrought:  the Fathers  who behold  mankind  laid down  the germ
,  
4 Gandharva  verily  protects  his dwellingplace;  Wondrous,  he guards  the generations  of the Gods.   
Lord  of the snare,  he takes  the foeman  with the snare:  those  who are most  devout  have  gained  a share  of 
meath.   
5 Rich  in oblations!  robed  in cloud,  thou corapassest  oblation,  sacrifice,  the mighty  seat of Gods.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
King,  on thy chariot−sieve  thou goest  up to war, and with a thousand  weapons  winnest  lofty fame.   
 
HYMN  LXXXIV.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. FLOW,  cheering  Gods,  most  active,  winner  of the flood,  for Indra,  and for Vayu,  and for Varuna.   
Bestow  on us to−day  wide  room  with happiness,  and in tbine  ample  dwelling  laud the Host  of Heaven.   
2 He who hath come  anear  to creatures  that have  life, Immortal  Soma  flows  onward  to all of them.   
Effecting,  for our aid, both union  and release,  Indu,  like Surya,  follows  closely  after Dawn.   
3 He who is poured  with milk,  he who within  the plants  hastes  bringing  treasu re for the happiness  of God
s,  
He, poured  forth  in a stream  flows  with the lightning's  flash,  Soma  who gladdens  Indra  and the Host  of 
Heaven.   
4 Winner  of thousands,  he, this Soma,  flows  along,  raising  a vigorous  voice  that wakens  with the dawn.   
Indu with winds  drives  on the ocean  of the air, he sinks  within  the jars, he rests in Indra's  heart.   
5 The kine with milk dress  him who makes  the milk increase,  Soma,  amid  the songs,  who finds  the light o
f 
heaven.   
 
Winner  of wealth,  the effectual  juice  is flowing  on, Singer  and Sage  by wisdom,  dear as heaven  itself.  
 
HYMN  LXXXV.  Soma  Pavamana.  
I. FLOW  on to Indra,  Soma,  carefully  effused:  let sickness  stay afar together  with the fiends.   
Let not the double−tongued  delight  them  with thy juice.  here be thy flowing  drops  laden  with opulence.   
2 O Pavamana,  urge us forward  in the fight  thou art the vigour  of the Gods,  the well−loved  drink.   
Smite  thou our enemies  who raise  the shout  of joy: Indra,  drink  Soma  juice,  and drive  away  our foes.   
3 Unharmed,  best Cheerer,  thou,  O Indu,  flowest  on: thou,  even  thou thyself,  art Indra's  noblest  food.   
Full many  a wise man lifts to thee the song  of praise,  and hails  thee with a kiss as Sovran  of this world.   
4 Wond rous,  with hundred  streams,  hymned  in a thousand  songs,  Indu pours  out for Indra  his delightrul  
meath.   
Winning  us land and waters,  flow thou hitherward:  Rainer  of bounties,  Soma,  make  broad  way for us.  
5 Roaring  within  the beaker  thou art balmed  with milk: thou passest  through  the fleecy  filter  all at once.   
Carefully  cleansed  and decked  like a prizewinning  steed,  O Soma,  thou hast flowed  down  within  Indra's  
throat.   
6 Flow  onward  sweet  of flavour  for the Heavenly  Race,  for Indra  sweet,  whose  name  is easily invoked:   
Flow  sweet  for Mitra,  Varuna,  and Vayu,  rich in meath,  inviolable  for Brhaspati.   
7 Ten rapid  fingers  deck the Courser  in the jar: with hymns  the holy singers  send their voices  forth.   
The filtering  juices  hasten  to their eulogy,  the drops  that gladden  find their way to Indra's  heart.   
8 While  thou art purified  pour on us hero strength,  great,  far−extended  shelter,  spacious  pasturage.   
Let no oppression  master  this our holy work:  may we, O Indu,  gain all opulence  through  thee.   
9 The Steer  who sees afar hath risen  above  the sky: the Sage  hath caused  the lights  of heaven  to give their 
shine.   
The. King  is passing  through  the filter  with a roar:  they drain  the milk of heaven  from  him who looks  on 
men.   
10 High  in the vault  of heaven,  unceasing,  honey−tongued,  the Loving  Ones  drain  out the mountain−haunRig Veda – English Translation  
ting 
Steer,−   
The drop that hath grown  great  in waters,  in the lake meath−rich,  in the stream's  wave  and in the cleansin
g 
sieve.   
11 The Loving  Ones  besought  with many  voices  the Eagle  who had flown  away to heaven.   
Hymns  kiss the Youngling  worthy  of laudation,  resting  on earth,  the Bird of golden  colour.   
12 High  to heaven's  vault  hath the Gandharva  risen,  beholding  all his varied  forms  and figures.   
His ray hath shone  abroad  with gleaming  splendour:  pure,  he hath lighted  both the worlds,  the Parents.   
 
HYMN  LXXXVI.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. THY  gladdening  draughts,  O Pavamana,  urged  by song  flow swiftly  of themselves  like sons of fleet−fo
ot 
mares.   
The drops  of Soma  juice,  those  eagles  of the heavens,  most  cheering,  rich in meath,  rest in the reservoir.   
2 As rapid  chariot−steeds,  so turne d in several  ways  have thine  exhilarating  juices  darted  forth,   
Soma−drops  rich in meath,  waves,  to the Thunder−armed,  to Indra,  like milch−kine  who seek their calf w
ith 
milk.   
3 Like a steed  urged  to battle,  finder  of the light;  speed  onward  to the cloud− born reservoir  of heaven,   
A Steer  that o'er the woolly  surface  seeks  the sieve,  Soma  while  purified  for Indra's  nourishment.   
4 Fleet  as swift  steeds,  thy drops,  divine,  thought−swift,  have  been,  O Pavamana,  poured  with milk into th
e 
vat.  
The Rsis have  poured  in continuous  Soma  drops,  ordainers  who adorn  thee,  Friend  whom  Rsis love.   
5 O thou who seest  all things,  Sovran  as thou art and passing  strong,  thy rays encompass  all abodes.   
 
Pervading  with thy natural  powers  thou flowest  on, and as the whole  world's Lord,  O Soma,  thou art King
.  
6 The beams  of Pavamana,  sent from  earth  and heaven,  his ensigns  who is ever steadfast,  travel  round.   
When  on the sieve  the Golden−hued  is cleansed,  he rests within  the vats as one who seats  him in his place
.  
7 Served  with fair rites he flows,  ensign  of sacrifice:  Soma  advances  to the special  place  of Gods.   
He speeds  with thousand  currents  to the reservoir,  and passes  through  the filter  bellowing  as a bull.  
8 The Sovran  dips him in the seain  and the streams,  and set in rivers  with the waters'  wave  moves  on.  
High  heaven's  Sustainer  at the central  point  of earth,  raised  on the fleecy  surface  Pavamana  stands.   
9 He on whose  high decree  the heavens  and earth  depend  nath roared  and thundered  like the summit  of th
e 
sky.  
Soma flows  on obtaining  Indra's  friendly  love,  and, as they purify  him, settles  in the jars.  
10 He, light of sacrifice  distils  delicious  meath,  most  wealthy,  Father  and begetter  of the Gods.   
He, gladdening,  best of Cheerers,  juice!hat  Indra  loves,  enriches  with mysterious  treasure  earth  and heave
n.  
11 The vigorous  and far−seeing  one, the Lord  of heaven,  flows,  shouting  to the beaker,  with his thousand  
streams.   
Coloured  like gold he rests in seats  where  Mitra  dwells,  the Steer  made  beautiful  by rivers  and by sheep.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
12 In forefront  of the rivers  Pavamana  speeds,  in forefront  of the hymn,  foremost  among  the kine.   
He shares  the mighty  booty  in the van of war: the well−armed  Steer  is purified  by worshippers.   
13 This heedful  Pavamana,  like a bird sent forth,  hath with his wave  flowed  onward  to the fleecy  sieve.   
O Indra,  through  thy wisdom,  b thy thought,  O Sage,  Soma  flows  bright  and pure between  the earth  and 
heaven.   
14 He, clad in mail that reaches  heaven,  the Holy  One,  filling  the firmament  stationed  amid  the worlds,   
Knowing.  the realm  of light,  hath come  to us in rain: he summons  to himself  his own primeval  Sire.  
15 He who was first of all to penetrate  his form  bestowed  upon  his race wide  shelter  and defence.   
From  that high station  which  he hath in loftiest heaven  he comes  victorious  to all encounters  here.   
16 Indu hath started  for Indra's  special  place  and slights  not as a Friend  the promise  of his Friend.   
Soma  speeds  onward  like a youth  to youtlitial  maids,  and gains  the beaker  by a course  of bundred  paths.   
17 Your  songs,  exhilarating,  tuneful,  uttering  praise,  are come  into the placns  where  the people  meet.   
Worshippers  have  exalted  Soma  with their hymns,  and milch  kine have  come  near to meet  him with their 
milk.   
18 O Soma,  Indu,  while  they cleanse  thee,  pour on us accumulateds  Plentiful,  nutritious  food,   
Which,  ceaseless,  thrice  a day shall  yield  us hero power  enriched  with store  of nourishment,  and strength,  
and 
Meath.   
19 Far−seeing  Soma  flows,  the Steer,  the Lord  of hymns,  the Furtherer  of day, of morning,  and of heaven.
  
Mixt  with the streams  he caused  the beakers  to resound,  and with the singers'  aid they entered  Indra's  hear
t.  
20 On, with the prudent  singers,  flows  the ancient  Sage  and guided  by the men hath roared  about  the vats.
  
Producing  Trita's  name,  may he pour forth  the meath,  that Vayu  and that Indra  may become  his Friends.   
21 He, being  purified,  hath made  the Mornings  shine:  this, even  this is he who gave  the rivers  room.   
He made  the Three  Times  Seven  pour out the milky  flow:  Soma,  the Cheerer,  yields  whate'er  the heart  fin
ds 
sweet.   
22 Flow,  onward,  Soma,  in thine  own celestial  forms,  flow,  Indu,  poured  within  the beaker  and the sieve.   
Sinking  into the throat  of Indra  with a roar, led by the men thou madest  Surya  mount  to heaven.   
23 Pressed  out with stones  thou flowest  onward  to the sieve,  O Indu,  entering  the depths  of Indra's  throat.   
Far−sighted  Soma,  now thou lookest  on mankind:  thou didst  unbar  the cowstall  for the Angirases.   
24 In thee,  O Soma,  while  thou purifitedst  thee,  high−thoughted  sages,  seeking  favour,  have  rejoiced.   
Down  from  the heavens  the Falcon  brought  thee hitherward,  even  thee,  O Indu,  thee whom  all our hymns  
adorn.   
25 Seven  Milch−kine  glorify  the Tawny−coloured  One while  with his wave  in wool  he purifies  himself.   
The living  men,  the mighty,  have  impelled  the Sage  into the waters'  lap, the place  of sacrifice.   
26 Indu,  attaining  purity,  plunges  through  the foe, making  Ilis ways  all easy for the pious  man.   
Making  the kine his mantle,  he, the lovely  Sage,  runs like a sporting  courser  onward  through  the fleece.   
27 The ceaseless  watery  fountains  with their hundred  streams  sing,  as they hasten  near,  to him the 
 
Golden−hued   
Him,  clad in robes  of milk,  swift  fingers  beautify  on the third  height  and in the luminous  realm  of heaven.
  
28 These  are thy generations  of celestial  seed thou art the Sovran  Lord  of all the world  of life.  
This universe,  O Pavamana,  owns  thy sway;  thou,  Indu,  art the first establisher  of Law.   
29 Thou  art the sea, O Sage  who bringest  alf to light:  under  thy Law are these  five regions  of the world.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Tlou  reachest  out beyond  the earth,  beyond  the heavens:  thine  are the lights,  O Pavamana,  thine  the Sun.  
30 Thou  in the filter,  Soma  Pavamana,  art purified  to support  the region  for the Gods.   
The chief,  the longing  ones have  sought  to hold thee fast, and all these  living  creatures  have  been  turned  t
o 
thee.   
31 Onward  the Singer  travels  o'er the fleecy sieve.  the Tawny  Steer  hath bellowed  in the wooden  vats.  
Hymns  have  been  sung  aloud  in resonant  harmony,  and holy songs  kiss him, the Child  who claims  our pra
ise.  
32 He hath assumed  the rays of Surya  for his robe,  spinning,  as he knows  bow,  the triply−twisted  thread.   
He, guiding  to the newest  rules  of Holy  Law,  comes  as the Women's  Consort  to the special  place.   
33 On flows  the King  of rivers  and the Lord  of heaven:  he follows  with a shout  the paths  of Holy  Law.   
The Golden−hued  is poured  forth,  with his hundred  streams,  Wealth−bringer,  lifting  up his voice  while  
purified.   
34 Fain to be cleansed,  thou,  Pavamana,  pourest  out, like wondrous  Surya,  through  the fleece,  an ample  se
a.  
Purified  with the hands,  pressed  by the men with stones,  thou speedest  on to mighty  booty−bringing  war.  
35 Thou,  Pavamana,  sendest  food and power  in streams.  thou sittest  in the beakers  as a hawk  on trees,   
For Indra  poured  as cheering  juice  to make  him glad,  as nearest  and farseeing  bearer−up  of heaven.   
36 The Sisters  Seven, the Mothers,  stand  around  the Babe,  the noble,  new−born  Infant,  skilled  in holy son
g,  
Gandharva  of the floods,  divine,  beholding  men,  Soma,  that he may reign  as King  of all the world.   
37 As Sovran  Lord  thereof  thou Passest  through  these  worlds,  O Indu, harnessing  thy tawny  well−winged  
Mares.   
May they pour forth  for thee milk and oil rich in sweets:  O Soma,  let the folk abide  in thy decree.   
38 O Soma,  thou beholdest  men from  every  side:  O Pavamana,  Steer,  thou wanderest  through  these.   
Pour  out upon  us wealth  in treasure  and in gold:  may we have  strength  to live among  the things  that be.  
39 Winner  of gold and goods  and cattle  flow thou on, set as impregner,  Indu,  mid the worlds  of life.  
Rich  in brave  men art thou,  Soma,  who winnest  all: these  holy singers  wait upon  thee with the song.   
40 The wave  of flowing  meath  hath wakened  up desires:  the Steer  enrobed  in milk plunges  into the stream
s.  
Borne  on his chariot−sieve  the King  hath risen  to war, and with a thousand  rays hath won him high renow
n.  
41 Dear  to all life, he sends  triumphant  praises  forth,  abundant,  bringing  offspring,  each succeeding  day.  
From  Indra  crave  for us, Indu,  when  thou art quaffed,  the blessing  that gives  children,  wealth  that harbour
s 
steeds.   
42 When  days begin,  the strong  juice,  lovely,  golden−hued,  is recognized  by wisdom  more  and more  each 
day,  
He, stirring  both the Races,  goes between  the two, the bearer  of the word  of men and word  of Gods.   
43 They  balm  him, balm  him over balm  him thoroughly,  caress  the mighty  strength  and balm  it with the 
meath.   
They  seize  the flying  Steer  at the stream's  breathing−place:  cleansing  with gold they grasp  the Animal  her
ein.  
44 Sing forth  to Pavamana  skilled  in holy song:  the juice  is flowing  onward  like a mighty  stream.   
He.glideth  like a serpent  from  his ancient  skin,  and like a playful  horse  the Tawny  Steer  hath run.  
45 Dweller  in flood s, King,  foremost,  he displays  his might,  set among  living  things  as measurer  of days.   
Distilling  oil he flows,  fair, billowy,  golden−hued,  borne  on a car of light,  sharing  one hom−e  with wealth
.  Rig Veda – English Translation  
46 Loosed  is the heavens!  support,  the uplifted  cheering  juice:  the triply−mingled  draught  flows  round  int
o 
the worlds.   
The holy hymns  caress  the stalk  that claims  our praise,  when  singers  have  approached  his beauteous  robe 
with song.   
47 Thy strearns  that flow forth  rapidly  collected  run over the fine fleece  of the sheep  as thou art cleansed.   
When,  Indu,  thou art. balmed  with milk within  the bowl,  thou sinkest  in the jars, O Soma,  when  expressed
.  
48 Winner  of' power,  flow,  Soma,  worthy  of our laud:  run onward  to the fleece  as well−beloved  meath.   
 
Destroy,  O Indu, all voracious  Raksasas.  With  brave  sons in the assembly  let our speech  be bold.  
 
HYMN  LXXXVII.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. 1. RUN  onward  to the reservoir  and seat thee:  cleansed  by the men speed  forward  to the battle.   
Making  thee beauteous  like an able courser,  forth  to the sacred  grass  with reins  they lead thee.   
2 Indu,  the well−armed  God,  is flowing  onward,  who quells  the curse  and guards  from  treacherous  onslau
ght,  
Father,  begetter  of the Gods,  most  skilful,  the buttress  of the heavens  and earth's  supporter .  
 
2. 3. Rsi and Sage,  the Champion  of the people,  cleft and sagacious,  Usana  in wisdom,   
He hath discovered  even  their hidden  nature,  the Cows'  concealed  and most  mysterious  title.  
4 This thine  own Soma  rich in meath,  O Indra,  Steer  for the Steer,  hath flowed into the filter.   
The strong  Free−giver,  winning  hundreds,  thousands,  hath reached  the holy grass  that never  fails him.  
5 These  Somas  are for wealth  of countless  cattle,  renown  therefor,  and mighty  strength  immortal.   
These  have been  sent forth,  urified by strainers,  like steeds  who rusg to battle  fain for glory.   
6 He, while  he cleanses  him, invoked  of many,  hath flowed  to give the people  all enjoyment.   
Thou  whom  the Falcon  brought,  bring,  dainty  viands,  bestir  thyself  and send us wealth  and booty.   
7 This Soma,  pressed  into the cleansing  filter,  hath run as 'twere  a host let loose,  the Courser;   
Like a strong  bull who whets  his horns  kpen−pointed,  like a brave  warrior  in the fray for cattle.   
8 He issued  forth  from  out the loftiest  mountain,  and found kine hidden  somewhere  in a stable.   
Soma's  stream  clears  itself  for thee,  O Indra,  like lightning  thundering  through  the clouds  of heaven,   
9 Cleansing  thyselr,  and borne  along  with Indra,  Soma,  thou goest  round  the herd of cattle.   
May thy praise  help us, Mighty  One,  prompt  Giver,  to the full ample  food which  thou bestowest.   
 
 
HYMN  LXXXVIII.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. FOR  thee this Soma  is effused,  O Indra:  drink  of this juice;  for thee the stream  is flowing−   
Soma,  which  thou thyself  hast made  and chosen,  even  Indu,  for thy special  drink  to cheer  thee.   
2 Like a capacious  car hath it been  harnessed,  the Mighty;  to acquire  abundant  treasures.   
Then  in the sacrifice  they celebrated  all triumphs  won by Nahus  −n the battle.   
3 Like Vayu  with his team,  moving  at pleasure,  most  gracious  when  invoked  like both Nasatyas,   
Thou  art thyself  like the Wealth−Giver,  Soma!  who grants all boons,  like song−inspiring  Pusan.   
4 Like Indra  who hath done  great  deeds,  thou,  Soma,  art slayer  of the Vrtras,  Fort−destroyer.   
Like Pedu's  horse  who killed  the brood  of serpents,  thus thou,  O Soma,  slayest  every  Dasyu.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
5 Like Agni  loosed  amid  the forest,  fiercely  he winneth  splendour  in the running  waters.   
Like one who fights,  the roaring  of the mighty,  thus Soma  Pavamana  sends  his current.   
6 These  Somas  passing  through  the fleecy  filter,  like rain descending  from  the clouds  of heaven,   
Have  been effused  and poured  into the beakers,  swiftly  like rivers  running  lowly  seaward.   
7 Flow  onward  like the potent  band  of Maruts,  like that Celestial  Host  whom  none  revileth.   
Quickly  be gracious  unto us like waters,  like sacrifice  victorious,  thousand−fa shioned.   
8 Thine  are King  Varuna's  eternal  statutes,  lofty and deep,  O Soma,  is thy glory.   
All−pure  art thou like Mitra  the beloved,  adorable,  like Aryaman,  O Soma.   
 
HYMN  LXXXIX.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. 1. THIS  Chariot−horse  hath moved  along  the pathways,  and Pavamana  flowed  like rain from  hea
ven. With  us hath Soma  with a thousand  currents  sunk  in the wood,  upon  his Mother's  bosom.   
2. 2. King,  he hath clothed  him in the robe of rivers,  mounted  the straightest−going  ship of Order.   
 
Sped  by the Hawk  the drop hath waxed  in waters:  the father  drains  it, drains  the Father's  offspring.   
3 They  come  to him, red, tawny,  Lord  of Heaven,  the watchful  Guardian  of the meath,  the Lion.   
First,  Hero  in the fight,  he seeks  the cattle,  and with his eye the Steer  is our protector .  
4 They  harness  to the broad−wheeled  car the mighty  Courser  whose  back bears  meath,  unwearied,  awful.   
The twins,  the sisters  brighten  him, and strengthen−these  children  of one damethe  vigorous  Racer.   
5 Four  pouring  out the holy oil attend  him, sitting  together  in the same  container.   
To him they flow,  when  purified,  with homage,  and still, from  every  side, are first about  him.  
6 He is the buttress  of the heavens,  supporter  of earth,  and in his hand  are all the people.   
Be the team's  Lord  a well to thee the singer:  cleansed  is the sweet  plant's  stalk  for deed  of glory.   
7 Fighting,  uninjured  come  where  Gods  are feasted;  Soma,  as Vitra−slayer  flow for Indra.   
Vouchsafe  us ample  riches  very splendid  may we be masters  of heroic  vigour.   
 
HYMN  XC. Soma  Pava mana,  
1. URGED  On, the Father  of the Earth  and Heaven  hath gone  forth  like a car to gather  booty,   
Going  to Indra,  sharpening  his weapons,  and in his hand  containing  every  treasure.   
2 To him the tones  of sacred  song  have  sounded,  Steer  of the triple  height, the Life−bestower.   
Dwelling  in wood  as Varuna  in rivers,  lavishing  treasure  he distributes  blessings   
3 Great  Conqueror,  warnor−girt,  Lord  of all heroes,  flow on thy way as he who winneth  riches;   
With  sharpened.  arms,  with swift  bow,  never  vanquished  in battle,  vanquishing  in fight  the foemen.   
4 Giving  security,  Lord  of wide  dominion,  send us both earth  and heaven  with all their fulness.   
Striving  to win the Dawns,  the light,  the waters,  and cattle,  call to us abundant  vigour.   
5 O Soma,  gladden  Varu na and Mitra;  cheer,  Indu Pavamana!  Indra,  Visnu.   
Cheer  thou the Gods,  the Company  of Maruts:  Indu,  cheer  mighty  Indra  to rejoicing.   
6 Thus  like a wise and potent  King  flow onward,  destroying  with thy vigour  all misfortunes.   
For our well−spoken  hymn  give life, O Indu.  Do ye preserve  us evermore  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  XCI. Soma  Pavamana.  
1. As for a chariot−race,  the skilful  Speaker,  Chief,  Sage,  Inventor,  hath,  with song,  been  started.  The sist
ers ten upon  the fleecy  summit  drive  on the Car−horse  to the resting  places.  2 The drop of Soma,  pressed  Rig Veda – English Translation  
by wise Nahusyas,  becomes  the banquet  of the Heavenly  People−  Indu,  by hands  of mortal  men made  bea
uteous,  immortal,  with the sheep  and cows  and waters.  3 Steer  roaring  unto Steer,  this Pavamana,  this juic
e runs to the white  milk of the milch−cow.  Through  thousand  fine hairs  goes the tuneful  Singer,  like Sura 
by his fair and open  pathways.  4 Break  down  the, strong  seats  even  of the demons:  cleansing  thee,  Indu,  r
obd thyself  in vigour.  Rend  with thy swift  bolt, coming  from  above  them,  those  who are near and those  w
ho yet are distant.  5 Prepare  the forward  paths  in ancient  manner  for the new bymn,  thou Giver  of all boun
ties. Those  which  are high and hard for foes to conquer  may we gain from  thee,  Active!  Food−besto wer! 
6 So purifying  thee vouchsafe  us waters,  heaven's  light,  and cows,  offipring  and many  children.  Give  us h
ealth,  ample  land,  and lights,  O Soma,  and grant  us long to look upon  the sunshine.  
 
HYMN  XCII.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. THE  gold−hued  juice,  poured  out upon  the filter,  is started  like a car sent forth  to conquer.  He hath gai
ned song  and vigour  while  they cleansed  him, and hath rejoiced  the Gods  with entertainments.  2 He who 
beholdeth  man hath reached  the filter:  bearing  his name,  the Sage  hath sought  his dwelling.   
The Rsis came  to him, seven  holy singers,  when  in the bowls  he settled  as Invoker.   
3 Shared  by all Gods,  mobt  wise,  propitious,  Soma  goes,  while  they cleanse  him, to his constant  station.   
Let him rejoice  in all his lofty wisdom  to the Five Tribes  the Sage  attains  with labour.   
4 In thy mysterious  place,  O Pavamana  Soma,  are all the Gods,  the Thrice−Eleven.   
Ten on the fleecy  height,  themselves,  self−prompted,  and seven  fresh  rivers,  brighten  and adorn  thee.   
5 Now  let this be the truth  of Pavamana,  there  where  all singers  gather  them  together,   
That he hath given  us room  and made  the daylight,  hath holpen  Manu  and repelled  the Dasyu.   
6 As the priest  seeks  the station  rich in cattle,  like a true King  who goes to great  assemblies,   
Soma  hath sought  the beakers  while  they cleansed  him, and like a wild bull, in the wood  hath settled.   
 
HYMN  XCIII.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. TEN  sisters,  pouring  out the rain together,  swift−moving  thinkers  of the sage,  adorn  him.  
Hither  hath run the gold−hued  Child  of Surya  and reached  the vat like a fleet vigorous  courser.   
2 Even  as a youngling  crying  to his mothers,  the bounteous  Steer  hath flowed  along  to waters.   
As youth  to damsel,  so with milk he hastens  on to the. chose  meeting−place,  the beaker.   
3 Yea, swollen  is the udder  of the milch−cow:  thither  in streams  goes very sapient  Indu.   
The kine make  ready,  as with new−washed  treasur es, the Head  and Chief  with milk within  the vessels.   
4 With  all the Gods,  O Indu Pavamana,  while  thou art roaring  send us wealth  in horses.   
Hither  upon  her car come  willing  Plenty,  inclined  to us, to give us of her treasures.   
5 Now  unto us mete  riches,  while  they cleansethee,  all−glorious,  swelling  wealth,  with store  of heroes.   
Long  be his life who worships,  thee,  O Indu.  May he, enriched  with prayer,  come  soon  and early.   
 
HYMN  XCIV.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. WHEN  beauties  strive  for him as for a charger,  then strive  the songs  like soldiers  for the sunlight.   
Acting  the Sage,  he flows  enrobed  in waters  and song  as 'twere  a stall that kine may prosper.   
2 The worlds  expand  to hirn who from  aforetime  found  light to spread  the law of life eternal.   
The swelling  songs,  like kine within  the stable,  in deep  devotion  call aloud  on Indu.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
3 When  the sage bears  his holy wisdom  round  him, like a car visiting  all worlds,  the Hero,   
Becoming  fame,  mid Gods,  unto the mortal,  wealth  to the skilled,  worth  praise  mid the Ever −present,   
4 For glory  born be hath come  forth  to glory:  he giveth  life and glory  to the singers.   
They,  clothed  in glory,  have  become  immortal.  He, measured  in his course,  makes  frays  successful.   
5 Stream  to us food and vigour,  kine and horses:  give us broad lights  and fill thGods  with rapture.   
All ther are easy things  for thee to master  thou,  Pavamana  Soma,  quellest  foemen.   
 
HYMN  XCV Soma  Pavamana.  
1. Loud  neighs  the Tawny  Steed  when  started,  settling  deep  in the wooden  vessel  while  they cleanse  him.  
Led by the men he takes  the milk for raiment:  then shall  he, through  his powers,  engender  praise−songs.   
2 As one who rows  drives  on his boat,  he, Gold−hued,  sends  forth  his voice,  loosed  on the path of Order.   
As God,  the secret  names  of Gods  he utters,  to be declared  on sacred  grass  more  widely.   
3 Hastening  onward  like the waves  of waters,  our holy hymns  are pressing  nigh to Soma.   
To him they come  with lowly  adoration,  and, longing,  enter  him who longs  to meet  them.   
4 They  drain  the stalk,  the Steer  who dwells  on mountains,  even  as a Bull who decks  him on the upland.   
Hymns  follow  and attend  him as he bellows:  Trita  bears  Varuna  aloft in ocean.   
5 Sending  thy voice  out as Director,  loosen  the Invoker's  thought,  O Indu,  as they cleanse  thee.   
 
While  thou and Indra  rule for our advantage,  may we be masters  of heroic  vigour.  
 
HYMN  XCVI.  Soma  Pavamana  
1. IN forefront  of the cars forth  goes the Hero,  the Leader,  winning  spoil:  his host rejoices.   
Soma  endues  his robes  of lasting  colours,  and blesses,  for his friends,  their calls on Indra.   
2 Men decked  with gold adorn  his golden  tendril,  incessantly  with steed−impelling  homage.   
The Friend  of Indra  mounts  his car well−knowing,  he comes  thereon  to meet  the prayer  we offer.   
3 O God,  for service  of the Gods  flow onward,  for food sublime,  as Indra's  drink,  O Soma.   
Making  the floods,  bedewing  earth  and heaven,  come  from  the vast, comfort  us while  we cleanse  thee  
4 Flow  for prosperity  and constant  Vigour,  flow on for happiness  and high perfection.   
This is the wish  of these  friends  assembled:  this is my wish,  O Soma  Pavamana.   
5 Father  of holy hymns,  Soma  flows  onward  the Father  of the earth,  Father  of heaven:   
Father  of Agni,  Surya's  generator,  the Father  who begat  Indra  and Visnu.   
6 Brahman  of Gods,  the Lead er of the poets,  Rsi of sages,  Bull of savage  creatures,   
Falcon  amid  the vultures,  Axe of forests,  over the cleansing  sieve  goes Soma  singing.   
7 He, Soma  Pavamana,  like a river,  hath stirred  the wave  of voice,  our songs  and praises.   
Beholding  these  inferior powers  in cattle,  he rests among  them  as a Steer  well−knowing.   
8 As Gladdener,  Warrior  never  harmed  in battle,  with thousand  genial  streams,  pour strength  and vigour.   
As thoughtful  Pavamana,  urge O Indu,  speeding  the kine,  the plant's  wave  on to Indra.  
9 Dear,  grateful  to the Gods,  on to the beaker  moves  Soma,  sweet  to Indra,  to delight  him.  
With  hundred  powers,  with thousand  currents,  Indu,  like a strong  car−horse,  goes to the assembly.   
10 Born  in old time as finder−out  of treasures,  drained  with the stone,  decking  himself  in waters,   
Warding  off curses,  King  of all existence,  he shall  find way for prayer  the while  they cleanse  him.  
11 For our sage fathers,  Soma  Pavamana,  of old performed,  by thee,  their sacred  duties.   
Fighting  unvanquished,  open the enclosures:  enrich  us with large  gifts of steeds  and heroes.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
12 As thou didst  flow for Manu  Life−bestowing,  Foe−queller,  Comforter,  rich in oblations,   
Even  thus flow onward  now conferring  riches:  combine  with Indra,  and bring  forth  thy weapons.   
13 Flow  onward,  Soma,  rich in sweets  and holy,.  enrobed  in waters  on the fleecy  summit.   
Settle  in vessels  that are full of fatness,  as cheering  and most  gladdening  drink  for Indra.   
14 Pour,  hundred−streamed,  winner  of thousands,  mighty  at the Gods'  banquet , Pour  the rain of heaven,   
While  thou with rivers  roarest  in the beaker,  and blent  with milk prolongest  our existence.   
15 Purified  with our holy hymns,  this Soma  o'ertakes  malignities  like some  strong  charger,   
Like fresh  milk poured  by Aditi,  like passa ge in ample  room,  or like a docile  car−horse.   
16 Cleansed  by the pressers,  armed  with noble  weapons,  stream  to us the fair secret  name  thou bearest.   
Pour  booty,  like a horse,  for love of glory  God,  Soma,  send us kine,  and send us Vayu.   
17 They  deck  him at his birth,  the lovely  Infant,  the Maruts  with their troop  adorn  the Car−horse.   
By songs  a Poet and a Sage  by wisdom,  Soma  joes singing  through  the cleansing  filter.   
18 Light−winner,  Rsi−mindcd,  Rsi−maker,  hymned  in a thousand  hymns,  Leader  of sages,   
A Steer  who strives  to gain his third  form,  Soma  is, like Viraj,  resplendent  as a Singer.   
19 Hawk  seated  in the bowls,  Bird wide−extended,  the Banner  seeking  kine and wielding  weapons,   
Following  close  the sea, the wave  of waters,  the great  Bull tells his fourth  form  and declares  it.  
20 Like a fair youth  who decorates  his body,  a courser  rushing  to the gain of riches,   
A steer  to herds,  so, flowing  to the pitcher,  he with a roar hath passed  into the beakers.   
21 Flow  on with might  as Pavamana,  Indu flow loudly  roaring  through  the fleecy  filter.   
Enter  the beakers  sporting,  as they cleanse  thee,  and let thy gladdening  juice  make  Indra  joyful.   
22 His streams  have  been  effused  in all their fulness,  and he hath entered,  balmed  with milk,  the goblets.   
Singing  his psalm,  well−skilled  in song,  a Chanter,  be comes  as 'twere  to his friend's  sister  roaring.   
23 Chasing  our foes thou comest,  Pavamana  Indu,  besting,  as lover  to his darling.   
 
As a bird flies and settles  in the forest,  thus Soma  settles,  purified,  in goblets.   
24 With  full stream  and abundant  milk,  O Soma,  thy beams  come,  like a woman,  as they cleanse  thee.   
He, gold−hued,  rich in boons,  brought  to the waters,  hath roared  within  the goblet  of the pious.   
 
HYMN  XCVII.  Soma  Pavamana  
1. MADE  pure by this man's  urgent  zeal and impulse  the God hath to the Gods  his juice  imparted.   
He goes,  effused  and singing,  to the filter,  like priest  to measured  seats  supplied  with cattle.   
2 Robed  in fair raiment  meet  to wear  in battle,  a mighty  Sage  pronouncing  invoca tions.   
Roll onward  to the beakers  as they cleanse  thee,  far−seeing  at the feast  of Gods,  and watchful.   
3 Dear,  he is brightened  on the fleecy  summit,  a Prince  among  us, nobler  than the noble.   
Roar  out as thou art purified,  run forward.  Do ye preserve  us evermore  with blessings.   
4 Let us sing praises  to the Gods:  sing loudly,  send ye the Soma  forth  for mighty  riches.   
Let him flow,  sweetly−flavoured,  through  the filter,  and let our pious  one rest in the pitcher.   
5 Winning  the friendship  of the Deities,  Indu flows  in a thousand  streams  to make  them  joyful.   
Praised  by the men after the ancient  statute,  he hath come  nigh,  for our great  bliss,  to Indra.   
6 Flow,  Gold−hued,  cleansing  thee,  to enrich  the singer:  let thy juice  go to Indra  to support  him.  
Come  nigh,  together  with the Gods,  for bounty.  Do ye preserve  us evermore  with blessings.   
7 The God declares  the Deities'  generations,  like Usana,  proclaiming  lofty  wisdom.   
With  brilliant  kin, far−ruling,  sanctifying,  the Boar  advances,  singing,  to the place s.  
8 The Swans,  the Vrsaganas  from  anear  us have  brought  their restless  spirit  to our dwelling.   
Friends  come  to Pavamana  meet  for praises,  and sound  in concert  their resistless  music.   
9 He follows  the Wide−strider's  rapid  movement:  cows  low, as 'twere,  to him who sports  at pleasure.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
He with the sharpened  horns  brings  forth  abundance:  the Silvery  shines  by night,  by day the Golden.   
10 Strong  Indu,  bathed  in milk,  flows  on for Indra,  Soma  exciting  strength,  to make  him joyful.   
He quells  malignities  and slays  the demons,  the King  of mighty  power  who brings  us comfort.   
11 Then  in a stream  he flows,  milked  out with press−stones,  mingled  with sweetness,  through  the fleecy  
filter−   
Indu rejoicing  in the love of Indra,  the God who gladdens,  for the God's  enjoyment.   
12 As he is purified  he pours  out treasures,  a God bedewing  Gods  with his own juices.   
Indu hath,  wearing  qualities  by seasons,  on the raised  fleece  engaged,  the ten swift  fingers.   
13 The Red Bull bellowing  to the kine advances,  causing  the heaven s and earth  to roar and tbunder.   
Well  is he beard  like Indra's  shout  in battle:  letting  this voice  be known  he hastens  hither.   
14 Swelling  with milk,  abounding  in sweet  flavours,  urging  the meath−rich  plant  thou goest  onward.   
Raising  a shout  thou flowes t as they cleanse  thee,  when  thou,  O Soma,  art effused  for Indra.   
15 So flow thou on inspiriting,  for rapture,  aiming  deatb−shafts  at him who stays  the waters,   
Flow  to us wearing  thy resplendent  colour,  effused  and eager  for the kine,  O Soma.   
16 Pleased  with us, Indu,  send us as thou flowest  good  easy paths  in ample  space  and comforts.   
Dispelling,  as 'twere  with a club,  misfortunes,  run o'er the height,  run o'er the fleecy  summit.   
17 Pour  on us rain celestial,  quickly  streaming,  refreshing,  fraught  with health  and ready  bounty.   
Flow,  Indu,  send these  Winds  thy lower  kinsmen,  setting  them  free like locks  of hair unbraided.   
18 Part, like a knotted  tangle,  while  they cleanse  thee,  O Soma,  righteous  and unrighteous  conduct.   
Neigh  like a tawny  courser  who is loosened,  come  like a youth,  O God,  a house−possessor.   
19 For the God's  service,  for delight,  O Indu,  run o'er the height,  run o'ver  the fleecy  summit.   
With  thousand  streams,  inviolate,  sweet−scented,  flow on for gain of strength  that conquers  heroes .  
20 Without  a car, without  a rein to guide  them,  unyoked,  like coursers  started  in the contest,   
These  brilliant  drops  of Soma  juice  run forward.  Do ye, O Deities,  come  nigh to drink  them.   
21 So for our banquet  of the Gods,  O Indu,  pour down  the rain of heaven  into the vessels.   
May Soma  grant  us riches  sought  with longing,  mighty,  exceeding  strong,  with store  of heroes.   
 
22 What  time the loving  spirit's  word  had formed  him Chief  of all food,  by statute  of the Highest,   
Then  loudly  lowing  came  the cows  to Indu,  the chosen,  well−loved  Master  in the beaker.   
23 The Sage,  Celestial,  liberal,  raining  bounties,  pours  as he flows  the Genuine  for the Truthful.   
The King  shall  be effectual  strength's  upholder:  he by the ten bright  reins  is mostly  guided.   
24 He who beholds  mankind,  made  pure with filters,  the King  supreme  of Deities  and mortals,   
From  days of old is Treasure−Lord  of riches:  he, Indu,  cherishes  fair well−kept  Order.   
25 Haste,  like a steed,  to vittory  for glory,  to Indra's  and to Vayu's  entertainm ent.  
Give  us food ample,  thousandfold:  be, Soma,  the finder−out  of riches  when  they cleanse  thee.   
26 Effused  by us let God−delighting  Somas  bring  as they flow a home  with noble  heroes.   
Rich  in all boons  like priests  acquiring  favour,  the worshippers  of heaven,  the best of Cheerers.   
27 So, God,  for service  of the Gods  flow onward,  flow,  drink  of Gods,  for ample  food,  O Soma.   
For we go forth  to war against  the mighty  make  heaven  and earth  well stablished  by thy cleansing.   
28 Thou,  yoked  by strong  men,  neighest  like a courser,  swifter  than thought  is, like an awful  lion.  
By paths  directed  hitherward,  the straightest,  send thou us happiness,  Indu,  while  they cleanse  thee.   
29 Sprung  from  the Gods,  a hundred  streams,  a thousand,  have  been  effused:  sages  prepare  and purge  the
m.  
Bring  us from  heaven  the means  of winnning,  Indu;  thou art−forerunnner  of abundant  riches.   
30 The streams  of days,  were  poured  as 'twere  from  heaven:  the wise King  doth not treat his friend  unkind
ly.  
Like a son following  his father 's wishes,  grant  to this family  success  and safety.   
31 Now  are thy streams  poured  forth  with all their sweetness,  when,  purified.  thou goest  through  the filterRig Veda – English Translation  
.  
The race of kine is thy gift, Pavarridna:  when  born thou madest  Surya  rich with brightness.   
32 Bright,  bellowing  aiong  the path of Order,  thou shinest  as the form  of life eternal.   
Thou  flowest  on as gladdening  drink  for Indra,  sending  thy voice  out with the hymns  of sages.   
33 Pouring  out streams  at the Gods'  feast  with service,  thou,  Soma,  lookest down,  a heavenly  Eagle.   
Enter  the Soma−holding  beaker,  Indu,  and with a roar approach  the ray of Sarya.   
34 Three  are the voices  that the Courser  utters:  he speaks  the thought  of prayer,  the law of Order.   
To the Cow's  Master  come  the Cows  inquiring:  the hymns  with eager  longing  come  to Soma.   
35 To Soma  come  the Cows,  the Milch−kine  longing,  to Soma  sages  with their hvmns  inquiring.   
Soma,  effused,  is purified  and blended  our hymns  and Trstup  songs  unite  in Soma.   
36 Thus,  Soma,  as we pour thee into vessels,  while  thou art purified  flow for our welfare.   
Pass into Indra  with a mighty  roaring  make  the voice  swell,  and generate  abundance.   
37 Singer  of true songs,  ever−watchful,  Soma  hath settled  in the ladles  when  they cleanse  him.  
Him the Adhvaryus,  paired  and eager,  follow,  leaders  of sacrifice  and skilful−handed.   
38 Cleansed  near the Sun as 'twere  he as Creator  hath filled  full heaven  and earth,  and hath disclosed  the
m.  
He by whose  dear help men gain all their wishes  shall  yield  the precious  meed  as to a victor.   
39 He, being  cleansed,  the Strengthener  and Increaser,  Soma  the Bounteous,  helped  us with his lustre,   
Wherewith  our sires of old who knew  the footsteps  found  light and stole  the cattle  from  the mountain.   
40 In the first vault  of heaven  loud roared  the Ocean,  King  of all being,  generating  creatures.   
Steer,  in the filter,  on the fleecy  summit,  Soma,  the Drop  effused,  hath waxen  mighty.   
41 Soma  the Steer,  in that as Child  of Waters  he chose  the Gods,  performed  that great  achievement.   
He, Pavamana,  granted  strength  to Indra;  he, Indu,  generated  light in Surya.   
42 Make  Vayu  glad,,  for furtherance  and bounty:  cheer  Varuna  and Mitra,  as they cleanse  thee.   
Gladden  the Gods,  gladden  the host of Maruts:  make  Heaven  and Earth  rejoice,  O God,  O Soma.  
43 Flow  onward  righteous  slayer  of the wicked,  driving  away  our enemies  and sickness,   
Blending  thy milk with milk which  cows  afford  us. We are thy friends,  thou art the Friend  of Indra.   
44 Pour  us a fount  of meath,  a spring  of treasure;  send us a hero son and happy  fortune.   
Be sweet  to India  when  they cleanse  thee,  Indu,  and pour down  riches  on us from  the ocean.   
45 Strong  Soma,  pressed,  like an impetuous  courser,  hath flowed  in stream  as a flood  speeding  downward
.  
Cleansed,  he hath settled  in his wooden  dwelling:  Indu hath flowed  with milk and with the waters.   
46 Strong,  wise,  for thee who longest  for his coming  this Soma  here flows  to the bowls,  O Indra.   
He, chariot−borne,  sun−bright,  and truly  potent,  was poured  forth  like the longing  of the pious.   
47 He, purified  with ancient  vital vigour,  pervading  all his Daughter's  forms  and figures,   
 
Finding  his threefold  refuge  in the waters,  goes singing,  as a priest,  to the assemblies.   
48 Now,  chariot−borne,  flow unto us, God Soma,  as thou art purified  flow to the saucers,   
Sweetest  in waters,  rich in meath,  and holy,  as Savitar  the God is, truthfulminded.   
49 To feast  him, flow mid song and hymn,  to Vayu,  flow purified  to Varuna  and Mitra.   
Flow  to the song−inspiring  car−borne  Hero,  to mighty  Indra,  him who wields  the thunder.   
50 Pour  on us garments  that shall  clothe  us meetly,  send,  purified,  miIch−kine,  abundant  yielders.   
God Soma,  send us chariot−drawing  horses  that they may bring  us treasures  bright  and golden.   
51 Send  to us in a stream  celestial  riches,  send us, when  thou art cleansed,  what  earth  containeth,   
So that thereby  we may acquir e possessions  and Rsihood  in Jamadagni's  manner.   
52 Pour  forth  this wealth  with this purification:  flow onward  to the yellow  lake,  O Indu.   
Here,  too, the Ruddy,  wind−swift,  full of wisdom,  Shall  give a son to him who cometh  quickly.   
53 Flow  on for us with this purification  to the famed  ford of thee whose  due is glory.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
May the Foe−queller  shake  us down,  for triumph,  like a tree's  ripe fruit,  sixty  thousand  treasures.   
54 Eagerly  do we pray for those  two exploits,  at the blue lake and Prsana,  wrought  in battle.   
He sent our enemies  to sleep  and slew thern,  and turned  away  the foolish  and unfriendly.   
55 Thou  comest  unto three  extended  filters,  and hasteriest  through  each one as they cleanse  thee.   
Thou  art the giver  of the gift, a Bhaga,  a Maghavan  for liberal lords,  O Indu.   
56 This Soma  here,  the Wise,  the All−obtainer,  flows  on his way as King  of all existence.   
Driving  the drops  at our assemblies,  Indu completely  traverses  the fleecy  filter.   
57 The Great  Inviolate  are kissing  Indu,  and singing  in his place like eager  sages.   
The wise men send him forth  with ten swift  fingers,  and balm  his form  with essence  of the waters.   
58 Soma,  may we, with thee as Pavamana,  pile up together  all our spoil  in battle.   
This boon  vouchsafe  us Varuna  and Mitra,  and Aditi  and Sindhu,  Earth  and Heaven.   
 
HYMN  XCVIII.  Soma  Pavamana  
1. STREAM  on us riches  that are sought  by many,  best at winning  strength   
Riches,  O Indu,  thousandfold,  glorious,  conquering  the great.   
2 Effused,  he hath,  as on a car, invested  him in fleecy  mail:  
Onward  hath Indu flowed  in streams,  impelled,  surrounded  by the wood.   
3 Effused,  this Indu hath flowed  on, distilling  rapture,  to the fleece:   
He goes erect,  as seeking  kine in stream,  with light,  to sacrifice.   
4 For thou thyself,  O Indu,  God,  to every mortal  worshipper   
Attractest  riches  thousandfold,  made  manifest  in hundred  forms.   
5 Good  Vrtra−slayer,  may we be still nearest  to this wealth  of thine   
Which  many  crave,  nearest  to food and happiness,  Resistless  One!   
6 Whom,  bright  with native  splendour,  crushed  between  the pair of pressingstones−   
The wavy  Friend  whom  Indra  loves−the  twice−five  sisters  dip and bathe,   
7 Him with the fleece  they purify,  brown,  golden−hued,  beloved  of all,  
Who  with exhilarating  juice  goes forth  to all the Deities.   
8 Through  longing  for this sap of yours  ye drink  what  brings  ability,   
Even  him who,  dear as heaven's  own light,  gives  to our princes  high renown.   
9 Indu at holy rites produced  you, Heaven  and Earth,  the Friends  of men,   
Hill−haunting  God the Goddesses.  They bruised  him where  the roar was loud.   
10 For Vrtra−slaying  Indra,  thou,  Soma,  art poured  that he may drink,   
Poured  for the guerdon−giving  man,  poured  for the God who sitteth  there.   
11 These  ancient  Somas,  at the break  of day, have  flowed  into the sieve,  
Snorting  away  at early  morn  these  foolish  evil−hearted  ones.   
12 Friends,  may the princes,  ye and we, obtain  this Most  Resplendent  One.   
 
Gain  him who hath the smell  of strength,  win him whose  home  is very strength.  
 
HYMN  XCIX.  Soma  Pavamana.  
1. THE Y for the Bold  and Lovely  One ply manly  vigour  like a bow:  joyous,  in front  of songs  they weave  
bright  raiment  for the Lord  Divine.   
2 And he, made  beautiful  by night,  dips forward  into strengthening  food',   Rig Veda – English Translation  
What  time the sacrificer's  thoughts  speed  on his way the Golden−hued.   
3 We cleanse  this gladdening  drink  of his the juice  which  Indra  chiefly  drinks−−−   
That which  kine took into their mouths,  of old, and princes  take it now.   
4 To him, while  purifying,  they have  raised  the ancient  psalm  of praise:   
And sacred  songs  which  bear the names  of Gods  have supplicated  him.  
5 They  purify  him as he drops,  courageous,  in the fleecy  sieve.   
Him they instruct  as messenger  to bear the sage's  morning  prayer.   
6 Soma,  best Cheerer,  takes  his seat, the while  they cleanse him in the bowls.   
He as it were  impregns  the cow,  and babbles  on, the Lord  of Song.   
7 He is effused  and beautified,  a God for Gods,  by skilful  men.   
He penetrates  the mighty  floods  collecting  all he knows  therein.   
8 Pressed,  Indu,  guided  by the men,  thou art led to the cleaning  sieve.   
Thou,  yielding  Indra  highest  joy, takest  thy seat within  the bowls.   
 
HYMN  C. Soma  Pavamana.  
I. THE  Guileless  Ones  are singing  praise  to Indra's  well beloved  Friend,   
As, in the morning  of its life, the mothers  lick the new−born  calf.  
2 O Indu,  while  they cleanse  thee bring,  O Soma,  doubly−waxing  wealth   
Thou  in the worshipper's  abode  causest  all treasures  to increase.   
3 Set free the. song which  mind  hath yoked,  even  as thunder  frees  the rain:  
All treasures  of the earth  and heaven,  O Soma,  thou dost multiply.   
4 Thy stream  when  thou art pressed  runs on like some  victorious  warrior's  steed   
Hastening  onward  through  the fleece  like a fierce  horse  who wins  the prize.   
5 Flow  on, Sage  Soma,  with thy stream  to give us mental power  and strength,   
Effused  for Indra,  for his drink,  for Mitra  and for Varuna.   
6 Flow  to the filter  with thy stream,  effused,  best winner,  thou,  of spoil,   
O Soma,  as most  rich in sweets  for Indra,  Visnu,  and the Gods.   
7 The mothers,  void of guile s, caress  thee Golden−coloured,  in the sieve,   
As cows,  O Pavamana,  lick the new−born  calf, as Law commands.   
8 Thou,  Pavamana,  movest  on with wondrous  rays to great  renown.   
Striving  within  the votary's  house  thou drivest  all the glooms  away.   
9 Lord  of great sway,  thou liftest  thee above  the heavens,  above  the earth.   
Thou,  Pavamana  hast assumed  thy coat of mail in majesty.   
 
HYMN  CI. Soma  Pavamana  
1. FOR  first possession  of your juice,  for the exhilarating  drink,  Drive  ye away  the dog, my friends,  drive 
ye the long−tongued  dog away.   
2 He who with purifying  stream,  effused,  comes  flowing  hitherward,   
 
Indu,  is like an able steed.   
3 The men with all−pervading  song  send unassailable  Soma  forth,   
By pressing−stones,  to sacrifice.   
4 The Somas,  very rich in sweets,  for which  the sieve  is destined,  flow,   
Effused,  the source  of Indra's  joy: may your strong  juices  reach  the Gods.   
5 Indu flows  on for Indra's  sake:  thus have  the Deities  declared.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
The Lord  of Speech  exerts  himself,  Ruler  of all, because  of might.  
6 Inciter  of the voice  of song,  with thousand  streams  the ocean  flows,   
Even  Soma,  Lord  of opulence,  the Friend  of Indra,  day by day.  
7 As Pusan,  Fortune,  Bhaga,  comes  this Soma  while  they make  him pure.   
He, Lord  of the multitude,  hath looked  upon  the earth  and heaven.   
8 The dear cows  lowed  in joyful  mood  together  to the gladdening  drink.   
The drops  as they were  purified,  the Soma  juices,  made  then paths.   
9 O Pavamana,  bring  the juice,  the mightiest,  worthy  to be famed,   
Which  the Five Tribes  have over them,  whereby  we may win opulence.   
10 For us the Soma  juices  flow,  the drops  best furtherers  of our weal,   
Effused  as friends  without  a spot,  benevolent,  finders  of the light.   
11 Effused  by means  of pressing−stones,  upon  the ox−hide  visible,   
They,  treasure−finders,  have  announced  food unto us from  every  side.  
12 Tlese  Soma  juices,  skilled  in song,  purified,  blent  with milk and curd,   
When  moving  and when  firmly  laid in oil, resemble  lovely  Suns.   
13 Let not the power  of men restrain  the voice  of the outpouring  juice:   
As Bhrgu's  sons chased  Makha,  so drive  ye the greedy  hound  away.   
14 The Friend  hath wrapped  him in his robe,  as in his parents  arms,  a son.  
He went,  as lover  to a dame,  to take his station  suitor−like.   
15 That Hero  who produces  strength,  he who hath propped  both worlds  apart,   
Gold−hued,  hath wrapped  him in the sieve,  to settle,  priest−like,  in his place.   
16 Soma  upon  the ox's skin through  the sheep's  wool  flows  purified.   
Bellowing  out, the Tawny  Steer  goes on to Indra's  special  place.  
 
HYMN  CIL Soma  Pavamana.  
1. THE  Child,  when  blended  with the streams,  speeding  the plan of sacrifice,   
Surpasses  all things  that are dear,  yea, from  of old.  
2 The place,  near the two pressing−stones  of Trita,  hath he occupied,   
Secret  and dear through  seven  lights  of sacrifice.   
3 Urge  to three  courses,  on the heights  of Trita,  riches  in a stream.   
He who is passing  wise measures  his courses  out.  
4 Even  at his birth  the Mothers  Seven  taught  him, for glory,  like a sage,   
So that he, firm and sure,  hath set his mind  on wealth.   
5 Under  his sway,  of one accord,  are all the guileless  Deities:   
Warriors  to be envied,  they,  when  they are pleased.   
6 The Babe  whom  they who strengthen  Law have  generated  fair to see,  
Much  longed  for at the sacrifice,  most  liberal  Sage,−   
7 To him, united,  of themselves,  come  the young  Parents  of the rite,  
When  they adorn  him, duly weaving  sacrifice.   
8 With  wisdom  and with radiant  eyes unbar  to us the stall of heaven,   
Speeding  at solemn  rite the plan of Holy  Law.   
 
HYMN  CIII. Soma  Pavamana.  
1. To Soma  who is purified  as ordering  Priest  the song  is raised:  Bring  meed,  as 'twere,  to one who makes
 thee glad with hymns.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
2 Blended  with milk and curds  he flows  on through  the long wool  of the sheep.   
The Gold−hued,  purified,  makes him three  seats  for rest.  
3 On through  the long wool  of the sheep  to the meath−dropping  vat he flows:   
The Rsis'  sevenfold  quire  hath sung aloud  to him.  
4 Shared  by all Gods,  Infallible,  the Leader  of our holy hymns,   
Golden−hued  Soma,  being  cleanse d, hath reached  the bowls.   
5 After  thy Godlike  qualities,  associate  with Indra,  go,  
As a Priest  purified  by priests,  Immortal  One.   
6 Like a car−horse  who shows  his strength,  a God effused  for Deities.   
The penetrating  Pavamana  flows  along.   
 
HYMN  CIV. Soma  Pavamana.  
1. SIT down,  O friends,  and sing aloud  to him who purifies  himself:  Deck  him for glory,  like a child,  with
 holy rites.   
2 Unite  him bringing  household  wealth,  even  as a calf, with mother  kine,   
Him who hath double  strength,  the God,  delight ing juice.   
3 Purify  him who gives  us power,  that he, most  Blessed  One,  may be  
A banquet  for the Troop,  Mitra,  and Varuna.   
4 Voices  have  sung  aloud  to thee as finderout  of wealth  for us:  
We clothe  the hue thou wearest  with a robe of milk.   
5 Thou,  Indu,  art the food of Gods,  O Sovran  of all gladdening  drinks:   
As Friend  for friend,  be thou best finder  of success.   
6 Drive  utterly  away  from  us each demon,  each voracious  fiend,   
The godless  and the false:  keep  sorrow  far away.   
 
HYMN  CV. Soma  Pavamana  
1. SING;  ye aloud,  O friends,  to him who makes  him pure for gladdening  drink:   
They  shall  make  sweet  the Child  with sacrifice  and laud.   
2 Like as a calf with mother  cows,  so Indu is urged  forth  and sent,  
Glorified  by our hymns,  the God−delighting  juice.   
3 Effectual  means  of power  is he, he is a banquet  for the Troop,   
He who hath been  effused,  most  rich in meath,  for Gods.   
4 Flow  to us, Indu,  passing,  strong,  effused,  with wealth  of kine and steeds:   
I will spread  forth  above  the milk thy radiant  hue.  
5 Lord  of the tawny,  Indu thou who art the God's  most  special  food,   
As Friend  to friend,  for splendour  be thou good  to men.   
6 Drive  utterly,  far away  from  us each godless,  each voracious  foe.  
O Indu,  overcome  and drive  the false  afar.  
 
HYMN  CVI. Soma  Pavamana.  
1. To Indra,  to the Mighty  Steer,  may these  gold−coloured  juices  go, Drops  rapidly  produced,  that find the
 light of heaven.   
2 Effused,  this juice  victorious  flows  for Indra,  for his maintenance.   