Rig Veda – English Translation  
Guard  us trom evil, Pusan,  guard  us strengtheners  of Law:  let not the evil−wisher  master  us.  
11 Her tooth  a deer,  dressed  in an eagle's  feathers,  bound  with cow−hide,  launched  forth,  She flieth  onwar
d.  
There  where  the heroes  speed  hither  and thither,  there  may the Arrows  shelter  and protect  us.  
12 Avoid  us thou whose  flight  is straight,  and let our bodies  be as stone.   
May Soma  kindly  speak  to us, and Aditi  protect  us well.   
13 He lays his blows  upon  their backs,  he deals his blows  upon  their thighs.   
Thou,  Whip,  who urgest  horses,  drive  sagacious  horses  in the fray.  
14 It compasses  the arm with serpent  windings,  fending  away  the friction  of the bowstring:   
So may the Brace,  well−skilled  in all its duties,  guard  manful ly the man from  every  quarter.   
15 Now  to the Shaft  with venom  smeared,  tipped  with deer−horn,  with iron mouth,   
Celestial,  of Parjanya's  seed,  be this great  adoration  paid.   
16 Loosed  from  the Bowstring  fly away,  thou Arrow,  sharpened  by our prayer.   
Go to the foemen,  strike  them  home,  and let not one be left alive.   
17 There  where  the flights  of Arrows  fall like boys  whose  locks  are yet unshorn.   
Even  there  may Brahmanaspati,  and Aditi  protect  us well,  protect  us well through  all our days.   
18 Thy vital parts I cover  with thine  Armour:  with immortality  King  Soma  clothe  thee.   
 
Varuna  give tliee what  is more  than ample,  and in thy triumph  may the Gods  be joyful.   
19 Whoso  would  kill us, whether  he be a strange  foe or one of us,  
May all the Gods  discomfit  him. My nearest,  closest  Mail  is prayer.   
 
RIG VEDA  − BOOK  THE SEVENTH  
HYMN  I. Agni.  
1. THE  men from  fire−sticks,  with their hands'  swift  movement,  have,  in deep  thought,  engendered  glorio
us 
Agni,   
Far−seen,  with pointed  flame,  Lord  of the homestead.   
2 The Vasus  set that Agni  in the dwelling,  fair to behold,  for help from  every  quarter:   
Who,  in the home  for ever,  must  be honoured.   
3 Shine  thou before  us, Agni,  well−enkindled,  with flame,  Most  Youthful  God,  that never  fadeth.   
To thee come  all our sacrificial  viands.   
4 Among  all fires these  fires have  shone  most  brightly,  splendid  with light,  begirt  by noble  heroes,   
Where  men of lofty  birth  sit down  together.   
5 Victorious  Agni,  grant  us wealth  with wisdom,  wealth  with brave  sons,  famous  and independe nt,  
Which  not a foe who deals  in magic  conquers.   
6 To whom,  the Strong,  at morn  and eve comes,  maid−like,  the ladle  dropping  oil, with its oblation.   
Wealth−seeking  comes  to him his own devotion.   
7 Burn  up all malice  with those  flames,  O Agni,  wherewith  of old thou burntest  up Jarutha,   
And drive  away  in silence  pain and sickness.   
8 With  him who lighteth  up thy splendour,  Agni,  excellent,  pure,  refulgent,  Purifier,   
Be present,  and with us through  these  our praises.   
9 Agni,  the patriarchal  men,  the mortals who have  in many  places  spread  thy lustre,−   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Be gracious  to us here for their sake also.  
10 Let these  men,  heroes  in the fight  with foemen,  prevail  against  all godless  arts of 4magic,−   
These  who ipprove  the noble  song  I sing thee.   
11 Let us not sit in want  of men,  O Agni,  without  descendants,  heroleu,  about  thee:   
But, O House−Friend,  in houses  full of children.   
12 By sacrifice  which  the Steeds'  Lord  ever visits,  there  make  our dwelling  rich in seed and offspring,   
Increasing  still with lineal  successors.   
13 Guard  us, O Agni,  from  the hated  demon,  guard  us from  malice  of the churlish  sinner:   
Allied  with thee may I subdue  assailants.   
14 May this same  fire of mine  surpass  all others,  this fire where  offspring,  vigorous  and firm−handed,   
Wins,  on a thousand  paths,  what  ne'er  shall  perish.   
15 This is that Agni,  saviour  from  the foeman,  who guards  the kindler  of the flame  from  sorrow:   
Heroes  of noble  lineage  serve  and tend him.  
16 This is that Agni,  served  in many  places,  whom  the rich lord who brings oblation  kindles,   
And round  him goes the priest  at sacrifices.   
17 Agni,  may we with riches  in possession  bring  thee continual  ofierings  in abundance,   
Using  both means  to draw  thee to our worship.   
18 Agni,  bear thou,  Eternal,  these  most  welcome  oblat ions to the Deities'  assembly:   
Let them  enjoy  our very fragrant  presents.   
19 Give  us not up, Agni,  to want  of heroes,  to wretched  clothes,  to need,  to destitution.   
Yield  us not, Holy  One,  to fiend  or hunger;  injure  us not at home  or in the forest.   
20 Give strength  and power  to these  my prayers,  O Agni;  O God,  pour blessings  on our chiefs  and nobles.
  
 
Grant  that both we and they may share  thy bounty.  Ye Gods,  protect  us evermore  with blessings.   
21 Thou  Agni,  swift  to hear,  art fair of aspect:  beam  forth, O Son of Strength,  in full effulgence.   
Let me not want,  with thee,  a son for ever:  let not a manly  hero ever fail us.  
22 Condemn  us not to indigence,  O Agni,  beside  these  flaming  fires which  Gods  have kindled;   
Nor, even  after fault,  let thy displeasu re, thine  as a God,  O Son of Strength,  o'ertake  us.  
23 O Agni,  fair of face,  the wealthy  mortal  who to the Immortal  offers  his oblation.   
Hath  him who wins  him treasure  by his Godhead,  to whom  the prince,  in need,  goes supplicating.   
24 Knowing  our chief  felicity,  O Agni,  bring  hither  ample  riches  to our nobles,   
Wherewith  we may enjoy  ourselves,  O Victor,  with undiminished  life and hero children.   
25 Give  strength  and power  to these  my prayers,  O Agni;  O God,  pour blessings  on bur chiefs  and nobles.
  
Gran t that both we and they may share  thy bounty.  Ye Gods,  protect  us evermore  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  II. Apris.  
1. GLADLY  accept,  this day, our fuel, Agni:  send up thy sacred  smoke  and shine  sublimely.   
Touch  the celestial  summits  with thy columns,  and overspread  thee with the rays of Surya.   
2 With  sacrifice  to these  we men will honour  the majesty  of holy Narasamsa−   
To these  the pure,  most  wise,  the thought.  inspirers,  Gods  who enjoy  both sorts  of our oblations.   
3 We will extol  at sacrifice  for ever,  as men may do, Agni  whom  Manu  kindled,   
Your  very skilful  Asura,  meet  for worship,  envoy  between  both worlds,  the truthful  speaker.   
4 Bearing  the sacred  grass,  the men who serve  him strew  it with reverence,  on their knees,  by Agni.   
Calling  him to the spotted  grass,  oil−sprinkled,  adorn  him, ye Adhvaryus,  with oblation.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
5 With  holy thoughts  the pious  have  thrown  open  Doors  fain for chariots  in the Gods'  assembly.   
Like two full mother  cows  who lick their youngling,  like maidens  for the gathering,  they adorn  them.   
6 And let the two exalted  Heavenly  Ladies,  Morning  and Night,  like a cow good  at milking,   
Come,  much−invoked,  and on our grass  be seated  ' wealthy,  deserving  worship,  for our welfare.   
7 You,  Bards  and Singers  at men's  sacrifices,  both filled  with wisdom,  I incline  to worship.   
Send  up our offerings  when  we call upon  you, and so among  the Gods  obtain  us treasures.   
8 May Bharati  with all her Sisters,  Ila accordant  with the Gods,  with mortals  Agni,   
Sarasvati  with all her kindred  Rivers,  come  to this grass,  Three  Goddesses,  and seat them.   
9 Well  pleased  with us do thou,  O God,  O Tvastar,  give ready  issue  to our procreant  vigour,   
Whence  springs  the hero,  powerful,  skilled  in action,  lover  of Gods,  adjuster  of the press−stones.   
10 Send  to the Gods  the oblation,  Lord  of Forests,  and let the Immolator,  Agni,  dress  it.  
He as the truer  Priest  shall  offer  worship,  for the God'sgenerations  well he knoweth.   
11 Come  thou to us, O Agni,  duly kindled,  together  with the potent  Gods  and Indra.   
On this our grass  sit Aditi,  happy  Mother,  and let our Hail!  delight  the Gods  Immortal.   
 
HYMN  III. Agni.  
1. ASSOCIATE  with fires,  make  your God Agni  envoy  at sacrifice,  best skilled  in worship,   
Established  firm among  mankind,  the Holy,  flame−crowned  and fed with oil, the Purifier.   
2 Like a steed  neighing  eager  for the pasture,  when  he hath stepped  forth  from the great  enclosure:   
Then  the wind  following  blows  upon  his splendour,  and, straight,  the path is black  which  thou hast travell
ed.  
3 From  thee a Bull but newly  born,  O Agni,  the kindled  everlasting  flames  rise upward.   
Aloft  to heaven  thy ruddy  smoke  ascendeth:  Agni,  thou speedest  to the Gods  as envoy.   
4 Thou  whose  fresh  lustre  o'er the earth  advanceth  when  greedily  with thy jaws thy food thou eatest.   
Like a host hurried  onward  comes  thy lasso:  fierce,  with thy tongue  thou piercest,  as 'twere  barley.   
5 The men have  decked  him both at eve and morning,  Most  Youthful  Agni,  as they tend a courser.   
 
They  kindle  him, a guest  within  his dwelling:  bright  shines  the splendour  of the worshipped  Hero.   
6 O fair of face,  beautiful  is thine  aspect  when,  very near at hand,  like gold thou gleamest,   
Like Heaven's  thundering  roar thy might  approaches,  and like the wondrous  Sun thy light thou showest.   
7 That we may worship,  with your Hail to Agni!  with sacrificial  cakes  and fat oblations,   
Guard  us, O Agni,  with those boundless  glories  as with a hundred  fortresses  of iron.  
8 Thine  are resistless  songs  for him who offers,  and hero−giving  hymns  wherewith  thou savest;   
With  these,  O Son of Strength,  O Jatavedas,  guard  us, preserve  these  princes  and the singers.   
9 When  forth  he cometh,  like an axe new−sharpened,  pure in his form,  resplendent  in his body,   
Sprung,  sought  with eager  longing,  from  his Parents,  for the Gods'  worship,  Sage  and Purifier:   
10 Shine  this felicity  on us, O Agni:  may we attain  to perfect  understan ding.   
All happiness  be theirs  who sing and praise  thee.  Ye Gods,  preserve  us evermore  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  IV. Agni.  
1. BRING  forth  your gifts to his refulgent  splendour,  your hymn  as purest  offering  to Agni,   
To him who goes as messenger  with knowled ge between  all songs  of men and Gods  in heaven.   
2 Wise  must  this Agni  be, though  young  and tender,  since  he was born,  Most  Youthful,  of his Mother;   
He who with bright  teeth  seizeth  fast the forests,  and eats his food,  though  plenteous,  in a moment.   
3 Before his presence  must  we all assemble,  this God's  whom  men have  seized  in his white  splendour.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
This Agni  who hath brooked  that men should  seize  him hath shone  for man with glow  insufferable.   
4 Far−seeing  hath this Agni  been  established,  deathless  mid mortals,  wise among  the foolish.   
Here,  O victorious  God,  forbear  to harm  us: may weforever  share  thy gracious  favour.   
5 He who hath occupied  his God−made  dwelling,  Agni,  in wisdom  hath surpassed  Immortals.   
A Babe  unborn,  the plants  and trees  support  him, and the earth  beareth  him the All−sustainer.   
6 Agni  is Lord  of Amrta.  in abundance,  Lord  of the gift of wealth  and hero valour,   
Victorious  God,  let us not sit about  thee like men devoid  of strength,  beauty,  and worship.   
7 The foeman's  treasure  may be won with labour:  may we be masters  of our own possessions.   
Agni,  no son is he who springs  from  others:  lengthen  not out the pathways  of the foolish.   
8 Unwelcome  for adoption  is the stranger,  one to be thought  of as another's  offipring,   
Though  grown  famili ar by continual  presence.  May our strong  hero come,  freshly  triumphant.   
9 Guard  us from  him who would  assail  us, Agni;  preserve  us O thou Victor,  from  dishonour.   
Here  let the place  of darkening  come  upon  thee:  may wealth  be ours,  desirable,  in thousands.   
10 Shine  this felicity  on us, O Agni:  may we attain  to perfect  understanding.   
All happiness  be theirs  who sing and praise  thee.  Ye Gods,  preserve  us evermore  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  V. Agni.  
1. BRING  forth  your song of praise  to mighty  Agni,  the speedy  messenger  of earth  and heaven,   
Vaisvanara,  who,  with those  who wake,  hath waxen  great  in the lap of all the Gods  Immortal.   
2 Sought  in the heavens,  on earth  is Agni  stablished,  leader  of rivers,  Bull of standing  waters.   
Vaisvanara  when  he hath grown  in glory,  shines  on the tribes  of men with light and treasure.   
3 For fear of thee forth  fled the dark−hued  races,  scattered  abroad,  deserting  their possessions,   
When,  glowing,  O Vaisvanara,  for Puru,  thou Agni  didst  light up and rend their castles.   
4 Agni  Vaisvanara,  both Earth  and Heaven  submit  them  to thy threefold  jurisdiction.   
Refulgent  in thine  undecaying  lustre  thou hast invested  both the worlds  with splendour.   
5 Agni,  the tawny  horses,  loudly  neighing  our resonant  hymns  that drop with oil, attend  thee;   
Lord  of the tribes,  our Charioteer  of riches,  Ensign  of days,  Vaisvanara  of mornings.   
6 In thee,  O bright  as Mitra,  Vasus  seated  the might  of Aduras,  for they loved  thy spirit.   
 
Thou  dravest  Dasyus  from  their home,  O Agni,  and broughtest  forth  broad light to light the Arya.   
7 Born  in the loftiest  heaven  thou in a moment  reachest,  like wind,  the place  where  Gods  inhabit.   
Thou,  favouring  thine  offspring,  roaredst  loudly  when  giving  life to creatures,  Jatavedas.   
8 Send  us that strength,  Vaisvanara,  send it, Agni,  that strength,  O Jatavedas,  full of splendour,   
Wherewith,  all−bounteous  God,  thou pourest  riches,  as fame  wide−spreading,  on the man who offers.   
9 Agni,  bestow  upon  our chiefs  and nobles  that famous  power,  that wealth  which  feedeth  many.   
Accordant  with the Vasus  and the Rudras,  Agni,  Vaisvanara,  give us sure protection.   
 
HYMN  VI. Agni.  
1. PRAISE  of the Asura,  high imperial  Ruler,  the Manly  One in whom  the folk shall  triumph−   
I laud his deeds  who is as strong  as Indra,  and lauding  celebrate  the Fort−destroyer.   
2 Sage,  Sing,  Food,  Light,−they  bring  him from  the mountain,  the blessed  Sovran  of the earth  and heaven.
  
I decorate  with songs  the mighty  actions  which  Agni,  Fort−destroyer,  did aforetime.   
3 The foolish,  faithless,  rudely−speak ing niggards,  without  belief  or sacrifice  or worship,−   
Far far sway  hath Agni  chased  those  Dasytis,  and, in the cast, hath turned  the godless  westward.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
4 Him who brought  eastward,  manliest  with his prowess,  the Maids  rejoicing  in the western  darkness,   
That Agni  I extol,  the Lord  of riches,  unyielding  tamer  of assailing  foemen.   
5 Him who brake  down  the walls  with deadly  weapons,  and gave the Mornings  to anoble  Husband,   
Young  Agni,  who with conquering  strength  subduing  the tribes  of Nahus  made  them  bring  their tribute.   
6 In whose  protection  all men rest by nature,  desiring  to enjoy  his gracious  favour−   
Agni  Vaisvanara  in his Parents,  bosom  hath found  the choicest  seat in earth  and heaven.   
7 Vaisvanara  the God,  at the sun's  setting,  hath taken  to himsel f deep−hidden  treasures:   
Agni  hath taken  them  from  earth  and heaven,  from  the sea under  and the sea above  us.  
 
HYMN  VII. Agni.  
1. I SEND  forth  even  your God,  victorious  Agni,  like a strong  courser,  with mine  adoration.   
Herald  of sacrifice  be he who knoweth  he hath reached  Gods,  himself,  with measured  motion.   
2 By paths  that are thine  own come  hither,  Agni,  joyous,  delighting  in the Gods'  alliance,   
Making  the heights  of earth  roar with thy fury,  burning  with eager  teeth  the woods  and forests.   
3 The grass is strewn;  the sacrifice  advances  adored  as Priest,  Agni  is made  propitious,   
Invoking  both All−boon−bestowing  Mothers  of whom,  Most  Youthful!  thou wast born to help us.  
4 Forthwith  the men,  the best of these  for wisdom,  have  made  him leader  in the solemn  worship.   
As Lord  in homes  of men is Agni  stablished,  the Holy  One,  the joyous,  sweetly  speaking.   
5 He hath come,  chosen  bearer,  and is seated  in man's  home,  Brahman,  Agni,  the Supporter,   
He whom  both Heaven  anct Earth  exalt  and strengthenwhom,  Giver of all boons,  the Hotar  worships.   
6 These  have  passed  all in glory,  who,  the manly,  have  wrought  with skill the hymn  of adoration;   
Who,  listening,  have  advanced  the people's  welfare,  and set their thoughts  on this my holy statute.   
7 We, the Vasisthas , now implore  thee,  Agni,  O Son of Strength,  the Lord  of wealth  and treasure.   
Thou  hast brought  food to singers  and to nobles.  Ye Gods,  preserve  us evermore  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  VIII. Agni  
1. THE  King  whose  face is decked  with oil is kindled  with homa ge offered  by his faithful  servant
. The men,  the priests  adore  him with oblations.  Agni  hath shone  forth  when  the dawn  is breaking
. 2 Yea, he hath been  acknowledged  as most  mighty,  the joyous  Priest  of men,  the youthful  Agni.
  
He, spreading  o'er the earth,  made  light around  him, and grew  among  the plants  with blackened  fellies..   
3 How  dost thou decorate  our hymn,  O Agni?  What  power  dost thou exert  when  thou art lauded?   
When,  Bounteous  God,  may we be lords  of riches,  winners  of precious  wealth  which  none  may conquer?   
4 Far famed  is this the Bharata's  own Agni  he shineth  like the Sun with lofty  splendour.   
He who hath vanquished  Puru  in the battle,  the heavenly  guest  hath glowed  in full refulgence.   
5 Full many  oblations  are in thee collected:  with all thine aspects  thou hast waxen  gracious.   
Thou  art already  famed  as praised  and lauded,  yet still, O nobly  born,  increase  thy body.   
6 Be this my song,  that winneth  countless  treasure,  engendered  with redoubled  force  for Agni,   
That,  splendid,  chasing  sickness,  slaying  demons,  it may delight  our friend  and bless  the singers.   
7 We, the Vasisthas,  now implore  thee,  Agni,  O Son of Strength,  the Lord  of wealth  and riches.   
Thou  hast brought  food to singers  and to nobles.  Ye Gods,  preserve  us evermore  with blessings .  
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  IX. Agni.  
1. ROUSED  from  their bosom  is the Dawns'  beloved,  the joyous  Priest,  most  sapient,  Purifier.   
He gives  a signal  both to Gods  and mortals,  to Gods  oblations,  riches  to the pious.   
2 Most  wise is he who,  forcing  doors  of Panis,  brought  the bright  Sun to us who feedeth  many.   
The cheerful  Priest,  men's  Friend  and home−companion,  through  still night's  darkness  he is made  apparen
t.  
3 Wise,  ne.'er  deceived,  uncircumscribed,  refulgent,  our gracious  guest,  a Friend  with good  attendants,   
Shine s forth  with wondrous  light before  the Mornings;  the young  plants  hath he entered,  Child  of Waters.   
4 Seeking  our gatherings,  he, your Jatavedas,  hath shone  adorable  through  human  ages,   
Who  gleams  refulgent  with his lovely  lustre:  the kine have waked  to meet  him when  enkindled.   
5 Go on thy message  to the Gods,  and fail not, O Agni,  with their band  who pray and worship.   
Bring  all the Gods  that they may give us riches,  Sarasvati,  the Maruts,  Asvins,  Waters.   
6 Vasistha,  when  enkindling  thee,  O Agni,  hath slain  jarutha.  Give  us wealth  in plenty.   
Sing praise  in choral  song,  O Jatavedas.  Ye Gods,  preserve  us evermore  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  X. Agni.  
1. HE hath sent forth,  bright,  radiant,  and refulgent,  like the Dawn's  Lover,  his far−spreading  lustre.   
Pure in his splendour  shines  the golden  Hero:  our longing  thoughts  hath he aroused  and wakened.   
2 He, like the Sun, hath shone  while  Morn  is breaking,  and priests  who weave  the sacrifice  sing praises,   
Agni,  the God,  who knows  their generations  and visits  Gods, most  bounteous,  rapid  envoy.   
3 Our songs  and holy hymns  go forth  to Agni,  seeking  the God and asking  him for riches,   
Him fair to see, of goodly  aspect,  mighty,  men's  messenger  who carries  their oblations.   
4 joined  with the Vasus,  Agni,  bring  thou Indra bring  hither  mighty  Rudra  with the Rudras,   
Aditi  good  to all men with Adityas,  Brhaspati  All−bounteous,  with the Singers.   
5 Men eagerly  implore  at sacrifices  Agni,  Most  Youthful  God,  the joyous  Herald.   
For he is Lord  and Ruler  over riches,  and for Gods' worship  an unwearied  envoy.   
 
HYMN  XI. Agni.  
1. GREAT  art thou,  Agni,  sacrifice's  Herald:  not without  thee are deathless  Gods  made  joyfu
l. Come  hither  with all Deities  about  thee here take thy seat, the first, as Priest,  O Agni.  2 Me
n with oblations  evermore  entreat  thee,  the swift,  to undertake  an envoy's  duty.  He on whose  
sacred  grass  with Gods  thou sittest,  to him, O Agni,  are the days propitious.  3 Three  times  a 
day in thee are shown  the treasures  sent for the mortal  who presents  oblation.   
Bring  the Gods  hither  like a man,  O Agni:  be thou our envoy,  guarding  us from  curses.   
4 Lord  of the lofty sacrifice  is Agni,  Agni  is Lord  of every  gift presented.   
The Vasus  were  contented  with his wisdom,  so the Gods  made  him their oblationbearer.   
5 O Agni,  bring the Gods  to taste our presents:  with Indra  leading,  here let them  be joyful.   
Convey  this sacrifice  to Gods  in heaven.  Ye Gods,  preserve  us evermore  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  XII. Agni.  
1. WE with great  reverence  have  approached  The Youngest  who hath shone  forth  well−kindled  in his 
dwelling,   
With  wondrous  light between  wide  earth  and heaven,  well−worshipped,  looking  forth  in all directions.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
2 Through  his great  might  o'ercoming  all misfortunes,  praised  in the house  is Agni  Jatavedas.   
May he protect  us from  disgrace  and trouble,  both us who laud him and our noble  patrons.   
3 O Agni,  thou art Varuna  and Mitra:  Vasisthas  with their holy hymns  exalt  thee.   
With  thee be most  abundant  gain of treasure.  Ye Gods,  preserve  us evermore  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  XIII. Agni.  
1. BRING  song  and hymn  to Agni,  Asura−slayer,  enlightener  of all and thought−bestower.  Like an ob
lation  on the grass,  to please  him, I bring  this to Vaisvanara,  hymn−inspirer.  2 Thou  with thy flame,  O
 Agni,  brightly  glowing,  hast at thy birth  filled  full the earth  and heaven.  TIOU  with thy might,  Vaisv
anara  Jatavedas,  settest  the Gods  free frodi  the curse  that bound  them.  3 Agni,  when,  born thou looke
dst on all creatures,  like a brisk  herdsman  moving  round  his cattle.  The path to prayer,  Vaisvanara,  th
ou foundest.  Ye Gods,  preserve  us evermore  with blessings.  
 
HYMN  XIV Agni.  
1. WITH  reverence  and with offered  gifts serve  we the God whose  flame  is bright:   
Let us bring  Jatavedas  fuel, and adore  Agni  when  we invoke  the Gods.   
2 Agni,  may we perform  thy rites with fuel, and honour  thee,  O Holy  one, with praises:   
Honour  thee,  Priest  of sacrifice!  with butter,  thee,  God of blessed  light!  with our oblation.   
3 Come,  Agni,  with the Gods  to our invoking,  come,  pleased,  to offerings  sanctified  with Vasat.   
May we be his who pays thee,  God,  due honour.  Ye Gods,  preserve  us evermore  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  XV. Agni.  
1. OFFER  oblations  in his mouth,  the bounteous  God's  whom  we must  serve.   
His who is nearest  kin to us:  
2 Who  for the Fivefold  People's  take hath seated  him in every  home   
Wise,  Youthful,  Master  of the house.   
3 On all sides  may that Agni  guard  our household  folk and property;   
May he deliver  us from  woe.   
4 I have  begotten  this new hymn  for Agni,  Falcon  of the sky:  
Will he not give us of his wealth?   
5 Whose  lories  when  he glows  in front  of sacrite  are fair to see,  
Like wealth  of one with hero sons.   
 
6 May he enjoy  this hallowed  gift, Agni  accept  our songs,  who bears   
Oblations,  best of worshippers.   
7 Lord  of the house,  whom  men must  seek,  we set thee down,  O Worshipped  Onel   
Bright,  rich in heroes,  Agni!  God  
8 Shine  forth  at night  and morn:  through  thee with fires are we provided  well.   
Thou,  rich in heroes,  art our Friend.   
9 The men come  near thee for their gain,  the singers  with their songs  of praise:  
Speech,  thousandfold,  comes  near to thee.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
10 Bright,  Purifier,  meet  for praise,  Immortal  with refulgent  glow,   
Agni  drives  Raksasas  away.   
11 As such,  bring  us abundant  wealth,  young  Child  of Strength,  for this thou canst   
May Bhaga  give us what  is choice.   
12 Thou,  Agni,  givest  hero fame:  Bhaga  and Savitar  the God,   
And Did give us what  is good.   
13 Agni,  preserve  us from  distress:  consume  our enemies,  O God,   
Eternal,  with the hottest  flames.   
14 And,  irresistible,  be thou a mighty  iron fort to us,  
With  hundred  walls  for man's  defence.   
15 Do thou preserve  us, eve and morn,  from  sorrow,  from  the wicked  men,   
Infallible!  by day and night.   
 
HYMN  XVI. Agni.  
1. WITH  this my reverent  hymn  I call Agni  for you, the Son of Strength,  Dear,  wisest  envoy,  served  with 
noble  sacrifice,  immortal  messenger  of all.  
2 His two red horses,  all−supporting,  let him yoke:  let him, well−worshipped,  urge them  fast.  
Then  hath the sacrifice  good  prayers  and happy  end, and heavenly  gift of wealth  to men.   
3 The flame  of him the Bountiful,  the Much−invoked,  hath mounted  up,  
And his red−coloured  smoke−clouds  reach  and touch  the sky: the men are kindling  Agni  well.   
4 Thee,  thee Most  Glorious  One we make  our messenger.  Bring  the Gods  hither  to the feast.   
Give  us, O Son of Strength,  all food that fcedeth  man:  give that for which  we pray to thee.   
5 Thou,  Agni,  art the homestead's  Lord,  our Herald  at the sacrifice.   
Lord  of all boons,  thou art the Cleanser  and a Sage.  Pay worship,  and enjoy  the good.   
6 Give  riches  to the sacrificer,  O Most  Wise,  for thou art he who granteth  wealth.   
Inspire  with zeal each priest  at this our solemn  rite; all who are skilled  in singing  praise.   
7 O Agni  who art worshipped  well,  dear let our princes  he to thee,   
Our wealthy  patrons  who are gover nors of men,  who part, as gifts,  their stalls  of kine.   
8 They  in whose  home,  her hand  bearing  the sacred  oil, Ila sits down  well−satisfied−   
Guard  them,  Victorious  God,  from  slander  and from  harm.  give us a refuge  famed  afar.  
9 Do thou,  a Priest  with pleasant  tongue,  most  wise,  and very near to us,  
Agni,  bring  riches  hither  to our liberal  chiefs,  and speed  the oflering  of our gifts.   
10 They  who bestow  as bounty  plenteous  wealth  of steeds,  moved  by desire  of great  renown−   
Do thou with saving  help preser ve them  from  distress,  Most  Youthful!  with a hundred  forts.   
11 The God who gives  your wealth  demands  a full libation  poured  to him.  
Pour  ye it forth,  then fill the vessel  full again:  then doth the God pay heed  to you.  
12 Him have  the Gods  appointed  Priest of sacrifice,  oblation−bearer,  passing  wise.   
Agni  gives  wealth  and valour  to the worshipper,  to folk who offer  up their gifts.   
 
HYMN  XVII.  Agni.  
1. AGNI,  be kindled  well with proper  fuel, and let the grass  be scattered  wide  about  thee.   
2 Let the impatient  Portals  be thrown  open  bring  thou the Gods  impatient  to come  hither.   
3 Taste,  Agni:  serve  the Gods  with our oblation.  Offer  good  sacrifices,  Jatavedas!   
4 Let Jatavedas  pay fair sacrifices,  worship  andgratify  the Gods  Immortal.   
5 Wise  God,  win for us things  that are all−goodly,  and let the prayers,  we pray today  be fruitful.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
6 Thee,  even  thee,  the Son of Strength,  O Agni,  those  Gods  have  made  the bearer  of oblations.   
7 To thee the God may we perform  our worship:  do thou,  besought,  grant  us abund ant riches.   
 
HYMN  XVIII.  Indra.  
1. ALL  is with thee,  O Indra,  all the treasures  which  erst our fathers  won who sang thy praises.   
With  thee are milch−kine  good  to milk,  and horses:  best winner  thou of riches  for the pious.   
2 For like a King  among  his wives thou dwellest:  with glories,  as a Sage,  surround  and help us.  
Make  us, thy servants,  strong  for wealth,  and honour  our songs  wirth  kine and steeds  and decoration.   
3 Here  these  our holy hymns  with joy and gladness  in pious  emulation  have  approached  thee.  
Hitherward  come  thy path that leads  to riches:  may we find shelter  in thy favour,  Indra.   
4 Vasistha  hath poured  forth  his prayers,  desiring  to milk thee like a cow in goodly  pasture.   
All these  my people  call thee Lord  of cattle:  may Indra.  come  unto the prayer  we offer.   
5 What  though  the floods  spread  widely,  Indra  made  them  shallow  and easy for Sudas  to traverse.   
He, worthy  of our praises,  caused  the Simyu,  foe of our hymn,  to curse  the rivers'  fury.   
6 Eager  for spoil  was Turvasa  Purodas,  fain to win wealth,  like fishes  urged  by hunger.   
The Bhrgus  and the Druhyus  quickly  listened:  friend  rescued  friend  mid the two distant  peoples.   
7 Together  came  the Pakthas,  the Bhalanas,  the Alinas,  the Sivas,  the Visanins.   
Yet to the Trtsus  came  the Arya's  Comrade,  through  love of spoil  and heroes'  war, to lead them.   
8 Fools,  in their folly  fain to waste  her waters,  they parted  inexhaustible  Parusni.   
Lord  of the Earth,  he with his might  repressed  them:  still lay the herd and the affrighted  herdsman.   
9 As to their goal they sped to their destruetion:  they sought  Parusni;  e'en the swift  returned  not.  
Indra  abandoned,  to Sudas  the manly,  the swiftly  flying  foes,  unmanly  babblers.   
10 They  went  like kine unherded  from  the pasture,  each clinging  to a friend  as chance  directed.   
They  who drive  spotted  steeds,  sent down  by Prsni,  gave ear, the Warriors  and the harnessed  horses.   
11 The King  who scattered  one−and−twenty  people  of both Vaikarna  tribes  through  lust of glory−   
As the skilled  priest  clips  grass  within  the chamber,  so hath the Hero  Indra,  wrought  their downfall.   
12 Thou,  thunder−armed,  o'erwhelmedst  in the waters  famed  ancient  Kavasa  and then the Druhyu.   
Others  here claiming  friendship  to their friendship,  devoted  unto thee,  in thee were  joyful.   
13 Indra at once  with conquering  might  demolished  all their strong  places  and their seven  castles.   
The goods  of Anu's  son he gave to Trtsu.  May we in sacrifice  conquer  scorned  Puru.   
14 The Anavas  and Druhyus,  seeking  booty,  have  slept,  the sixty  hundred,  yea, six thousand,   
And six−and−sixty  heroes.  For the pious  were  all these  mighty  exploits  done  by Indra.   
15 These  Trtsus  under  Indra's  careful  guidance  came  speeding  like loosed  waters  rushing  downward.   
The foemen,  measuring  exceeding  closely,  abandoned  to Sudas  all their provisions.   
16 The hero's  side who drank  the dressed  oblation,  Indra's  denier,  far o'er earth  he scattered.   
Indra  brought  down  the fierce  destroyer's  fury.  He gave  them  various  roads,  the path's  Controller.   
17 E'en with the weak  he wrou ght this matchless  exploit:  e'en with a goat he did to death  a lion.  
He pared  the pillar's  angles  with a needle.  Thus  to Sudas  Indra  gave all provisions.   
18 To thee have all thine  enemies  submitted:  e'en the fierce  Bheda  hast thou made  thy subject.   
Cast down  thy sharpened  thunderbolt,  O Indra,  on him who harms  the men who sing thy praises.   
19 Yamuna  and the Trtsus  aided  Indra.  There  he stripped  Bheda  bare of all his treasures.   
 
The Ajas and the Sigrus  and the Yaksus  brought  in to him as tribute  heads  of horses.   
20 Not to be scorned,  but like Dawns  past and recent,  O Indra,  are thy favours  and thy riches.   
Devaka,  Manyamana's  son, thou slewest,  and smotest  Sambara  from  the lofty  mountain.   
21 They  who,  from  home,  have  gladdened  thee,  thy servants  Parasa ra, Vasistha,  Satayatu,   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Will not forget  thy friendship,  liberal  Giver.  So shall  the days dawn  prosperous  for the princes.   
22 Priest−like,  with praise,  I move  around  the altar,  earning  Paijavana's  reward,  O Agni,   
Two hundred  cows  from  Devavan's  descendan t, two chariots  from  Sudas  with mares  to draw  them.   
23 Gift of Paijavana,  four horses  bear me in foremost  place,  trained  steeds  with pearl  to deck them.   
Sudas's  brown  steeds,  firmly−stepping,  carry  me and my son for progeny  and glory.   
24 Him whose  fame  spreads  between  wide  earth  and heaven,  who,  as dispenser,  gives  each chief  his porti
on,  
Seven  flowing  Rivers  glorify  like Indra.  He slew Yudhyamadhi  in close  encounter.   
25 Attend  on him O ye heroic  Maruts  as on Sudas's  father  Divodasa.   
Further  Paijavana 's desire  with favour.  Guard  faithfully  his lasting  firm dominion.   
 
HYMN  XIX. Indra.  
1. HE like a bull with sharpened  horns,  terrific,  singly  excites  and agitates  all the people:   
Thou  givest  him who largely  pours  libations  his goods  who pours  not, for his own possession.   
2 Thou,  verily,  Indra,  gavest  help to Kutsa,  willingly  giving  car to him in battle,   
When,  aiding  Arjuneya,  thou subduedst  to him both Kuyava  and the Dasa  Susna.   
3 O Bold  One,  thou with all thine  aids hast boldly  holpen  Sudas  whose  offerings  were  accepted,   
Puru  in winning  land and slaying  foemen,  and Trasadasyu  son of Purukutsa.   
4 At the Gods'  banquet,  hero−souled!  with Heroes,  Lord  of Bay Steeds,  thou slewest  many  foemen.   
Thou  sentest  in swift  death  to sleep  the Dasyu,  both Cumuri  and Dhuni,  for Dabhiti.   
5 These  were  thy mighty  powers  that, Thunder−wielder,  thou swiftly  crushedst  nine−and−ninety  castles:   
Thou  capturedst  the hundredth  in thine  onslaught;  thou slewest  Namuci,  thou slewest  Vrtra.   
6 Old are the blessings,  Indra,  whic h thou gavest  Sudas  the worshipper  who brought  oblations.   
For thee,  the Strong,  I yoke  thy strong  Bay Horses:  may our prayers  reach  thee and win strength,  Most  
Mighty!   
7 Give  us not up, Lord  of Bay Horses,  Victor,  in this thine  own assembly,  to the wicke d.  
Deliver  us with true and faithful  succours:  dear may we be to thee among  the princes.   
8 May we men,  Maghavan,  the friends  thou lovest,  near thee be joyful  under  thy protection.   
Fain to fulfil  the wish  of Atithigva  humble.  the pride  of Turvasa  and Yadva.  
9 Swiftly,  in truth,  O Maghavan,  about  thee men skilled  in hymning  sing their songs  and praises.  '  
Elect  us also into their assembly  who by their calls on thee despoiled  the niggards.   
10 Thine  are these  lauds,  O manliest  of heroes,  lauds  which  rever t to us and give us riches.   
Favour  these,  Indra,  when  they fight  with faemen,  as Friend  and Hero  and the heroes'  Helper.   
11 Now,  lauded  for thine  aid, Heroic  Indra,  sped by our prayer,  wax mighty  in thy body.   
Apportion  to us strength  and habitations.  Ye Gods,  protect  us evermore  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  XX. Indra.  
1. STRONG,  Godly−natured,  born for hero exploit,  man's  Friend,  hedoth  whatever  deed  he wille
th. Saving  us e'en from  great  transgression,  Indra,  the Youthful,  visiteth  man's  home  with favour.
 2 Waxing  greatness  Indra  slayeth  Vrtra:  the Hero  with his aid hath helped  the singer.  He gave S
udas wide  room  and space,  and often  hath granted  wealth  to him who brought  oblations.  3 Soldie
r unchecked,  war−rousing,  battling  Hero,  unconquered  from  of old, victorious  ever,  Indra  the ver
y strong  hath scattered  armies;  yea, he hath slain  each foe who fought  against  him.  
4 Thou  with thy greatness  hast filled  full, O Indra,  even  both the worlds  with might,  O thou Most  Mighty.
  Rig Veda – English Translation  
Lord  of Bays,  Indra,  brandishing  his thunder,  is gratified  with Soma  at the banquet.   
5 A Bull begat  the Bull for joy of battle,  and a strong  Mother  brought  forth  him the manly.   
He who is Chief  of men,  their armies'  Leader,  is strong  Hero,  bold,  and fain for booty.   
6 The people  falter  not, nor suffer  sorrow,  who win themselves  this God's  terrific  spirit.   
He who with sacrifices  worships  Indra  is lord of wealth,  law−born  and law's  protector.   
7 Whene'er  the elder  fain would  help the younger  the greater  cometh  to the lesser's  present.   
Shall  the Immortal  sit aloof'  inactive?  O Wondrous  Indra,  bring  us wondrous  riches.   
8 Thy dear folk, Indra,  who present  oblations,  are, in chief  place,  thy friends,  O Thunder−wielder.   
May we be best content  in this thy favour,  sheltered  by One who slays  not, but preserves  us.  
9 To thee the mighty  hymn  hath clamoured  loudly,  and, Maghavan,  the eloquent  hath besought  thee.   
Desire  of wealth  hath come  upon  thy singer:  help us then,  gakra,  to our share  of riches.   
10 Place  us by food which  thou hast given,  O Indra,  us and the wealthy  patrons  who command  us.  
Let thy great  power  bring  good  to him who lauds  thee.  Ye Gods,  preserve  us evermore  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  XXI. Indra.  
1. PRESSED  is the juice  divine  with milk commingled:  thereto  hath Indra  ever been  accustom ed.  
We wake  thee,  Lord  of Bays,  with sacrifices:  mark  this our laud in the wild joy of Soma.   
2 On to the rite they move,  the grass  they scatter,  these  Soma−drinkers  eloquent  in synod.   
Hither,  for men to grasp,  are brought  the press−stones,  far−thunderin g, famous,  strong,  that wait on heroe
s.  
3 Indra,  thou settest  free the many  waters  that were  encompassed,  Hero,  by the Dragon.   
Down  rolled,  as if on chariots  borne,  the rivers:  through  fear of thee all things  created  tremble.   
4 Skilled  in all manly  deed s the God terrific  hath with his weapons  mastered  these  opponents.   
Indra  in rapturous  joy shook  down  their castles  he slew them  in his might,  the Thunder−wielder.   
5 No evil spirits  have  impelled  us, Indra,  nor fiends,  O Mightiest  God,  with their devices.   
Let our true God subdue  the hostile  rabble:  let not the lewd  approach  our holy worship.   
6 Thou  in thy strength  surpassest  Earth  and Heaven:  the regions  comprehend  not all thy greatness.   
With  thine  own power  and might  thou slewest  Vrtra:  no foe hath found the end of thee in battle.   
7 Even  the earlier  Deities  submitted  their powers  to thy supreme  divine  dominion.   
Indra  wins  wealth  and deals  it out to other's:  men in the strife  for booty  call on Indra.   
8 The humble  hath invoked  thee for protection,  thee, Lord  of great  felicity,  O Indra.   
Thou  with a hundred  aids hast been  our Helper:  one who brings  gifts like thee hath his defender.   
9 May we, O Indra,  be thy friends  for ever,  eagerly,  Conqueror,  yielding  greater  homage.   
May,  through  thy grace,  the strength of us who battle  quell  in the shock  the onset  of the foeman.   
10 Place  us by food which  thou hast given,  O Indra,  us and the wealthy  patrons  who command  us.  
Let thy great  power  bring  good  to him who lauds  thee.  Ye Gods,  preserve  us evermore  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  XXII Indra.  
1. DRINK  Soma,  Lord  of Bays,  and let it cheer  thee:  Indra,  the stone,  like a well guided  courser,   
Directed  by the presser's  arms  hath pressed  it.  
2 So let the draught  of joy, thy dear companion,  by which,  O Lord  of Bays,  thou slayest  foemen,   
Delight  thee,  Indra,  Lord  of princely  treasures.   
3 Mark  closely,  Maghavan,  the words  I utter,  this eulogy  recited  by Vasistha:   
Accept  the prayers  I offer  at thy banquet.   
4 Hear  thou the call of the juice−drinking  press−stone:  hear thou the Brahman's  hymn  who sings  and laudRig Veda – English Translation  
s 
thee.   
 
Take  to thine  inmost  self these  adorations.   
5 I know  and ne'er  forget  the hymns  and praises  of thee,  the Conqueror,  and thy strength  immortal.   
Thy name  I ever utter.  Self−Refulgent   
6 Among  mankind  many  are thy libations,  and many  a time the pious  sageinvokes  thee.   
O Maghavan,  be not long distant  from  us.  
7 All these  libations  are for thee,  O Hero:  to thee I offer  these  my prayers.  that strengthen.   
Ever,  in every  place,  must  men invoke  thee.   
8 Never  do men attain,  O Wonder−Worker,  thy greatness,  Mighty  One,  who must  be lauded,   
Nor, Indra,  thine  heroic  power  and bounty.   
9 Among  all Rsis,  Indra,  old and recent,  who have  engendered  hymns  as sacred  singers,   
Even  with us be thine  auspicious  friendships.  Ye Gods, preserve  us evermore  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  XXIII.  Indra.  
1. PRAYERS  have  been  offered  up through  love of glory:  Vasistha,  honour  Indra  in the battle.   
He who with might  extends  through  all existence  hears  words  which  I, his faithful  servant,  utter.   
2 A cry was raised  which  reached  the Gods,  O Indra,  a cry to them  to send us strength  in combat.   
None  among  men knows  his own life's  durat ion: bear us in safety  over these  our troubles.   
3 The Bays,  the booty−seeking  car I harness:  my prayers  have  reached  him who accepts  them  gladly.   
Indra,  when  he had slain  resistless  foemen,  forced  with his might  the two world−halves  asunder.   
4 Like barren cows,  moreover,  swelled  the waters:  the singen  sought  thy holy rite, O Indra.   
Come  unto us as with his team  comes  Vayu:  thou,  through  our solemn  hymns  bestowest  booty.   
5 So may these  gladdening  draughts  rejoice  thee,  Indra,  the Mighty,  very bounteous  to the singer.   
Alone  among  the Gods  thou pitiest  mortals:  O Hero,  make  thee glad at this libation.   
6 Thus  the Vasisthas  glorify  with praises  Indra,  the Powerful  whose  arm wields  thunder.   
Praised,  may he guard  our wealth  in kine and heroes.  Ye Gods,  preserve us evermore  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  XXIV.  Indra.  
1. A HOME  is made  for thee to dwell  in, Indra:  O Much−invoked,  go thitherwith  the heroes.  That thou,  to
 prosper  us, mayst  be our Helper,  vouchsafe  us wealth,  rejoice  with draughts  of Soma.  2 Indra,  thy wish,  t
wice−strong,  is comprehended:  pressed  is the Soma,  poured  are pleasant  juices.  This hymn  of praise,  from
 loosened  tongue,  made  perfect,  draws  Indra  to itself  with loud invoking.  3 Come,  thou Impetuous;  God,  f
rom earth  or heaven;  come  to our holy grass to drink  the Soma.  Hither  to me let thy Bay Horses  bring  thee
 to listen  to our hymns  and make  thee joyful.  4 Come  unto us with all thine  aids, accordant,  Lord  of Bay S
teeds,  accepting  our devotions,  Fair−helmeted,  o'ercoming  with the mighty,  and lendin g us the strength  of
 bulls,  O Indra.  5 As to the chariot  pole a vigorous  courser,  this laud is brought  to the great  strong  Uphold
er. This hymn  solicits  wealth  of thee:  in heaven,  as 'twere  above  the sky, set thou our glory.  6 With  precio
us things.  O Indra,  thus content  us: may we attain  to thine  exalted  favour.  Send  our chiefs  plenteous  food 
with hero children.  Preserve  us evermore,  ye Gods,  with blessings.  
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  XXV.  Indra.  
WHEN  with thy mighty  help,  O potent  Indra,  the armies  rush together  in their fury.  
When  from  the strong  man's  arm the lightning  flieth,  let not the mind  go forth  to side with others.   
2 O Indra,  where  the ground  is hard to traverse,  smite  down  our foes,  the mortals  who assail  us,  
 
Keep  far from  us the curse  of the reviler:  bring  us accumulated  store  of treasures.   
3 God of the fair helm,  give Sudas  a hundred  succours,  a thousand  blessings,  and thy bounty.   
Strike  down  the weapon  of our mortal  foeman:  bestow  upon  us splendid  fame  and riches.   
4 I wait the power  of one like thee,  O Indra, gifts of a Helper  such as thou art, Hero.   
Strong,  Mighty  God,  dwell  with me now and ever:  Lord  of Bay Horses,  do not thou desert  us.  
5 Here  are the Kutsas  supplicating  Indra  for might,  the Lord  of Bays  for God−sent  conquest.   
Make  our foes ever easy to be vanquished:  may we, victorious,  win the spoil,  O Hero.   
6 With  precious  things,  O Indra,  thus content  us: may we attain  to thine  exalted  favour.   
Send  our chiefs  plenteous  food with hero children.  Preserve  us evermore,  ye Gods,  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  XXVI.  Indra.  
1. SOMA  unpressed  ne'er  gladdened  liberal  Indra,  no juices  pressed  without  a prayer  have  pleased  him.  
I generate  a laud that shall  delight  him, new and heroic,  so that he may hear us.  
2 At every  laud the Soma  gladdens  Indra:  pressed  juices  please  him as each psalm  is chanted,   
What  time the priests  with one united  effort  call him to aid, as sons invoke  their father.   
3 These  deeds  he did; let him achieve  new exploits,  such as the priests  declare  at their libations.   
Indra  hath taken  and possessed  all castles,  like as one common  husband  doth his spouses.   
4 Even  thus have they declared  him. Famed  is Indra  as Conqueror,  sole distributer  of treasures;   
Whose  many  succours  come  in close  succession.  May dear delightful  benefits  attend  us.  
5 Thus , to bring  help to men,  Vasistha  laudeth  Indra,  the peoples'  Hero,  at libation.   
Bestow  upon  us strength  and wealth  in thousands.  Preserve  us evermore,  ye Gods,  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  XXVII.  Indra.  
1. MEN  call on Indra  in the armed  encounter  that he may make  the hymns  they sing decisive.   
Hero,  rejoicing  in thy might,  in combat  give us a portion  of the stall of cattle,   
2 Grant,  Indra  Maghavan,  invoked  of many,  to these  my friends  the strength  which  thou possessest.   
Thou,  Maghavan,  hast rent strong  place s open:  unclose  for us, Wise  God,  thy hidden  bounty.   
3 King  of the living  world,  of men,  is Indra,  of all in varied  form  that earth  containeth.   
Thence  to the worshipper  he giveth  riches:  may he enrich  us also when  we laud him.  
4 Maghavan  Indra,  when  we all invoke  him, bountiful  ever sendeth  strength  to aid us:  
Whose  perfect  guerdon,  never  failing,  bringeth  wealth  to the men,  to friends  the thing  they covet.   
5 Quick,  Indra,  give us room  and way to riches,  and let us bring  thy mind  to grant  us treasures,   
That we may win us cars and Steeds  and cattle.  Preserve  us evermore,  ye Gods,  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  XXVIII.  Indra.  
1. COME  to our prayers,  O Indra,  thou who knowest:  let thy Bay Steeds  be yoked  and guided  hither.   
Though  mortal  men on every  side invok e thee,  still give thine  ear to us, O All−impeller.   
2 Thy greatness  reacheth  to our invocation,  the sages'  prayer  which,  Potent  God,  thou guardest.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
What  time thy hand,  O Mighty,  holds  the thunder,  awful  in strength  thou hast become  resistless.   
3 What  time thou drewest  both world−halves  together,  like heroes  led by thee who call each other−   
For thou wast born for strength  and high dominion−then  e'en the active  overthrew  the sluggish.   
4 Honour  us in these  present  days,  O Indra,  for hostile  men are making  expiation.   
Our sin that sinless  Varuna  discovered,  the Wondrous−Wise  hath long ago forgiven.   
5 We will address  this liberal  Lord,  this Indra,  that he may grant  us gifts of ample  riches,   
 
Best favourer  of the singer's  prayer  and praises.  Preserve  us evermore,  ye Gods,  with blessings.  
 
HYMN  XXIX  Indra.  
1. THIS  Soma  hath been  pressed  for thee,  O Indra:  come  hither,  Lord  of Bays,  for this thou lovest.   
Drink  of this fair, this well−effused  libation:  Maghavan,  give us wealth  when  we implore  thee.   
2 Come  to us quickly  with thy Bay Steeds,  Hero,  come  to our prayer,  accepting  our devotion.   
Enjoy  thyself  aright  at this libation,  and listen  thou unto the prayers  we offer.   
3 What  satisfaction  do our hymns  afford  thee?  When,  Maghavan?  Now  let us do thee service .  
Hymns,  only hymns,  with love for thee,  I weave  thee:  then hear,  O Indra,  these  mine  invocations.   
4 They,  verily,  were  also human  beings  whom  thou wast wont  to hear,  those  earlier  sages.   
Hence  I, O Indra  Maghavan,  invoke  thee:  thou art our Providence,  even  as a Father.   
5 We will address  this liberal  Lord,  this Indra,  that he may grant  us gifts of ample  riches,   
Best favourer  of the singer's  prayer  and praises.  Preserve  us evermore,  ye Gods,  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  XXX.  Indra.  
1. WITH  power  and strengt h, O Mighty  God,  approach  us: be the augmenter,  Indra,  of these  riches;   
Strong  Thunderer,  Lord  of men,  for potent  valour,  for manly  exploit  and for high dominion.   
2 Thee,  worth  invoking,  in the din of battle,  heroes  invoke  in fray for life and sunlight.   
Among  all people  thou art foremost  fighter:  give up our enemies  to easy slaughter.   
3 When  fair bright  days shall  dawn  on us, O Indra,  and thou shalt  bring  thy banner  near in battle,   
Agni  the Asura  shall  sit as Herald,  calling  Gods  hither  for our great  good fortune.   
4 Thine  are we, Indra,  thine,  both these  who praise  thee,  and those  who give rich gifts,  O God and Hero.   
Grant  to our princes  excellent  protection,  may they wax old and still be strong  and happy.   
5 We will address  this liberal  Lord,  this Indra that he may grant  us gifts of ample  riches:   
Best favourer  of the singer's  prayer  and praises.  Preserve  us evermore,  ye Gods,  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  XXXI.  Indra.  
1. SING  ye a song,  to make  him glad,  to Indra,  Lord  of Tawny  Steeds,  The Soma−drinker,  O my friends.   
2 To him the Bounteous  say the laud,  and let us glorify,  as men May do, the Giver  of true gifts.   
3 O Indra,  Lord  of boundless  might,  for us thou winnest  strength  and kine,   
Thou  winnest  gold for us, Good  Lord.   
4 Faithful  to thee we loudly  sing,  heroic  Indra,  songs  to thee:  Mark,  O Good  Lord,  this act of ours.   
5 Give  us not up to man's  reproach,  to foeman's  hateful  calumny:  In thee alone  is all my strengt h.  
6 Thou  art mine  ample  coat of mail,  my Champion,  Vrtra−Slayer,  thou:   Rig Veda – English Translation  
With  thee for Friend  I brave  the foe.  
7 Yea, great  art thou whose  conquering  might  two independent  Powers  confess.   
The Heaven,  O India,  and the Earth.   
8 So let the voice  surround  thee,  which  attends  the Maruts  on their way,   
Reaching  thee with the rays of light.   
9 Let the ascending  drops  attain  to thee,  the Wondrous  God,  in heaven:   
Let all the folk bow down  to thee.   
10 Bring  to the Wise,  the Great,  who waxeth  mighty,  your offeri ngs, and make  ready  your devotion;   
To many  clans  he goeth,  man's  controller.   
 
11 For Indra,  the sublime,  the far−pervading,  have  singers  generated  prayer  and praises:   
The sages  never  violate  his statutes.   
12 The choirs  have  stablished  Indra  King  for ever,  for victory,  him whose  anger  is resistless:   
And,  for the Bays'  Lord,  streng thened  those  he loveth.   
 
HYMN  XXXII.  Indra.  
1. LET none,  no, not thy worshippers,  delay  thee far away  from  us. Even  from  far away  come  thou unto o
ur feast,  or listen  if already  here.   
2 For here,  like flies on honey,  these  who pray to thee sit by the juice that they have  poured.   
Wealth−craving  singers  have on Indra  set their hope,  as men set foot upon  a car.  
3 Longing  for wealth  I call on him, the Thunderer  with the strong  right  hand,   
As a son calleth  on his sire.  
4 These  Soma  juices,  mixed  with curd, have  been  expressed  for Indra  here.   
Come  with thy Bay Steeds,  Thunder−wielder,  to our home,  to drink  them  till they make  thee glad.   
5 May he whose  ear is open  hear us. He is asked  for wealth:  will he despise  our prayer?   
Him who bestows  at once  a hundr ed thousand  gifts none  shall  restrain  when  he would  give.   
6 The hero never  checked  by men hath gained  his strength  through  Indra,  he  
Who  presses  out and pours  his deep  libations  forth,  O Vrtra−slayer,  unto thee.   
7 When  thou dost drive  the fighting  men together  be, thou Mighty  One,  the mighty's  shield.   
May we divide  the wealth  of him whom  thou hast slain:  bring  us, Unreachable,  his goods.   
8 For Indra,  Soma−drinker,  armed  with thunder,  press  the Soma  juice.   
Make  ready  your dressed  meats:  cause  him to favour us. The Giver  blesses  him who gives.   
9 Grudge  not, ye Soma  pourers;  stir you, pay the rites,  for wealth,  to the great  Conqueror.   
Only  the active  conquers  dwells  in peace,  and thrives:  not for the niggard  are the Gods.   
10 No one hath overturned  or stayed  the car of him who freely  gives.   
The man whom  Indra  and the Marut  host defend  comes  to a stable  full of kine.   
11 Indra,  that man when  fighting  shall  obtain  the spoil,  whose  strong  defender  thou wilt be.  
Be thou the gracious  helper,  Hero  I of our cars, be thou the helper  of our men.   
12 His portion  is exceeding  great  like a victorious  soldier's  spoil.   
Him who is Indra,  Lord  of Bays,  no foes subdue.  He gives  the Soma−pourer  strength.   
13 Make  for the Holy  Gods  a hymn  that is not mean,  but well−arran ged and fair of form.   
Even  many  snares  and bonds  subdue  not him who dwells  with Indra  through  his sacrifice.   
14 Indra,  what  mortal  will attack  the man who hath his wealth  in thee?   
The strong  will win the spoil  on the decisive  day through  faith in thee,  O Maghavan.   
15 In battles  with the foe urge on our mighty  ones who give the treasures  dear to thee,   
And may we with our princes,  Lord  of Tawny  Steeds!  pass through  all peril,  led by thee.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
16 Thine,  Indra,  is the lowest  wealth,  thou cherishest  the mid−mo st wealth,   
Thou  ever rulest  all the highest:  in the fray for cattle  none  resisteth  thee.   
17 Thou  art renowned  as giving  wealth  to every  one in all the battles  that are fought.   
Craving  protection,  all these  people  of the earth,  O Much−invoked,  implore  thy name.   
18 If I, O Indra,  were  the Lord  of riches  ample  as thine  own,   
I should  support  the singer,  God.  who givest  wealth!  and not abandon  him to woe.   
19 Each  day would  I enrich  the man who sang my praise,  in whatsoever  place  he were.   
No kinship  is there better,  Maghavan,  than thine:  a father  even  is no more.   
20 With  Plenty  for his true ally the active  man will gain the spoil.   
Your  Indra,  Much−invoked,  I bend  with song,  as bends  a wright  his wheel  of solid  wood.   
21 A moral  wins  no riches  by unworthy  praise:  wealth  comes  not to the niggard  churl.   
Light  is the task to give,  O Maghavan,  to one like me on the decisive  day.  
 
22 Like kine unmilked  we call aloud,  Hero,  to thee,  and sing thy praise,   
Looker  on heavenly  light,  Lord  of this moving  world,  Lord , Indra,  of what  moveth  not.  
23 None  other  like to thee,  of earth  or of the heavens,  hath been  or ever will be born.   
Desiring  horses,  Indra  Maghavan!  and kine,  as men of might  we call on thee.   
24 Bring,  Indra,  the Victorious  Ones;  bring,  elder  thou,  the younger  host.   
For, Maghavan,  thou art rich in treasures  from  of old, and must  be called  in every  fight.   
25 Drive  thou away  our enemies,  O Maghavan:  make  riches  easy to be won.   
Be thou our good  Protector  in the strife  for spoil:  Cherisher  of our friends  be thou.   
26 O Indra,  give us wisdom  as a sire gives  wisdom  to his sons.   
Guide  us, O Much−invoked,  in this our way may we still live and look upon  the light.   
27 Grant  that no mighty  foes,  unknown,  malevolent,  unhallowed,  tread  us to the ground.   
With  thine assistance,  Hero,  may we ass through  all the waters  that are rul`ng  down.   
 
HYMN  XXXIII  Vasistha.  
1. THESE  who wear  hair−knots  on the right,  the movers  of holy thought,  white−robed,  have  won me over
.  
I warned  the men,  when  from  the grass  I raised  me, Not from  afar can my Vasisthas  help you.  
2 With  soma  they brought  Indra  from  a distance,  Over  Vaisanta,  from  the strong  libation.   
Indra  preferred  Vasisthas  to the Soma  pressed  by the son of Vayata,  Pasadyumna.   
3 So, verily,  with these  he crossed  the river, in company  with these  he slaughtered  Bheda.   
So in the fight  with the Ten Kings,  Vasisthas!  did Indra  help Sudas  through  your devotions.   
4 I gladly,  men I with prayer  prayed  by our fathers  have fixed  your axle:  ye shall  not be injured:   
Since,  when  ye sang aloud  the Sakvari  verses,  Vasisthas!  ye invigorated  Indra.   
5 Like thirsty  men they looked  to heaven,  in battle  with the Ten Kings,  surrounded  and imploring.   
Then  Indra  heard  Vasistha  as he praised  him, and gave the Trtsus  ample  room  and freedom.   
6 Like sticks  and staves  wherewith  they drive  the cattle,  Stripped  bare,  the Bharatas  were  found  defencele
ss:  
Vasistha  then became  their chief  and leader:  then widely.  were  the Trtsus'  clans  extended.   
7 Three  fertilize  the worlds  with genial  moisture:  three noble  Creatures  cast a light before  them.   
Three  that give warmth  to all attend  the morning.  All these  have they discovered,  these  Vasisthas.   
8 Like the Sun's  growing  glory  is their splendour,  and like the sea's is their unflathomed  greatness.   
Their  course  is like the wind's.  Your  laud,  Vasisthas,  can never  be attained  by any other.   
9 They  with perceptions  of the heart  in secret  resort  to that which  spreads  a thousand  branches.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
The Apsaras  brought  hither  the Vasisthas  wearing  the vesture  spun  for them by Yama.   
10 A form  of lustre  springing  from  the lightning  wast thou,  when  Varuna  and Mitra  saw thee.   
Tliy one and only birth  was then,  Vasistha,  when  from  thy stock  Agastya  brought  thee hither.   
11 Born  of their love for Urvasi,  Vasistha  thou,  priest , art son of Varuna  and Mitra;   
And as a fallen  drop,  in heavenly  fervour,  all the Gods  laid thee on a lotus−blossorn.   
12 He thinker,  knower  both of earth  and heaven,  endowed  with many  a gift, bestowing  thousands,   
Destined  to wear  the vesture  spun  by Yam a, sprang  from  the Apsaras  to life, Vasistha.   
13 Born  at the sacrifice,  urged  by adorations,  both with a common  flow bedewed  the pitcher.   
Then  from  the midst  thereof  there  rose up Mana,  and thence  they say was born the sage Vasistha.   
14 He brings  the bearer of the laud and Saman:  first shall  he speak  bringing  the stone  for pressing.   
With  grateful  hearts  in reverence  approach  him: to you, O Pratrdas,  Vasistha  cometh.   
 
HYMN  XXXIV  Visvedevas.  
1. MAY  our divine  and brilliant  hymn  go forth,  like a swift  chariot  wrought  and fashioned  w
ell. 2 The waters  listen  as they flow along:  they know  the origin  of heaven  and earth.   
3 Yea, the broad  waters  swell  their flood  ior him: of him strong  heroes  think  amid  their foes.   
4 Set ye for him the coursers  to the pole:  like Indra  Thunderer  is the Golden−armed.   
5 Arouse  you, like the days,  to sacrifice  speed  gladly  like a traveller  on the way.   
6 Go swift  to battles,  to the sacrifice:  set up a flag, a hero for the folk.  
7 Up from  his strength  hath risen  as 'twere  a light: it bears  the load as earth  bears  living  things.   
8 Agni,  no demon  I invoke  the Gods:  by law completing  it, I form  a hymn.   
9 Closely  albout  you lay your heavenly  song,  and send your voice  to where  the Gods  abide.   
10 Varuna,  Mighty,  with a thousand  eyes, beholds  the paths  wherein  these  rivers  run.  
11 He, King  of kings,  the glory  of the floods,  o'er all that liveth  hath resistless  sway.   
12 May he assist  us among  all the tribes,  and make  the envier's  praise  devoid  of light.   
13 May the foes' threatening  arrow  pass us by: may he put far from  us our bodies'  sin.  
14 Agni,  oblation−cater,  through  our prayers  aid us: to him our dearest  laud is brought.   
15 Accordant  with the Gods  choose  for our Friend  the Waters'  Child:  may he be good  to us.  
16 With  lauds  I sing the Dragon  born of floods:  he sits beneath  the streams  in middle  air.  
17 Ne'er  may the Dragon  of the Deep  harm  us: ne'er  fail this faithful  servant's  sacrifice.   
18 To these  our heroes  may they grant  renown:  may pious  men march  boldly  on to wealth.   
19 Leading  great  hosts,  with fierce  attacks  of these,  they burn their foes as the Sun burns  the earth.   
20 What  time our wives  draw  near to us, may he, left−handed  Tvastar,  give us hero sons.   
21 May Tvastar  find our hymn  acceptable,  and may Aramati,  seeking wealth,  be ours.   
22 May they who lavish  gifts bestow  those  treasures:  may Rodasi  and Varunani  listen.   
May he, with the Varutris,  be our refuge,  may bountiful  Tvastar  give us store  of riches.   
23 So may rich Mountains  and the liberal  Waters,  so may all Herbs  that grow  on ground,  and Heaven,   
And Earth  accordant  with the Forest−Sovrans,  and both the World−halves  round  about  protect  us.  
24 To this may both the wide  Worlds  lend approval,  and Varuna  in heaven,  whose  Friend  is Indra.   
May all the Maruts  give consent,  the Victors,  that we may hold great  wealth  in firm possession.   
25 May Indra,  Varuna,  Mitra,  and Agni,  Waters,  Herbs,  Trees  accept  the praise  we offer.   
May we find refuge  in the Marut's  bosom.  Protect  us evermore,  ye Gods,  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  XXXV.  Visvedevas.  
1. BEFRIEND  us with their aids Indra  and Agni,  Indra  and Varuna  who receive  oblations!   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Indra  and Soma  give health,  strength  and comfort,  Indra  and Pusan  be our help in battle.   
2 Auspicious  Friends  to us be Bhaga,  Sathsa,  auspicious  be Purandhi  aid all Riches;   
The blessing  of the true and well−conducted,  and Aryaman  in many  forms  apparent.   
3 Kind  unto us he Maker  and Sustainer,  and the far−reaching  Pair with God−like  natures.   
Auspicious  unto us be Earth  and Heaven,  the Mountain,  and the Gods'  fair invocations.   
4 Favour  us Agni  with his face of splendour,  and Varuva  and Mitra  and the Asvins.   
Favour  us noble  actions  of the pious,  impetuous  vita blow  on us with favour.   
5 Early  invoked,  may Heaven  and Earth  be friendly,  and Air's  mid−region  good  for us to look on.  
To us may Herbs  and Forest−Trees  be gracious,  gracious  the Lord  Victorious  of the region.   
6 Be the God Indra  with the Vasus  friendly,  and, with Adityas,  Varuna  who blesseth.   
Kind,  with the Rudras,  be the Healer  Rudra,  and, with the Dames,  may Tvastar  kindly  listen.   
7 Blest  unto us be Soma,  and devotions,  blest  be the Sacrifice,  the Stones  for pressing.   
Blest  be the fixing  of the sacred  Pillars,  blest  be the tender  Grass  and blest  the Altar.   
8 May the far−seeing  Sun rise up to bless  us: be the four Quarters  of the sky auspicious.   
Auspicious  be the firmly−seated  Mountains,  auspicious  be the Rivers  and the Waters.   
9 May Adid  through  holy works  be gracioas,  and may the Maruts,  loud in song,  be friendly.   
May Visnu  give felicity,  and Pusan,  the Air that cherisheth  our life, and Vayu.   
10 Prosper  us Savitar,  the God who rescues,  and let the radiant  Mornings  be propitious.   
 
Auspicious  to all creatures  be Parjanya,  auspicious  be the field's  benign  Protector.   
11 May all the fellowship  of Gods  befriend  us, Sarasvati,  with Holy  Thoughts,  be gracious.   
Friendly  be they,  the Liberal  Ones  who seek us, yea, those  who dwell  in heaven,  on earth,  in waters.   
12 May the great  Lords  of Truth  protect  and aid us: blest  to us be our horses  and our cattle.   
Kind  be the pious  skilful−handed  Rbhus,  kind be the Fathers  at our invocations.   
13 May Aja−Ekapad,  the God,  be gracious,  gracious  the Dragon  of the Deep,  and Ocean.   
Gracious  be he the swelling  Child  of Waters,  gracious  be Prsni  who hath Gods  to guard  her.  
14 So may the Rudras,  Vasus,  and Adityas  accept  the new hymn  which  we now are making.   
May all the Holy  Ones  of earth  and heaven,  and the Cow's  offipring  hear our invocation.   
15 They  who of Holy  Gods  are very holy,  Immortal,  knowing  Law, whom  man must  worship,−   
May these  to−day  give us broad  paths  to travel.  Preserve  us evermore,  ye Gods,  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  XXXVI.  Visvedevas  
1. 1. LET the prayer  issue  from  the seat of Order,  for Surya  with his beams  hath loosed  the cattle.   
With  lofty ridges  earth  is far extended,  and Agni's  flame  hath lit the spacious  surface.   
2 O Asuras,  O Varuna  and Mitra,  this hymn  to you, like food,  anew  I offer.   
One of you is a strong  unerring  Leader,  and Mitra,  speaking,  stirreth  men to labour.   
3 The moveme nts of the gliding  wind  come  hither:  like cows,  the springs  are filled  to overflowing.   
Born  in the station  e'en of lofty  heaven  the Bull hath loudly  bellowed  in this region.   
4 May I bring  hither  with my song,  O Indra,  wise Aryaman  who yokes  thy dear Bay Horses,   
Voracious,  with thy noble  car, O Hero,  him who defeats  the wrath  of the malicious.   
5 In their own place  of sacrifice  adorers  worship  to gain long life and win his friendship.   
He hath poured  food on men when  they have  praised  him; be this, the dearest  reverence,  paid to Rudra.   
6 Coming  together,  glorious,  loudly  roaring  − Sarasvati,  Mother  of Floods,  the seventh−   
With  copious  milk,  with fair streams,  strongly  flowing,  full swelling  with the volume  of their water;   
 
2. 7. And may the mighty  Maruts,  too, rejoicing,  aid our devotion  and protect  our offspring.   
Let not swift−moving  Aksara  neglect  us: they have  increased  our own appropriate  riches,   Rig Veda – English Translation  
8 Bring  ye the great  Aramati  before  you, and Pusan  as the Hero  of the synod,   
Bhaga  who looks  upon  this hymn with favour,  and, as our strength,  the bountiful  Purandbi.   
9 May this our song  of praise  reach  you, O Maruts,  and Visnu  guardian  of the future  infant.   
May they vouchsafe  the singer  strength  for offspring.  Preserve  us evermore,  ye Gods,  with blessings.   
 
 
HYMN  XXXVII.  Visvedevas.  
1. LET your best−bearing  car that must  be lauded,  ne'er  injured,  bring  you Vajas  and Rbhuksans.   
Fill you, fair−helmeted!  with mighty  Soma,  thrice−mixed,  at our libations  to delight  you.  
2 Ye who behold  the light of heaven,  Rbhuksans,  give our rich patron s unmolested  riches.   
Drink,  heavenly−natured.  at our sacrifices,  and give us bounties  for the hymns  we sing you.  
3 For thou,  O Bounteous  One,  art used to giving,  at parting  treasure  whether  small  or ample.   
Filled  full are both thine  arms  with great  possessions:  thy goodness  keeps  thee not from  granting  riches.   
4 Indra,  high−famed,  as Vaja  and Rbhuksans,  thou goest  working,  singing  to the dwelling.   
Lord  of Bay Steeds,  this day may we Vasisthas  offer  our prayers  to thee and bring  oblations.   
5 Thou  winne st swift  advancement  for thy servant,  through  hymns,  Lord  of Bay Steeds,  which  thou hast 
favoured.   
For thee with friendly  succour  have  we battled,  and when,  O Indra,  wilt thou grant  us riches?   
6 To us thy priests  a home,  as 'twere,  thou givest:  when,  Indra wilt thou recognize  our praises?   
May thy strong  Steed,  through  our ancestral  worship,  bring  food and wealth  with heroes  to our dwelling.   
 
7 Though  Nirrti  the Goddess  reigneth  round  him, Autumns  with food in plenty  come  to Indra.  With  three  
close  Frien ds to length  of days he cometh,  he whom  men let not rest at home  in quiet.  8 Promise  us gifts,  
O Savitar:  may riches  come  unto us in Parvata's  full bounty.  May the Celestial  Guardian  still attend  us. Pr
eserve  us evermore,  ye Gods,  with blessings.  
 
HYMN  XXXVIII.  Savitar.  
1. ON high hath Savitar,  this God,  extended  the golden  lustre  which  he spreads  around  him.  
Now,  now must  Bhaga  be invoked  by mortals,  Lord  of great  riches  who distributes  treasures.   
2 Rise up, O Savitar  whose  hands  are golden,  and hear this man while  sacrifice  is offered,   
Spreading  afar thy broad  and wide  effulgence,  and bringing  mortal  men the food that feeds  them.   
3 Let Savitar  the God he hymned  with praises,  to whom  the Vasus,  even,  all sing glory.   
Sweet  be our lauds  to him whose  due is worship:  may he with all protection  guard  our princes.   
4 Even  he whom  Aditi  the Goddess  praises,  rejoicing  in God Savitar's  incitement:   
Even  he who praise  the high imperial  Rulers,  Varuna,  Mitra,  Aryaman,  sing in concert.   
5 They  who come  emulous  to our oblation,  dispensing  bounty,  from  the earth  and heaven.   
May they and Ahibudhnya  hear our calling:  guard  us Varutri  with the Ekadhenus.   
6 This may the Lord  of Life,  entreated,  grant  us,−the  wealth  which  Savitar  the God possesses.   
The mighty  calls on Bhaga  for protection,  on Bhaga  calls the weak  to give him riches.   
7 Bless  us the Vajins  when  we call, while  slowly  they move,  strong  Singers,  to the Gods'  assembly.   
Crushing  the wolf,  the serpent,  and the demons,  may they completely  banish  all afflictio n.  
8 Deep−skilled  in Law eternal,  deathless,  Singers,  O Vajins,  help us in each fray for booty.   
Drink  of this meath,  he satisfied,  be joyful:  then go on paths  which  Gods  are wont  to travel.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
 
HYMN  XXXIX  Visvedevas.  
1. AGNI,  erect,  hath shown  enriching  favour:  the flame  goes forward  to the Gods'  assembly.   
Like car−borne  men the stones  their path have chosen:  let the priest,  quickened,  celebrate  our worship.   
2 Soft to the tread,  their sacred  grass  is scattered:  these  go like Kings  amid  the band  around  them,   
At the folks  early  call on Night  and Morning,−Vayu,  and Pusan  with his team,  to bless  us.  
3 Here  on their path the noble  Gods  proceeded:  in the wide  firmament  the Beauteous  decked  them.   
Bend  your way hither,  ye who travel  widely:  hear this our envo y who hath gone  to meet  you.  
4 For they are holy aids at sacrifices:  all Gods  approach  the place  of congregation.   
Bring  these,  desirous,  to our worship,  Agni,  swift  the Nisatyas,  Bhaga,  and Purandhi.   
5 Agni,  to these  men's  hymns,  from  earth,  from  heaven , bring  Mitra,  Varuna,  Indra,  and Agni,   
And Aryaman,  and Aditi,  and Visnu.  Sarasvati  be joyful,  and the Maruts.   
6 Even  as the holy wish,  the gift is offered:  may he, unsated,  come  when  men desire  him.  
Give  never−failing  ever−conquering  riches:  with Gods  for our allies  may we be victors.   
7 Now  have  both worlds  been  praised  by the Vasist has; and holy Mitra,  Varuna,  and Agni.   
May they,  bright  Deities,  make  our song  supremest.  Preserve  us evermore,  ye Gods,  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  XL. Visvedevas.  
1. BE gathered  all the audience  of the synod:  let us begin  their praise  whose  course  is rapid .  
Whate'er  God Savitar  this day produces,  may we be where  the Wealthy  One distributes.   
2 This,  dealt  from  heaven  ' may both the Worlds  vouchsafe  us, and Varuna,  Indra,  Aryaman,  and Mitra.   
May Goddess  Aditi  assign  us riches,  Vayu  and Bhaga  make  them  ours for ever.   
 
3 Strong  be the man and full of power,  O Maruts,  whom  ye, borne  on by spotted  coursers,  favour.   
Him,  too, Sarasvati  and Agni  further,  and there  is none  to rob him of his riches.   
4 This Varuna  is guide  of Law,  he, Mitra,  and Aryaman,  the King s, our work  have  finished.   
Divine  and foeless  Aditi  quickly  listens.  May these  deliver  us unharmed  from  trouble.   
5 With  offerings  I propitiate  the branches  of this swift−moving  God,  the bounteous  Visnu.   
Hence  Rudra  gained  his Rudra−strength:  O Asvins,  ye sought  the house  that hath celestial  viands.   
6 Be not thou angry  here,  O glowing  Pusan,  for what  Varutri  and the Bounteous  gave us.  
May the swift−moving  Gods  protect  and bless  us, and Vata  send us rain, wha wanders  round  us.  
7 Now  have  both worlds  been praised  by the Vasisthas,  and holy Mitra,  Varuna,  and Agni.   
May they,  bright  Deities,  make  our song  supremest.  Preserve  us evermore,  ye Gods,  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  XLI. Bhaga.  
1. AGNI  at dawn,  and Indra  we invoke  at dawn,  and Varuna  and Mitra,  and the Asvins  twain.  Bhaga  at da
wn, Pusan,  and Brahmanaspati,  Soma  at dawn,  Rudra  we will invoke  at dawn.  2 We will invoke  strong,  e
arly−conquering  Bhaga,  the Son of Aditi,  the great  supporter:  Thinking  of whom,  the poor,  yea, even  the 
mighty,  even  the King  himself says,  Give  me Bhaga.  3 Bhaga  our guide,  Bhaga  whose  gifts are faithful,  f
avour  this song,  and give us wealth,  O Bhaga.  Bhaga,  augment  our store  of kine and horses,  Bhaga,  may 
we be rich in men and heroes.  4 So may felicity  be ours at present,  and when  the day approaches,  and at n
oontide;  And may we still, O Bounteous  One,  at sunset  be happy  in the Deities'  loving−kindness.  5 May B
haga  verily  be bliss−bestower,  and through  him, Gods!  may happiness  attend  us. As such,  O Bhaga,  all wiRig Veda – English Translation  
th might  invoke  thee:  as such be thou our Champion  here,  O Bhaga.  6 To this our worship  may all Dawns  
incline  them,  and come  to the pure place  like Dadhikravan.  As strong  steeds  draw  a chariot  may they brin
g us hitherward  Bhaga  who discovers  treasure.  7 May blessed  Mornings  dawn on us for ever,  with wealth  
of kine,  of horses,  and of heroes,  Streaming  with all abundance,  pouring  fatness.  Preserve  us evermore,  ye
 Gods,  with blessings.  
 
HYMN  XLII Visvedevas.  
1. LET Brahmans  and Angirases  come  forward,  and let the roar of cloudy  heaven  surround  us.  
Loud  low the Milch−kine  swimming  in the waters:  set be the stones  that grace  our holy service.   
2 Fair, Agni,  is thy long−known  path to travel:  yoke  for the juice  tfiy bay, thy ruddy  horses,   
Or red steeds,  Hero−bearing,  for the chambe r. Seated,  I call the Deities'  generations.   
3 They  glorify  your sacrifice  with worship,  yet the glad Priest  near them  is left unequalled.   
Bring  the Gods  hither,  thou of many  aspects:  turn hitherward  Aramati  the Holy.   
4 What  time the Guest  hath made  hims elf apparent,  at ease reclining  in the rich man's  dwelling,   
Agni,  well−pleased,  well−placed  within  the chamber  gives  to a house  like this wealth  worth  the choosing.
  
5 Accept  this sacrifice  of ours,  O Agni;  glorify  it with Indra  and the Maruts.   
Here  on our grass  let Night  and Dawn  be seated:  bring  longing  Varuna  and Mitra  hither.   
6 Thus  hath Vasistha  praised  victorious  Agni,  yearning  for wealth  that giveth  all subsistence.   
May he bestow  on us food,  strength,  and riches.  Preserve  us evermore,  ye Gods,  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  XLIII  Visvedevas.  
1. SING  out the pious  at your sacrifices  to move  with adorations  Earth  and Heaven−  The H
oly Singers,  whose  unmatched  devotions,  like a tree's  branches,  part in all directions.   
2 Let sacrifice  proceed  like some  fleet courser:  with one accord  lift ye on high the ladles.   
Strew  sacred  grass  meet  for the solenm  service:  bright  flames  that love the Gods  have mounted  upward.   
3 Like babes  in arms  reposing  on their mother,  let the Gods  sit upon  the grass's  summit.   
Let general  fire make  bright  the flame  of worshi p: scorn  us not, Agni,  in the Gods'  assembly.   
4 Gladly  the Gods  have  let themselves  be honoured,  milking  the copious  streams  of holy Order.   
The highest  might  to−day  is yours,  the Vasits':  come  ye, as many  as ye are, one−minded.   
5 So, Agni,  send us wealt h among  the people:  may we be closely  knit to thee,  O Victor,   
Unharmed,  and rich, and taking  joy together.  Preserve  us evermore,  ye ods, with blessings.   
 
HYMN  XLIV.  Dadhikras.  
1. I CALL  on Dadhikras,  the first, to give you aid, the Asvins,  Bhaga,  Dawn,  and Agni  kindled  well,   
Indra,  and Visnu,  Pusan,  Brahmanaspati,  Adityas,  Heaven  and Earth,  the Waters,  and the Light.   
2 When,  rising,  to the sacrifice  we hasten,  awaking  Dadhikras  with adorations.   
Seating  on sacred  grass  the Goddess  Ila. let us invoke  the sage swift−hearing  Asvins.   
3 While  I am thus arousing  Dadhikravan  I speak  to Agni,  Earth,  and Dawn,  and Surya,   
The red, the brown  of Varuna  ever mindful:  may they ward  off from  us all grief  and trouble.   
4 Foremost  is Dadhikravan,  vigorous  courser;  in forefront  of the cars, his way he knoweth,   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Closely  allied  with Surya  and with Morning,  Adityas,  and Angirases,  and Vasus.   
5 May Dadhikras  prepare  the way we travel  that we may pass along  the path of Order.   
May Agni  bear us, and the Heavenly  Army:  hear us all Mighty  Ones  whom  none  deceiveth.   
 
HYMN  XLV.  Savitar.  
1. MAY  the God Savitar,  rich in goodly  treasures,  filling  the region,  borne  by steeds,  come  hither,   
In his hand  holding  much  that makes  men happy,  lulling  to slumber  and arousing  creatures.   
2 Golden,  sublime,  and easy in their motion,  his arms  extend  unto the bounds  of heaven.   
Now  shall  that mightiness  of his he lauded:  even  Surya  yields  to him in active  vigour.   
3 May this God Savitar,  the Strong  and Mighty,  the Lord  of precious  wealth,  vouc hsafe  us treasures.   
May he, advancing  his far−spreading  lustre,  bestow  on us the food that feedeth  mortals.   
4 These  songs  praise  Savitar  whose  tongue  is pleasant,  praise  him whose  arms  are full, whose  hands  are 
lovely.   
High  vital strength,  and manifold,  may he grant  us. Preserve  us evermore,  ye Gods,  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  XLVI.  Rudra.  
1. To Rudra  bring  these  songs,  whose  bow is firm and strong,  the self−dependent  God with swiftly−flying  
shafts,   
The Wise,  the Conqueror  whom  none  may overcome,  armed  with sharp−pointed  weapons:  may he hear o
ur 
call.  
2 He through  his lordship  thinks  on beings  of the earth,  on heavenly  beings  through  his high imperial  swa
y.  
Come  willingly  to our doors  that gladly  welcome  thee,  and heal all sickness,  Rudra.,  in our famili es.  
3 May thy bright  arrow  which,  shot down  by thee from  heaven,  flieth  upon  the earth,  pass us uninjured  by
.  
Thou,  very gracious  God,  bast thousand  medicines:  inflict  no evil on our sons or progeny.   
4 Slay us not, nor abandon  us, O Rudra  let not thy noose, when  thou art angry,  seize  us.  
Give  us trimmed  grass  and fame  among  the living.  Preserve  us evermore,  ye Gods,  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  XLVII.  Waters.  
1. MAY  we obtain  this day from  you, O Waters,  that wave  of pure refreshment,  which  the pious   
Made  erst the special  beverage  of Indra,  bright,  stainless,  rich in sweets  and dropping  fatness.   
2 May the Floods'  Offspring,  he whose  course  is rapid,  protect  that wave  most  rich in sweets,  O Waters,   
That shall  make  Indra  and the Vasus  joyful.  This may we gain from  you to−day,  we pious.   
3 All−purifying,  joying  in their nature,  to paths  of Gods  the Goddesses  move  onward.   
They  never  violate  the laws of Indra.  Present  the oil−rich  offering  to the Rivers.   
4 Whom  Surya  with his bright  beams  hath attracted,  and Indra  dug the path for them  to travel,   
May these  Streams  give us ample  room  and freedom.  Preserve  us evermore,  ye Gods,  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  XLVIII.  Rbhus.  
1. YE liberal  Heroes,  Vajas  and Rbhuksans,  come  and delight  you with our flowing  Soma.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
May your strength,  Vibhus,  as ye come  to meet  us, turn hitherward  your car that brings  men profit.   
2 May we as Rbhu  with your Rbhus  conquer  strength  with our strength,  as Vibhus  with the Vibhus.   
May Vaja  aid us in the fight  for booty,  and helped  by Indra  may we quell  the foeman.   
3 For they rule many  tribes  with high dominion,  and conquer  all their foes in close  encounter.   
May Indra,  Vibhvan,  Vaja,  and Rbhuksan  destroy  by turns  the wicked  foeman's  valour.   
4 Now,  Deities,  give us ample  room  and freedom:  be all of you, one−minded,  our protection.   
So let the Vasus  grant  us strength  and vigour.  Preserve  us evermore,  ye Gods,  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  XLIX.  Waters.  
1. FORTH  from  the middle  of the flood  the Waters−their  chief  the Sea−flow  cleansing,  never  sleeping.   
Indra,  the Bull,  the Thunderer,  dug their channels:  here let those  Waters,  Goddesses,  protect  me.  
2 Waters  which  come  from  heaven,  or those  that wander  dug from  the earth,  or flowing  free by nature,   
Bright,  purifying,  speeding  to the Ocean,  here let those Waters.  Goddesses,  protect  me.  
3 Those  amid  whom  goes Varuna  the Sovran,  he who discriminates  men's  truth  and falsehood−   
Distilling  meath,  the bright,  the purifying,  here let those  Waters,  Goddesses,  protect  me.  
4 They  from  whom  Varuna  the King,  and Soma,  and all the Deities  drink  strength  and vigour,   
They  into whom  Vaisvanara  Agni  entered,  here let those  Waters,  Goddesses,  protect  Me.  
 
HYMN  L. Various  Deities.  
1. O MITRA−VARUNA,  guard  and protect  me here:  let not that come  to me which  nests  within  and swell
s. I drive  afar the scorpion  hateful  to the sight:  let not the winding  worm  touch  me and wound  my foot. 2 
Eruption  that appears  upon  the twofold  joints,  and that which  overspreads  the ankles  and the knees,  May t
he refulgent  Agni  banish  far away  let not the winding  worm  touch  me and wound  my foot. 3 The poison  t
hat is formed  upon  the Salmali,  that which  is found  in streams,  that which  the plants  produce,  All this ma
y all the Gods  banish  and drive  away:  let not the winding  worm  touch  me and wound  my foot. 4 The stee
p declivities,  the valleys,  and the heights,  the channels  full of water,  and the waterless−  May those  who s
well with water,  gracious  Goddesses,  never  afflict  us with the Sipada  disease,  may all the 
rivers  keep  us free from  Simida.  
 
HYMN  LI. Adityas.  
1 THROUGH  the Adityas'  most  auspicious  shelter,  through  their most  recent  succour  may we conquer.   
May they,  the Mighty,  giving  ear, establish  this sacrifice,  to make  us free and sinless.   
2 Let Aditi  rejoice  and the Adityas,  Varuna,  Mitra,  Aryaman,  most  righteous.   
May they,  the Guardians  of the world,  protect  us, and, to show  favour,  drink  this day our Soma.   
3 All Universal  Deities,  the Maruts,  all the Adityas,  yea, and all the Rbhus,   
Indra,  and Agni,  and the Asvins,  lauded.  Preserve  us evermore,  ye Gods,  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  LII. Adityas.  
1. MAY  we be free from  every  bond,  Adityas!  a castle  among  Gods  and men,  ye Vasus.  Winnin
g, may we win Varuna  and Mitra,  and, being,  may we be, O Earth  and Heaven.  2 May Varuna  a
nd Mitra  grant  this blessing,  our Guardians,  shelter  to our seed and offspring.  Let us not suffer  f
or another's  trespass.  nor do the thing  that ye, O Vasus,  punish.  3 The ever−prompt  Angirases,  iRig Veda – English Translation  
mploring  riches  from  Savitar  the God,  obtained  them.  So may our Father  who is great  and holy,  
and all the Gods,  accordant,  grant  this favour.  
 
HYMN  LIII. Heaven  and Earth.  
1. AS priest  with solemn  rites and adorations  I worship  Heaven  and Earth,  the High  and Holy.  To them
, great  Parents  of the Gods,  have  sages  of ancient  time,  singing,  assigned  precedence.  2 With  newest  hy
mns set in the seat of Order,  those  the Two Parents,  born before  all others,  Come,  Heaven  and Earth , w
ith the Celestial  People,  hither  to us, for strong  is your protection.  3 Yea, Heaven  and Earth,  ye hold in 
your possession  full many  a treasure  for the liberal  giver.  Grant  us that wealth  which  comes  in free abu
ndance.  Preserve  us evermore,  ye Gods,  with blessings.  
 
HYMN  LIV. Vastospati.  
1. ACKNOWLEDGE  us, O Guardian  of the Homestead:  bring  no disease,  and give us happy  entrance.   
Whate'er  we ask of thee,  be pleased  to grant  it, and prosper  thou quadrupeds  and bipeds.   
2 Protector  of the Home,  be our promoter:  increase  our wealth  in kine and steeds,  O Indu.   
May we be ever−youthful  in thy friendship:  be pleased  in us as in his sons a father.   
3 Through  thy dear fellowship  that bringeth  welfare,  may we be victors,  Guardian  of the Dwelling!   
Protect  our happiness  in rest and labour.  Preserve  us evermore,  ye Gods,  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  LV. Vastospati.  
1. VASTOSPATI,  who killest  all disease  and wearest  every  form,  Be an auspicious  Friend  to us.  
2 When,  O bright  Son of Sarama,  thou showest,  tawny−hued!  thy teeth,   
They  gleam  like lances'  points  within  thy mouth  when  thou wouldst  bite; go thou to steep.   
3 Sarama's  Son, retrace  thy way:  bark at the robber  and the thief.   
At Indra's  singers  barkest  thou?  Why  dust thou seek to terrify  us? Go to sleep.   
4 Be on thy guard  against  the boar,  and let the boar beware  of thee.   
 
At Indra's  singers  barkest  thou?  Why  dost thou seek to terrify  us? Go to sleep.   
5 Sleep  mother,  let the father  sleep,  sleep  dog and master  of the house.   
Let all the kinsmen  sleep,  sleep  all the people  who are round  about.   
6 The man who sits, the man who walks,  and whosoever  looks  on us,  
Of these  we closely  shut the eyes,  even  as we closely  shut this house.   
7 The Bull who hath a thousand  horns,  who rises up from  out the sea,−   
By him the Strong  and Mighty  One we lull and make  the people  sleep.   
8 The women  sleeping  in the court,  lying  without,  or stretched  on beds,   
The matrons  with their odorous  sweetsthese,  one and all, we lull to sleep.   
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  LVI. Maruts.  
1. Wno  are these  radiant  men in serried  rank,  Rudra's  young  heroes  borne  by noble  steeds?   
2 Verily  no one knoweth  whence  they sprang:  they,  and they only,  know  each other's  birth.   
3 They  strew  each other  with their blasts,  these  Hawks:  they strove  together,  roaring  like the wind.   
4 A sage was he who knew  these  mysteries,  what  in her udder  mighty  Prsni  bore.   
5 Ever  victorious,  through  the Maruts,  be this band  of Heroes,  nursing  manly  strength,   
6 Most  bright  in splendour,  flectest  on their way,  close−knit  to glory,  strong  with varie d power.   
7 Yea, mighty  is your power  and firm your strength:  so, potent,  with the Maruts,  be the band.   
8 Bright  is your spirit,  wrathful  are your minds:  your bold troop's  minstrel  is like one inspired.   
9 Ever  avert  your blazing  shaft  from  us, and let not your displeasure  reach  us here  
10 Your  dear names,  conquering  Maruts,  we invoke,  calling  aloud  till we are satisfied.   
11 Well−armed,  impetuous  in their haste,  they deck  themselves,  their forms,  with oblations:  to you, the pu
re, 
ornaments  made  of gold.   
12 Pure,  Maruts,  pure yourselves,  are your oblations:  to you, the pure,  pure sacrifice  I offer.   
By Law they came  to truth,  the Law's  observers,  bright  by their birth,  and pure,  and sanctifying.   
13 Your  rings,  O Maruts,  rest upon  your shoulders,  and chains of gold are twined  upon  your bosoms.   
Gleaming  with drops  of rain, like lightning−flashes,  after your wont  ye whirl  about  your weapons.   
14 Wide  in the depth  of air spread  forth  your glories,  far, most  adorable,  ye bear your titles.   
Maruts,  accept  this thousandfold  allotment  of household  sacrifice  and household  treasure.   
15 If, Maruts,  ye regard  the praise  recited  here at this mighty  singer  invocation,   
Vouchsafe  us quickly  wealth  with noble  heroes,  wealth  which  no man uho hateth  us may injure.   
16 The Maruts,  fleet as coursers,  while  they deck them  like youths  spectators  of a festal  meeting,   
Linger,  like beauteous  colts,  about  the dwelling,  like frisking  calves,  these  who pour down  the water.   
17 So may the Maruts  help us and be gracious,  bringing  free room  to lovely  Earth  and Heaven.   
Far be your bolt that slayeth  men and cattle.  Ye Vasus,  turn yourselves  to us with blessings.   
18 The priest,  when  seated,  loudly  calls you, Maruts,  praising  in song  your universal  bounty.   
He, Bulls!  who hath so much  in his possession,  free from  duplicity,  with hymns  invokes  you.  
19 These  Maruts  bring  the swift  man to a stand−still,  and strength  with mightier  strength  they break  and 
humble   
These  guard  the singer  from  the man who hates  him and lay their sore displeasure  on the wicked.   
20 These  Maruts  rouse  even  the poor and needy:  the Vasus  love him as an active  champion.   
Drive  to a distance,  O ye Bulls,  the darkness:  give us full store  of children  and descendants.   
21 Never,  O Maruts,  may we lose your bounty,  nor, car−borne  Lords!  be hitidmost  when  ye deal it.  
Give  us a share  in that delightful  treasure,  the genuine  wealth  that, Bulls!  is your possession.   
22 What  time the men in fury rush together  for running  streams,  for pastures,  and for houses.   
Then,  O ye Maruts,  ye who spring  from  Rudra,  be our protectors  in the strife  with foemen.   
23 Full many  a deed  ye did for our forefathers  worthy  of lauds  which,  even  of old, they sang you.  
lle strong  man,  with the Maruts,  wins  in battle,  the charger,  with the Maruts,  gains  the booty.   
 
24 Ours,  O ye Maruts,  be the vigorous  Hero,  the Lord  Divine  of men,  the strong  Sustainer,  Wi
th whom  to fair lands  we may cross  the waters,  and dwell  in our own home  with you beside  us
. 25 May Indra,  Mitra,  Varuna  and Agni,  Waters,  and Plants,  and Trees  accept  our praises.  Ma
y we find shelter  in the Marut's  bosom.  Preserve  us evermore,  ye Gods,  with blessings.  
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  LVII.  Maruts.  
1. YEA,  through  the power  of your sweet  juice,  ye Holy!  the Marut  host is glad at sacrifices.   
They  cause  even  spacious  heaven  and earth  to tremble,  they make  the spring  flow when  they come,  the 
Mighty.   
2 The Maruts  watch  the man who sings  their praises,  promoters  of the thought  of him who worships.   
Seat you on sacred  grass  in our assembly,  this day, with friendly  minds,  to share  the banquet.   
3 No others  gleam  so brightly  as these  Maruts  with their own forms,  their golden  gauds,  their weapons.   
With  all adornments,  decking  earth  and heaven,  they heighten,  for bright  show,  their common  splendour.   
4 Far from  us be your blazing  dart, O Maruts,  when  we, through  human  frailty,  sin against  you.  
Let us not he exposed  to that, ye Holy!  May your most  loving  favour  still attend  us.  
5 May even  what  we have  done  delight  the Maruts,  the blameless  Ones,  the bright,  the purifyin g.  
Further  us, O ye Holy,  with your kindness:  advance  us mightily  that we may prosper.   
6 And may the Maruts,  praised  by all their titles,  Heroes,  enjoy  the taste of our oblations.   
Give  us of Amrta  for the sake of offspring:  awake  the excellent  fair stores of riches.   
7 Hither,  ye Maruts,  praised,  with all your succours,  with all felicity  come  to our princes,   
Who,  of themselves,  a hundredfold  increase  us. Preserve  us evermore,  ye Gods,  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  LVIII.  Maruts.  
1. SING  to the troop  that pours down  rain in common,  the Mighty  Company  of celestial  nature.   
They  make  the world−halves  tremble  with their greatness:  from  depths  of earth  and sky they reach  to hea
ven.  
2 Yea, your birth,  Maruts,  was with wild commotion,  ye who move  swiftly,  fierce  in wrath,  terrific.   
Ye all−surpassing  in your might  and vigour,  each looker  on the light fears  at your coming.   
3 Give  ample  vital power  unto our princes  let our fair praises  gratify  the Maruts.   
As the way travelled  helpeth  people  onward,  so further  us with your delightful  succours.   
4 Your  favoured  singer  counts  his wealth  by hundreds:  the strong  steed  whom  ye favour  wins  a thousand.   
The Sovran  whom  ye aid destroys  the foeman.  May this your gift, ye Shakers,  be distinguished.   
5 I call, as such,  the Sons  of bounteous  Rudra:  will not the Maruts  turn again  to us−ward?   
What  secret  sin or open  stirs their anger,  that we implore  the Swift  Ones  to forgive  us.  
6 This eulogy  of the Bounteous  hath been  spoken:  accept,  ye Maruts,  this our hymn  of praises.   
Ye Bulls, keep  those  who hate us at a distance.  Preserve  us evermore,  ye Gods,  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  LIX. Maruts.  
1. WHOMSO  ye rescue  here and there,  whomso  ye guide,  O Deities,  To him give shelter,  Agni,  Mitra,  Va
runa,  ye Maruts,  and thou Aryaman.   
2 Through  your kind favour,  Gods,  on some  auspicious  day, the worshipper  subdues  his foes.   
That man increases  home  and strengthening  ample  food who brings  you offerings  as ye list.  
3 Vasistha  will not overlook  the lowliest  one among  you all.  
O Maruts,  of our Soma  juice  effused  to−day  drink  all of you with eager  haste.   
4 Your  succour  in the battle  injures  not the man to whom  ye, Heroes,  grant  your gifts.   
 
May your most  recent  favour  turn to us again.  Come  quickly,  ye who fain would  drink.   
5 Come  hitherward  to drink the juice,  O ye whose  bounties  give you joy.  
These  offerings  are for you, these,  Maruts,  I present.  Go not to any place  but this.  Rig Veda – English Translation  
6 Sit on our sacred  grass,  be graciously  inclined  to give the wealth  for which  we long,   
To take delight,  ye Maruts,  Friends of all, with Svaha,  in sweet  Soma  juice.   
7 Decking  the beauty  of their forms  in secret  the Swans  with purple  backs  have  flown  down  hither.   
Around  me all the Company  hath settled,  like joyous  Heroes  glad in our libation.   
8 Maruts,  the man whose  wrath is hard to master,  he who would  slay us ere we think,  O Vasus,   
May he be tangled  in the toils of mischief;  smite  ye him down  with your most  flaming  weapon.   
9 O Maruts,  ye consuming  Gods,  enjoy  this offering  brought  for you,  
To help us, ye who slay the foe.  
10 Sharers  of household  sacrifice,  come,  Maruts,  stay not far away,   
That ye may help us, Bounteous  Ones.   
11 Here,  Self−strong  Maruts,  yea, even  here.  ye Sages  with your sunbright  skins   
I dedicate  your sacrifice.   
12 Tryambaka  we worship,  sweet  augmenter  of prosperity.   
As from  its stem the cucumber,  so may I be released  from  death,  not reft of immortality.   
 
HYMN  LX. Mitra−Varuna.  
1. WHEN  thou,  O Sun, this day, arising  sinless,  shalt  speak  the truth  to Varuna  and Mitra,   
O Aditi,  may all the Deities love us, and thou,  O Aryaman,  while  we are singing.   
2 Looking  on man,  O Varuna  and Mitra,  this Sun ascendeth  up by both the pathways,   
Guardian  of all things  fixt, of all that moveth,  beholding  good  and evil acts of mortals.   
3 He from  their home  hath yoked  the Seven  gold Coursers  who,  dropping  oil and fatness,  carry  Surya.   
Yours,  Varuna  and Mitra,  he surveyeth  the worlds  and living  creatures  like a herdsman.   
4 Your  coursers  rich in store  of sweets  have  mounted:  to the bright  ocean  Surya  hath ascend ed,  
For whom  the Adityas  make  his pathway  ready,  Aryaman,  Mitra,  Varuna,  accordant.   
5 For these,  even  Aryaman,  Varuna  and Mitra,  are the chastisers  of all guile  and falsehood.   
These,  Aditi's  Sons,  infallible  and mighty,  have  waxen  in the home  of law Eternal.  
6 These,  Mitra,  Varuna  whom  none  deceiveth,  with great  power  quicken  even  the fool to wisdom,   
And,  wakening,  moreover,  thoughtful  insight,  lead it by easy paths  o'er grief  and trouble.   
7 They  ever vigilant,  with eyes that close  not, caring  for heaven and earth,  lead on the thoughtless.   
Even  in the river's  bed there  is a shallow.  across  this broad  expanse  may they conduct  us.  
8 When  Aditi  and Varuna  and Mitra,  like guardians,  give Sudas  their friendly  shelter,   
Granting  him sons and lineal  success ion, let us not, bold ones!  move  the Gods  to anger.   
9 May he with ofierings  purify  the altar from  any stains  of Varuna's  reviler.   
Aryaman  save us us all those  who hate us: give room  and freedom  to Sudas,  ye Mighty.   
10 Hid from  our eyes is their resplend ent meeting:  by their mysterious  might  they hold dominion.   
Heroes!  we cry trembling  in fear before  you, even  in the greatness  of your power  have  mercy.   
11 He who wins  favour  for his prayer  by worship,  that he may gain him strength  and highest  riches,   
That good  man's  mind  the Mighty  Ones  will follow:  they have  brought  comfort  to his spacious  dwelling.   
12 This priestly  task, Gods!  Varuna  and Mitra!  hath been performed  for you at sacrifices.   
Convey  us safely  over every  peril.  Preserve  us evermore,  ye Gods , with blessings.   
 
HYMN  LXI. Mitra−Varuna.  
1. O VARUNA  and Mitra,  Surya  spreading  the beauteous  light of you Twain  Gods  ariseth.   
He who beholdetb  all existing  creatures  observetb  well the zeal that is in mortals.   
2 The holy sage,  renowned  afar, direct eth his hymns  to you, O Varuna  and Mitra,−   Rig Veda – English Translation  
He whose  devotions,  sapient  Gods,  ye favour  so that ye fill, as 'twere,  with power  his autumns.   
3 From  the wide  earth,  O Varuna  and Mitra  from  the great  lofty  heaven,  ye, Bounteous  Givers,  −  
Have  in the fields  and houses  set your warder−,  who visit every  spot and watch  unceasing.   
4 I praise  the strength  of Varuna  and Mitra  that strength,  by mightiness,  keeps  both worlds  asunder.   
Heroless  pass the months  of the ungodly  he who loves  sacrifice  makes  his home  endu ring.  
5 Steers,  all infallible  are these  your people  in whom  no wondrous  thing  is seen,  no worship.   
Guile  follows  close  the men who are untruthful:  no secrets  may be hidden  from  your knowledge.   
6 I will exalt  your sacrifice  with homage:  as priest,  I, Mitra−Varuna,  invoke  you.  
May these  new hymns  and prayers  that I have  fashioned  delight  you to the profit  of the singer.   
7 This priestly  task, Gods!  Varuna  and Mitra!  hath been performed  for you at sacrifices.   
Convey  us safely  over every  peril.  Preserve  us evermore,  ye Gods,  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  LXII.  Mitra−Varuna.  
1. SURYA  hath sent aloft his beams  of splendour  o'er all the tribes  of men in countless  places.   
Together  with the heaven  he shines  apparent,  formed  by his Makers  well with power  and wisdom.   
2 So hast thou mounted  up before  us, Surya,  through  these  our praises,  with fleet dappled  horses.   
Declare  us free from  all offence  to Mitra,  and Varuna,  and Aryaman,  and Agni.   
3 May holy Agni,  Varuna,  and Mitra  send down  their riches  upon  us in thousan ds.  
May they,  the Bright  Ones,  make  our praise−song  perfect,  and, when  we laud them,  grant  us all our wishe
s.  
4 O undivided  Heaven  and Earth,  preserve  us, us, Lofty  Ones!  your nobIy−born  descendants.   
Let us not anger  Varuna,  nor Vayu,  nor him, the deare st Friend  of mortals,  Mitra.   
5 Stretch  forth  your arms  and let our lives  be lengthened:  with fatness  dew the pastures  of our cattle.   
Ye Youthful,  make  us famed  among  the people:  hear,  Mitra−Varuna,  these  mine  invocations.   
6 Now  Mitra,  Varuna,  Aryaman  vouchsafe  us freedom  and room,  for us and for our children.   
May we find paths  all fair and good  to travel.  Preserve  us evermore,  ye Gods,  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  LXIII.  Mitra−Varuna.  
1. COMMON  to all mankind,  auspicious  Surya,  he who beholdeth  all, is moun ting upward;   
The God,  the eye of Varuna  and Mitra,  who rolled  up darkness  like a piece  of leather.   
2 Surya's  great  ensign,  restless  as the billow,  that urgeth  men to action,  is advancing:   
Onward  he still would  roll the wheel  well−rounded,  which  Etasa,  harnessed  to the car−pole,  moveth.   
3 Refulgent  from  the bosom  of the Mornings,  he in Whom  singers  take delight  ascendeth.   
This Savitar,  God,  is my chief  joy and pleasure,  who breaketh  not the universal  statute.   
4 Golden,  far−seeing,  from  the heaven  he riseth:  far is his goal,  he hasteth  on resplendent.   
Men,  verily,  inspirited  by Surya  speed  to their aims  and do the work  assigned  them.   
5 Where  the irrunortals  have  prepared  his pathway  he flieth  through  the region  like a falcon.   
With  homage  and oblations  will we serve  you, O Mitra−Varuna,  when  the Sun hath risen.   
6 Now  Mitra,  Varuna,  Aryaman  vouchsafe  us freedom  and room,  for us and for our children.   
May we find paths  all fair and good  to travel.  Preserve  us evermore,  ye Gods,  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  LXIV. Mitra−Varuna.  
1. YE Twain  who rule, in heaven  and earth,  the region,  clothed  be your clouds  in robes  of oil and fatness.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
May the imperial  Varuna,  and Mitra,  and high−born  Aryaman  accept  our presents.   
2 Kings,  guards  of rrtighty  everlasting  Order,  come hitherward,  ye Princes,  Lords  of Rivers.   
Send  us from  heaven,  O Varuna  and Mitra,  rain and sweet  food,  ye who pour down  your bounties.   
3 May the dear God,  and Varuna  and Mitra  conduct  us by the most  effective  pathways,   
That foes may say unto Sudas  our chieftain,  May,  we, too, joy in food with Gods  to guard  us.  
4 Him who hath wrought  for you this car in spirit,  who makes  the song rise upward  and sustains  it,  
Bedew  with fatness,  Varuna  nd Mitra  ye Kings,  make  glad the pleasant  dwelling−places.   
5 To you this laud,  O Varuna  and Mitra  is offered  like bright  Soma  juice  to Vayu.   
Favour  our songs  of praise,  wake  thought  and spirit.  Preserve  us evermore,  ye Gods,  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  LXV.  Mitra−Varuna.  
1. WITH  hymns  I call you, when  the Sun hath risen,  Mitra,  and Varuna  whose  thoughts  are holy,   
Whose  Power  Divine,  supreme  and everlasting,  comes  with good  heed  at each man's  supplication.   
2 For they are Asuras  of Gods,  the friendly  make,  both of you, our lands  exceedi ng fruitful.   
May we obtain  you, Varuna  and Mitra,  wherever  Heaven  and Earth  and days may bless us.  
3 Bonds  of the sinner,  they bear many  nooses:  the wicked  mortal  hardly  may escape  them.   
Varuna−Mitra,  may your path of Order  bear us o'er trouble  as a boat o'er waters.   
4 Come,  taste our offering,  Varuna  and Mitra:  bedew  our pasture  wil sweet  food and fatness.   
Pour  down  in plenty  here upon  the people  the choicest  of your fair celestial  water.   
5 To you this laud,  O Varuna  and Mitra,  is offered,  like bright  Soma  juice  to Vayu.   
Favour  our songs  of praise,  wake  thought  and spirit.  Preserve  us evermore,  ye Gods,  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  LXVI  Mitra−Varuna.  
1. 1. LET our strong  hymn  of praise  go forth,  the laud of Mitra−Varuna,  With  homage  to that high−
born Pair;   
2 The Two exceeding  wise,  the Sons  of Daksa,  whom  the gods  ordained   
For lordship,  excellently  great.   
3 Such,  Guardians  of our homes  and us, O Mitra−Varuna,  fulfil   
The thoughts  of those  who sing your praise.   
4 So when  the Sun hath risen  to−day,  may sinless  Mitra,  Aryaman,   
Bhaga,  and Savitar  sendus  forth.   
5 May this our home  be guarded  well forward,  ye Bounteous,  on the way,   
Who  bear us safely  o'er distress.   
 
2. 6. And those  Self−reigning,  Aditi,  whose  statute  is inviolate,  The Kings  who rule a vast domain.   
7 Soon  as the Sun hath risen,  to you, to Mitra−Varuna,  I sing,   
And Aryarnan  who slays  the foe.  
8 With  wealth  of gold may this my song  bring  unmolested  power  and might,   
And,  Brahmans,  gain the sacrifice.   
9 May we be thine,  God Varuna,  and with our princes,  Mitra,  thine.   
Food  and Heaven's  light will we obtain.   
10 Many  are they who strengthen  Law,  Sun−eyed,  with Agni  for their tongue,   
They  who direct  the three  great  gatherings  with their thoughts,  yea, all things  with surpassing  might.   
 
 
11 They  who have  stablished  year and month  and then the day, night,  sacrifice  and holy verse,   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Varuna,  Mitra,  Aryarnan,  the Kings,  have won dominion  which  none  else may gain.   
12 So at the rising  of the Sun we think  of you with hymns  to−day,   
Even  as Varuna,  Mitra,  Aryaman  deserve:  ye are the charioteers  of Law.   
13 True  to Law,  born in Law the strengtheners  of Law,  terrible,  haters  of the false,   
In their felicity  which  gives  the best defence  may we men and our princes  dwell.   
14 Uprises,  on the slope  of heaven,  that marvel  that attracts  die sight   
As swift  celestial  Etasa  bears  it away,  prepared  for every  eye to see.  
15 Lord  of each single head,  of fixt and moving  things,  equally  through  the whole  expanse,   
The Seven  sister  Bays  bear Surya  on his car, to bring  us wealth  and happiness.   
16 A hundred  autumns  may we see that bright  Eye, God−ordained,  arise   
A hundred  autumns  may we live.  
17 Infallible  through  your wisdom,  come  hither,  resplendent  Varuna,   
And Mitra,  to the Soma  draught.   
18 Come  as the laws of Heaven  ordain,  Varuna,  Mitra,  void of guile:   
Press  near and drink  the Soma  juice.   
19 Come,  Mitra,  Varuna,  accept,  Heroes,  our sacrificial  gift:  
Drink  Soma,  ye who strengthen  Law.   
 
HYMN  LXVII.  Asvins.  
1. I WITH  a holy heart  that brings  oblation  will sing forth  praise  to meet  your car, ye Princes,   
Which,  Much−desired!  hath wakened  as your envoy.  I call you hither  as a son his parents.   
2 Brightly  hath Agni  shone  by us enkindled:  the limits  even  of darkn ess were  apparent.   
Eastward  is seen the Banner  of the Morning,  the Banner  born to give Heaven's  Daughter  glory.   
3 With  hymns  the deft priest  is about  you, Asvins,  the eloquent  priest  attends  you now,  Nasatyas.   
Come  by the paths  that ye are wont  to trave l, on car that finds  the light,  laden  with treasure.   
4 When,  suppliant  for your help,  Lovers  of Sweetness!  I seeking  wealth  call you to our libation,   
Hitherward  let your vigorous  horses  bear you: drink  ye with us the well−pressed  Soma  juices.   
5 Bring  forward,  Asvins,  Gods,  to its fulfilment  my never−wearied  prayer  that asks for riches.   
Vouchsafe  us all high spirit  in the combat,  and with your powers,  O Lords  of Power,  assist  us.  
6 Favour  us in these  prayers  of ours,  O Asvins.  May we have  genial  vigour,  ne'er  to fail us.  
So may we, strong  in children  and descendants,  go, wealthy,  to the banquet  that awaits  you.  
7 Lovers  of Sweetness,  we have  brought  this treasure  to you as 'twere  an envoy  sent for friendship.   
Come  unto us with spirits  free from  anger,  in homes  of men enjoying  our oblation.   
8 With  one, the same,  intention,  ye swift  movers,  o'er the Seven  Rivers  hath your chariot  travell ed.  
Yoked  by the Gods,  your strong  steeds  never  weary  while  speeding  forward  at the pole they bear you.  
9 Exhaustless  be your bounty  to our princes  who with their wealth  incite  the gift of riches,   
Who  further  friendship  with their noble  natures,  combini ng wealth  in kine with wealth  in herses.   
10 Now  hear,  O Youthful  Twain,  mine  invocation:  come,  Asvins,  to the home  where  food aboundeth.   
Vouchsafe  us wealth,  do honour  to our nobles.  Preserve  us evermore,  ye Gods,  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  LXVIII.  Asvins.  
1. COME,  radiant  Asvins,  with your noble  horses:  accept  your servant's  hymns,  ye Wonder−Workers:   
Enjoy  oblations  which  we bring  to greet  you.  
2 The gladdening  juices  stand  prepared  before  you: come  quickly  and partake  of mine  oblation.   
Pass by the calling of our foe and bear us.  