Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  CLI. Faith.  
1. By Faith  is Agni  kindled,  through  Faith  is oblation  offered  up. We celebrate  with praises  Faith  upon  the
 height  of happiness.   
2 Bless  thou the man who gives,  O Faith;  Faith,  bless  the man who fain would  give.   
Bless  thou the liberal  worshippers:  bless  thou the word that I have  said.  
 
3 Even  as the Deities  maintained  Faith  in the mighty  Asuras,  So make  this uttered  wish  of mine  tr
ue for the liberal  worshippers.  4 Guarded  by Vayu,  Gods  and men who sacrifice  draw  near to Fait
h. Man winneth  Faith  by yearnings  of the heart,  and opulence  by Faith.  5 Faith  in the early  morni
ng, Faith  at noonday  will we invocate,  Faith  at the setting  of the Sun. O Faith,  endow  us with beli
ef. 
 
HYMN  CLII.  Indra.  
1. A MIGHTY  Governor  art thou,  Wondrous,  Destroyer  of the foe, Whose  friend  is never  done  to death,  a
nd never,  never  overcome.   
2 Lord  of the clan,  who brings  us bliss,  Strong,  Warrior,  Slayer  of the fiend,   
May India,  Soma−drinker,  go before  us, Bull who gives  us peace.   
3 Drive  Raksasas  and foes away,  break  thou in pieces  Vrtra' sjaws:   
O Vrtra−slaying  Indra,  quell  the foeman's  wrath  who threatens  us.  
4 O Indra,  beat our foes away,  humble  the men who challenge  us:  
Send  down  to nether  darkness  him who seeks  to do us injury.   
5 Baffle  the foeman's  plan,  ward  off his weapon  who would conquer  us.  
Give  shelter  from  his furious  wrath,  and keep  his murdering  dart afar.  
 
HYMN  CLIII.  Indra.  
1. SWAYING  about,  the Active  Ones  came  nigh to Indra  at his birth,  And shared  his great  heroic  might.   
2 Based  upon  strength  and victory  and power , O Indra  is thy birth:   
Thou,  Mighty  One,  art strong  indeed.   
3 Thou  art the Vrtra−slayer,  thou,  Indra,  hast spread  the firmament:   
Thou  hast with might  upheld  the heavens.   
4 Thou,  Indra,  bearest  in thine  arms  the lightning  that accords  with thee,   
Whett ing thy thunderbolt  with might.   
5 Thou,  Indra,  art preeminent  over all creatures  in thy might:   
Thou  hast pervaded  every  place.   
 
HYMN  CLIV.  New Life.  
1. FOR  some  is Soma  purified,  some  sit by sacrificial  oil: To those  for whom  the meath  flows  forth,  even 
to those  let him depart.   
2 Invincible  through  Fervour,  those  whom  Fervour  hath advanced  to heaven,   
Who  showed  great  Fervour  in their lives,  −even  to those  let him depart.   
3 The heroes  who contend  in war and boldly  cast their lives  away,   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Or who give guerdon  thousandfold,  −even  to those  let him depart.   
4 Yea, the first followers  of Law,  Law's  pure and holy strengtheners,   
The Fathers,  Yama!  Fervour−moved,even  to those  let him depart.   
5 Skilled  in a thousand  ways  and means,  the sages  who protect  the Sun,  
The Rsis,  Yama!  Fervour−moved,−even  to those  let him depart.   
 
HYMN  CLV.  Various.  
1. ARAYI,  one−eyed  limping  hag, fly, ever−screeching,  to the hill. We frighten  thee away  with these,  the 
heroes  of Sirimbitha.   
2 Scared  from  this place  and that is she, destroyer  of each germ  unborn.   
Go, sharp−horned  Brahmanaspti  and drive  Arayi  far away.   
3 Yon log that floats  without  a man to guide  it on the river's  edge,−   
Seize  it, thou thing  with hideous  jaws,  and go thou far away  thereon.   
4 When,  foul with secret  stain  and spot,  ye hastened  onward  to the breast,   
All Indra's  enemies  were  slain  and passed  away  like froth  and foam.   
5 These  men have  led about  the cow,  have duly carried  Agni  round,   
And raised  their glory  tg the Gods.  Who  will attack  them  with success?   
 
HYMN  CLVI.  Agni.  
1. LET songs  of ours speed  Agni  forth  like a fleet courser  in the race,  And we will win each prize  through
 him.  
2 Agni the dart whereby  we gain kine for ourselves  with help from  thee,−   
That send us for the gain of wealth.   
3 O Agni,  bring  us wealth  secure,  vast wealth  in horses  and in kine:   
Oil thou the socket,  turn the wheel.   
4 O Agni,  thou hast made  the Sun, Eternal  Star, to mount  the sky,  
Bestowing  light on living  men.   
5 Thou,  Agni,  art the people's  light,  best, dearest,  seated  in thy shrine:   
Watch  for the singer,  give him life.  
 
HYMN  CLVII.  Visvedevas.  
1. WE will, with Indra  and all Gods  to aid us, bring  these existing  worlds  into subjection.   
2 Our sacrifice,  our bodies,  and our offspr.  let Indra  form  together  with Adityas.   
3 With  the Adityas,  with the band  of Maruts,  may Indra  be Protector  of our bodies.   
4 As when  the Gods  came,  after they had slaughtered  the Asuras,  keeping  safe their Godlike  nature,   
5 Brought  the Sun hitherward  with mighty  powers,  and looked  about  them  on their vigorous  Godhead.   
 
HYMN  CLVIII.  Surya.  
1. MAY  Surya  guard  us out of heaven,  and Vata  from  the firmament,  And Agni  from  terres trial spots.   
2 Thou  Savitar  whose  flame  deserves  hundred  libations,  be thou pleased:   
From  failing  lightning  keep  us safe.  
3 May Savitar  the God,  and may Parvata  also give us sight;   Rig Veda – English Translation  
May the Creator  give us sight.   
4 Give  sight  unto our eye, give thou our bodies  sight  that they may see:  
May we survey,  discern  this world.   
5 Thus,  Surya,  may we look on thee,  on thee most  lovely  to behold,   
See clearly  with the eyes of men.   
 
HYMN  CLIX.  Saci Paulomi.  
1. YON  Sun hath mounted  up, and this my happy  fate hate mounted  high.  I knowing  this, as conqueror  ha
ve won my husband  for mine  own.   
2 I am the banner  and the head,  a mighty  arbitress  am I:  
I am victorious,  and my Lord  shall  be submissive  to my will.  
3 My Sons  are slayers  of the foe, my Daughter  is a rulin g Queen:   
I am victorious:  o'er my Lord  my song  of triumph  is supreme.   
4 Oblation,  that which  Indra  gave and thus grew  glorious  and most  high,−   
This have I offered,  O ye Gods,  and rid me of each rival wife.   
5 Destroyer  of the rival wife,  Sole Spouse,  victorious,  conqueror,   
The others'  glory  have  I seized  as 'twere  the wealth  of weaker  Dames.   
6 I have  subdued  as conqueror  these  rivals,  these  my fellow−wives,   
That I may hold imperial  sway  over this Hero  and the folk.  
 
HYMN  CLX.  Indra.  
1. TASTE  this strong  draught  enriched  with offered  viands:  with all thy chariot  here unyoke  thy Coursers.
  
Let not those  other  sacrificers  stay thee,  Indra:  these  juices  shed for thee are ready.   
2 Thine  is the juice  effused,  thine  are the juices  yet to be pressed:  our resonant  songs  invite  thee.   
O Indra,  pleased  to−day  with this libation,  come,  thou who knowest  all and drink  the Soma.   
3 Whoso,  devoted  to the God,  effuses  Soma  for him with yearning  heart  and spirit,−   
Never  doth Indra  give away  his cattle:  for him he makes the lovely  Soma  famous.   
4 He looks  with Ioving  favour  on the mortal  who,  like a rich man,  pours  for him the Soma.   
Maghavan  in his bended  arm supports  him: he slays,  unasked,  the men who hate devotion.   
5 We call on thee to come  to us, desirous  of goods and spoil,  of cattle,  and of horses.   
For thy new love and favour  are we present:  let us invoke  thee,  Indra,  as our welfare.   
 
HYMN  CLXI.  Indra.  
1. FOR  life I set thee free by this oblation  from  the unknown  decline  and from  Consumption;   
Or, if the grasping  demon  have  possessed  him, free him from  her, O Indra,  thou and Agni.   
2 Be his days ended,  be he now departed,  be he brought  very near to death  already,   
Out of Destruction's  lap again  I bring  him, save him for life to last a hundred  autumns.   
3 With hundred−eyed  oblation,  hundred−autumned,  bringing  a hundred  lives,  have I restored  him,  
That Indra  for a hundred  years  may lead him safe to the farther  shore  of all misfortune.   
4 Live,  waxing  in thy strength,  a hundred  autumns,  live through  a hundred  springs,  a hundred  winters.   
Through  hundred−lived  oblation  Indra,  Agni,  Brhaspati,  Savitar  yield  him for a hundred!   
5 So have  I found  and rescued  thee thou hast returned  with youth  renewed.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Whole  in thy members!  I have  found  thy sight  and all thy life for thee.   
 
HYMN  CLXII.  Agni  
1. MAY  Agni,  yielding  to our prayer,  the Raksas−slayer,  drive  awa
y The malady  of evil name  that hath beset  thy labouring  womb.  2 A
gni, concurring  in the prayer,  drive  off the eater  of the flesh,  The m
alady  of evil name  that hath attacked  thy babe  and womb.   
3 That which  destroys  the sinking  germ,  the settled,  moving  embryo,   
That which  will kill the babe  at birth,even  this will we drive  far away.   
4 That which  divides  thy legs that it may lie between  the married  pair,  
That penetrates  and licks  thy side,−even  this will we exterminate.   
5 What  rests by thee in borrowed  form  of brother,  lover,  or of lord,  
And would  destroy  thy Progeny,−even  this will we exterminate.   
6 That which  through  sleep  or darkness  hath deceived  thee and lies down  by thee,   
And will destroy  thy progeny,−−even  this will we exterminate.   
 
HYMN  CLXIII  
1. FROM  both thy nostrils,  from  thine  eyes,  from  both thine  ears and from  thy chin,   
Forth  from  thy head  and brain  and tongue  I drive  thy malady  away.   
2 From  the neck−tendons  and the neck,  from  the breast−bones  and from  the spine,   
From  shoulders,  upper,  lower  arms,  I drive  thy malady  away.   
3 From  viscera  and all within,  forth  from  the rectum,  from  the heart,   
From  kidneys,  liver,  and from  spleen,  I drive  thy malady  away.   
4 From  thighs,  from  knee−caps,  and from  heels,  and from  the forepart  of the feet,  
From  hips from  stomach,  and from  groin  I drive  thy malady  away.   
5 From  what  is voided  from  within,  and from  thy hair, and from  they nails,   
From  all thyself  from top to toe, I drive  thy malady  away.   
6 From  every  member,  every  hair, disease  that comes  in every  joint,   
From  all thyself,  from  top to toe, I drive  thy malady  away.   
 
HYMN  CLXIV.  Dream−charm.  
1. AVAUNT,  thou Master  of the mind  Depart,  and vanish  far away.  Look  on Destruction  far from  hence.  
The live man's  mind  is manifold.   
2 A happy  boon  do men elect,  a mighty  blessing  they obtain.   
Bliss  with Vaivasvata  they see. The live man's  mind  seeks  many  a place.   
3 If by address,  by blame,  by imprecation  we have  committed  sin, awake  or sleeping,   
All hateful  acts of ours,  all evil doings  may Agni  bear away  to distant  places.   
4 When,  Indra,  Brahmanaspati,  our deeds  are wrongful  and unjust,   
May provident  Angirasa  prevent  our foes from  troubling,  us.  
5 We have prevailed  this day and won:  we are made  free from  sin and guilt.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Ill thoughts,  that visit us awake  or sleeping,  seize  the man we hate,  yea, seize  the man who hateth  us.  
 
HYMN  CLXV.  Visvedevas.  
1. GODS,  whatsoe'er  the Dove  came  hither  seeking,  sent to us as the envoy  of Destruction,  For that l
et us sing hymns  and make  atonement.  Well  be it with our quadrupeds  and bipeds.  2 Auspicious  be t
he Dove  that hath been  sent us, a harmless  bird, ye Gods,  within  our dwelling.  May Agni,  Sage,  be p
leased  with our oblation,  and may the Missile  borne  on wings  avoid  us. 3 Let not the Arrow  that hat
h wings  distract  us: beside  the fire−place,  on the hearth  it settles.  May,  it bring  welfare  to our men a
nd cattle:  here let the Dove,  ye Gods,  forbear  to harm  us. 4 The scree ching  of the owl is ineffective  a
nd when  beside  the fire the Dove  hath settled,  To him who sent it hithcr  as an envoy,  to him be rever
ence paid,  to Death,  to Yama.   
5 Drive  forth  the Dove,  chase  it with holy verses:  rejoicing,  bring  ye hither  food and cattle
, Barring  the way against  all grief  and trouble.  Let the swift  bird fly forth  and leave  us vig
our. 
 
HYMN  CLXVI.  Sapatnanasanam.  
1. MAKE  me a bull among  my peers,  make  me my rivals,  conqueror:  Make  me the slayer  of my foes,  a so
vran ruler,  lord of kine  
2 I am my rivals'  slayer,  like Indra  unwounded  and unhurt,   
And all these  enemies  of mine  are vanquished  and beneath  my feet.  
3 Here,  verily,  I bind you fast, as the two bow−ends  with the string.   
Press  down  these  men,  O Lord  of Speech,  that they may humbly speak  to me.  
4 Hither  I came  as conqueror  with mighty  all−effecting  power,   
And I have  mastered  all your thought,  your synod,  and your holy work.   
5 May I be highest,  having  gained  your strength  in war, your skill in peace   
my feet have  trodden  on your heads.   
Speak  to me from  beneath  my feet, as frogs  from  out the water  croak,  as frogs  from  out the water  croak.   
 
HYMN  CLXVII.  Indra.  
1. THIS  pleasant  meath,  O Indra,  is effused  for thee:  thou art the ruling  Lord  of beaker  and of juice.   
Bestow  upon  us wealth  with many  hero sons:  thou,  having  glowed  with Fervour,  wortnest  heavenly  light.   
2 Let us call Sakra  to libations  here effused,  winner  of light who joyeth  in the potent  juice.   
Mark  well this sacrifice  of ours and come  to us: we pray to Maghavan  the Vanquisher  of hosts.   
3 By royal  Soma's  and by Varuna's  decree,  under  Brhaspati's  and Anumati's  guard,   
This day by thine  authority,  O Maghavan,  Maker,  Disposer  thou!  have  I enjoyed  the jars.  
4 1, too, urged  on, have  had my portion,  in the bowl,  and as first Prince  I drew  forth  this my hymn  of prai
se,  
When  with the prize  I came  unto the flowing  juice,  O Visvamitra,  Jamadagni,  to your home.   
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  CLXVIII.  Vayu.  
1. O THE  Wind's  chariot,  O its power  and glory!  Crashing  it goes and hath a voice  of thunde r.  
It makes  the regions  red and touches  heaven,  and as it moves  the dust of earth  is scattered.   
2 Along  the traces  of the Wind  they hurry,  they come  to him as dames  to an assembly.   
Borne  on his car with these  for his attendants,  the God speeds  forth,  the universe's  Monarch.   
3 Travelling  on the paths  of air's midregion,  no single  day doth he take rest or slumber.   
Holy  and earliest−born,  Friend  of fhe waters,  where  did he spring  and from  what  region  came  he?  
4 Germ  of the world,  the Deities'  vital spirit, this God moves  ever as his will inclines  him.  
His voice  is heard,  his shape  is ever viewless.  Let us adore  this Wind  with our oblation.   
 
HYMN  CLXIX.  COWS.  
1. MAY  the wind  blow  upon  our Cows  with healing:  may they eat herbage  full of vigorous  juices .  
May they drink  waters  rich in life and fatness:  to food that moves  on feet be gracious,  Rudra.   
2 Like−coloured,  various−hued,  or single−coloured,  whose  names  through  sacrifice  are known  to Agni,   
Whom  the Angirases  produced  by Fervour,vouchsafe  to these, Parjanya,  great  protection.   
3 Those  who have  offered  to the Gods  their bodies,  whose  varied  forms  are all well known  to Soma,−   
 
Those  grant  us in our cattle−pen,  O Indra,  with their full streams  of milk and plenteous  offsprin
g. 4 Prajapati,  bestowing  these  upon  me, one−minded  with all Gods  and with the Fathers,  Hath  t
o our cow−pen  brought  auspicious  cattle:  so may we own the offspring  they will bear us.  
HYMN  CLXX.  Surya.  
1. MAY  the Bright  God drink  glorious  Soma−mingled  meath,  giving  the sacrifice's  lord uninjured  life;  
He who,  wind−urged,  in person  guards  our offspring  well,  hath nourished  them  with food and shines  o'er 
many  a land.   
2 Radiant,  as high Truth,  cherished,  best at winning  strength,  Truth  based  upon  the statute  that supports  th
e 
heavens ,  
He rose,  a light,  that kills Vrtras  and enemies,  best slayer  of the Dasyus,  Asuras,  and foes.   
3 This light,  the best of lights,  supreme,  all−conquering,  winner  of riches,  is exalted  with high laud.   
All−lighting,  radiant,  mighty  as the Sun to see, he spreadeth  wide  unfailing  victory  and strength.   
4 Beaming  forth  splendour  with thy light,  thou hast attained  heaven's  lustrous  realm.   
By thee were  brought  together  all existing  things,  possessor  of all Godhead,  All−effecting  God.   
 
HYMN  CLXXI.  Indra.  
1. FOR  Ita's sake who pressed  the juice,  thou,  Indra,  didst  protect  his car,  
And hear the Soma−giver's  call.  
2 Thou  from  his skin hast borne  the head  of the swift−moving  combatant,   
And sought  the Soma−pourer's  home.   
3 Venya,  that mortal  man,  hast thou,  for Astrabudhna  the devout,   
O Indra,  many  a time set free.  Rig Veda – English Translation  
4 Bring,  Indra,  to the east again  that Sun who now is in the west,   
Even  against  the will of Gods.   
 
HYMN  CLXXII.  Dawn.  
1. WITH  all thy beauty  come:  the kine approaching  with full udders  follow  on thy path.   
2 Come  with kind thoughts,  most  liberal,  rousing  the warrior's  hymn  of praise,  with bounteous  ones,   
3 As nourishers  we tie the thread,  and, liberal  with our bounty,  offer  sacrifice.   
4 Dawn  drives  away  her Sister's  gloom,  and, through  her excellence,  makes  her retrace  her path.   
 
HYMN  CLXXIII.  The King.  
1. BE with us; I have  chosen  thee:  stand  stedfast  and immovable.  Let all the people  wish  for thee let not th
y kingship  fall away.   
2 Be even  here;  fall not away  be like a mountain  unremoved.   
Stand  stedfast  here like Indra's  self, and hold the kingship  in the grasp.   
3 This man hath Indra  stablished,  made  secure  by strong  oblation's  power.   
May Soma  speak  a benison,  and Brahmanaspati,  on him.  
4 Firm  is the sky and firm the earth,  and stedfast  also are these  hills.   
Stedfast  is all this living  world,  and stedfast  is this King  of men.   
5 Stedfast,  may Varuna  the King,  stedfast,  the God Brhaspati,   
 
Stedfast,  may Indra,  stedfast  too, may Agni  keep  thy stedfast  reign.  6
 On constant  Soma  let us think with constant  sacrificial  gift And then
 may Indra  make  the clans  bring  tribute  unto thee alone.  
 
HYMN  CLXXIV.  The King.  
1. WITH  offering  for success  in fight  whence  Indra  was victorious.  With  this, O Brahmanaspati,  let us att
ain to royal  sway.   
2 Subd uing those  who rival us, subduing  all malignities,   
Withstand  the man who menaces,  withstand  the man who angers  us.  
3 Soma  and Savitar  the God have  made  thee a victorious  King   
All elements  have aided  thee,  to make  thee general  conqueror.   
4 Oblation,  that which  Indra.  gave and thus grew  glorious  and most  high,−   
This have I offered,  Gods!  and hence  now,  verily,  am rivalless.   
5 Slayer  of rivals,  rivalless,  victorious,  with royal  sway,   
Over  these  beings  may I rule, may I be Sovran  of the folk.  
 
HYMN  CLXXV. Press−stones.  
I. MAY  Savitar  the God,  O Stones,  stir you according  to the Law:  Be harnessed  to the shafts,  and press.   
2 Stones,  drive  calamity  away,  drive  ye away  malevolence:   
Make  ye the Cows  our medicine.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
3 Of one accord  the upper  Stones,  giving  the Bull his bull−like  strength,   
Look  down  with pride  on those  below.   
4 May Savitar  the God,  O Stones,  stir you as Law commands  for him  
Who  sacrifices,  pouring  juice.   
 
HYMN  CLXXVI.  Agni.  
1. WITH  hymns  of praise  their sons have  told aloud  the Rbhus'  mighty  deeds.   
Who,  all−supporting,  have  enjoyed  the earth  as, twere  a mother  cow.   
2 Bring  forth  the God with song  divine,  being  Jatavedas  hitherward,   
To bear our gifts at once  to heaven.   
3 He here,  a God−devoted  Priest,  led forward  comes  to sacrifice.   
Like a car covered  for the road,  he, glowing,  knows,  himself,  the way.   
4 This Agni  rescues  from  distress,  as 'twere  from  the Immortal  Race,   
A God yet mightier  than strength,  a God who hath been  made  for life.  
 
HYMN  CLXXVII.  Mayabheda.  
1. THE  sapient  with their spirit  and their mind  behold  the Bird adorned  with all an Asura's  magic  might.   
Sages  observe  him in the ocean's  inmost  depth:  the wise disposers  seek the station  of his rays.   
2 The flying  Bird bears  Speech  within  his spirit:  erst the Gandharva  in the womb  pronounced  it:  
And at the seat of sacrifice  the sages  cherish  this radiant,  heavenly−bright  invention.   
3 I saw the Herdsman,  him who never  resteth,  approaching  and departing  on his pathways.   
 
He, clothed  in gathered  and diffusive  splendour,  within  the worlds  continually  travels.  
 
HYMN  CLXXVIII.  Tarksya.  
1. THIS  very mighty  one whom  Gods  commission,  the Conqueror  of cars, ever triumphant,   
Swift,  fleet to battle,  with uninjured  fellies,  even  Tarksya  for our weal  will we call hither.   
2 As though  we offered  up our gifts to Indra,  may we ascend. him as a ship.  for safety.   
Like the two wide  worlds,  broad,  deep  far−extended,  may we be safe both when  he comes  and leaves  you.
  
3 He who with might  the Five Lands  hath pervaded,  like Surya  with his lustre,  and the waters−   
His strength  wins  hundred s, thousands  none  avert  it, as− the young  maid  repelleth  not her lover.   
 
HYMN  CLXXIX.  Indra.  
1. Now  lift ye up yourselves  and look on Indra's  seasonable  share.  If it be ready,  offer  it; unready,  ye have
 been  remise.   
2 Oblation  is prepared:  come  to us, Indra;  the Sun hath travelled  over half his journey.   
Friends  with their stores  are sitting  round  thee waiting  like lords  of clans  for the tribe's  wandering  chieftai
n.  
3 Dressed  in the udder  and on fire, I fancy;  well−dressed,  I fancy,  is this recent  present.  Rig Veda – English Translation  
Drink,  Indra,  of the curd of noon's  libation  with favour,  Thunderer,  thou whose  deeds  are mighty.   
 
HYMN  CLXXX.  Indra.  
1. O MUCH−INVOKED,  thou hast subdued  thy foemen:  thy might  is loftiest;  here display  thy bounty.   
In thy right  hand,  O Indra,  bring us treasures:  thou art the Lord  of rivers  filled  with riches.   
2 Like a dread  wild beast  roaming  on the mountain  thou hast approached  us from  the farthest  distance.   
Whetting  thy bold and thy sharp  blade,  O Indra,  crush  thou the foe and scatter  those  who hate us.  
3 Thou,  mighty  Indra,  sprangest  into being  as strength  for lovely  lordship  o'er the people.   
Thou  drovest  off the folk who were  unfriendly,  and to the Gods  thou gavest  room  and freedom.   
 
HYMN  CLXXXl.  Visvedevas.  
1. 1. VASISTHA  mastered  the Rath antara,  took it from  radiant  Dhatar,  Savitar,  and Visnu,  Oblation
, portion  of fourfold  oblation,  known  by the names  of Saprathas  and Prathas.   
2. 2. These  sages  found  what  lay remote  and hidden,  the sacrifice's  loftiest  secret  essence.  From  radi
ant Dhatar,  Savitar,  and Visnu,  from  Agni,  Bharadvaja  brought  the Brhat.  3 They  found  with mental  eyes 
the earliest  Yajus,  a pathway  to the Gods,  that had descended.  From  radiant  Dhitar,  Savitar,  and Visnu,  fr
om Surya  did these  sages  bring  the Gharma.   
 
HYMN  CLXXXII.  Brhaspati.  
1. BRHASPATI  lead us safely  over troubless  and turn his evil thought  against  the sinner;   
Repel  the curse,  and drive  away  ill−feeling,  and give the sacrificer  peace  and cornfort!   
2 May Naratarhsa  aid us at Prayaja:  blest  be our Anuyaja  at invok ings.   
May he repel  the curse,  and chase  ill−feeling,  and give the sacrificer  peace  and comfort.   
 
3 May he whose  head  is flaming  burn the demons,  haters  of prayer,  so that the arrow  slay them.  May he 
repel  the curse  and chase  ill−feeling,  and give the sacrificer  peace  and comfort.  
 
HYMN  CLXXXIII.  The Sacrificer,  Etc.  
1. I SAW  thee meditating  in thy spirit  what  sprang  from  Fervour  and hath thence  developed.   
Bestowing  offspring  here,  bestowing  riches,  spread  in thine  offspring,  thou who cravest  children.   
2 I saw thee pondering  in thine  heart,  and praying  that in due time thy body  might  be fruitful.   
Come  as a youthful  woman,  rise to meet  me: spread  in thine  offspring,  thou who cravest  children.   
3 In plants  and herbs,  in all existent  beings  I have  deposit ed the germ  of increase.   
All progeny  on earth  have  I engendered,  and sons in women  who will be hereafter.   
 
HYMN  CLXXXIV.  
1. MAY  Visnu  form  and mould  the womb,  may Tvastar  duly shape  the forms,  Prajapati  infuse  the stream,Rig Veda – English Translation  
 and Dhatar  lay the germ  for thee.  
2 O Sinivali,  set the germ,  set thou the germ,  Sarasvati:   
May the Twain  Gods  bestow  the germ,  the Asvins  crowned  with lotuses.   
3 That which  the Asvins  Twain  rub forth  with the attrition−sticks  of gold,−   
That germ  of thine  we invocate,  that in the tenth  month  thou mayst  bear.   
 
HYMN  CLXXXV.  Aditi.  
1. GREAT,  unassailable  must  he the heavenly  favour  of' Three  Gods,  Varuna,  Mitra,  Aryaman.   
2 O'er these,  neither  at home  nor yet abroad  or pathways  that are Strange,   
The evil−minded  foe hath power   
3 Nor over him,.  the man on whom  the Sons  of Aditi  bestow  Eternal  light that he may live.  
 
HYMN  CLXXXVI.  Vayu.  
1. FILLING  our hearts  with health  and joy, may Vata  breathe  his balm  on us  
May he prolong  our days of life.  
2 Thou  art our Father,  Vata,  yea, thou art a Brother  and a friend,   
So give us strength  that we may live.  
3 The store  of Amrta  laid away  yonder,  O Vata,  in thine  home,−   
Give  us thereof  that we may live.  
 
HYMN  CLXXXVII.  Agni.  
1. To Agni  send I forth  my song,  to him the Bull of all the folk: So may he bear us past our foes.   
2 Who  from  the distance  far away  shines  brilliantly  across  the wastes:   
So may he bear us past our foes.   
 
3 The Bull with brightly−gleaming  flame  who utterly  consumes  the fiends   
So may he bear us past our foes.   
4 Who looks  on all existing  things  and comprehends  them  with his view:   
So may he bear us past our foes.   
5 Resplendent  Agni,  who was born in farthest  region  of the air:  
So may he bear us past our foes.   
 
HYMN  CLXXXVIII.  Agni.  
1. 1. Now  send ye Jatavedas  forth , send hitherward  the vigorous  Steed  To seat him on our sacred  gra
ss.  
 
2. 2. I raise  the lofty  eulogy  of Jatavedas,  raining  boons,  With  sages  for his hero band.   
3 With  flames  of Jatavedas  which  carry  oblation  to the Gods,   
May he promote  our sacrifice.   
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
 
HYMN  CLXXXIX.  Surya.  
1. THIS  spotted  Bull hath come,  and sat before  the Mother  in the east, Advancing  to his Father  heaven.   
2 Expiring  when  he draws  his breath,  she moves  along  the lucid  spheres:   
The Bull shines  out through  all the sky.  
3 Song  is besto wed upon  the Bird:  it rules  supreme  through  thirty  realms   
Throughout  the days at break  of morn.   
 
HYMN  CXC.  Creation.  
1. FROM  Fervour  kindled  to its height  Eternal  Law and Truth  were  born:  Thence  was the Night  produced
, and thence  the billowy  flood  of sea arose.   
2 From  that same  billowy  flood  of sea the Year  was afterwards  produced,   
Ordainer  of the days nights,  Lord  over all who close  the eye.  
3 Dhatar,  the great  Creator,  then formed  in due order  Sun and Moon.   
He formed  in order  Heaven  and Earth,  the regions  of the air, and light.   
 
HYMN  CXCI.  Agni.  
1. THOU,  mighty  Agni,  gatherest  up all that is precious  for thy friend.  Bring  us all treasures  as thou art en
kindled  in libation's  place   
2 Assemble,  speak  together:  let your minds  be all of one accord,   
As ancient  Gods  unanimous  sit down  to their appointed  share.   
3 The place  is common,  common  the assembly,  common  the mind,  so be their thought  united.   
A common  purpose  do I lay before  you, and worship  with your general  oblation.   
4 One and the same  bt your resolve,  and be your minds  of one accord.   
United  be the thoughts  of all that all may happily  agree.   
 
APPENDIX  I.  
PAGE  87, HYMN  CXXVI.  I subjoin  a Latin  version  of the two stanzas  omitted  in my trauslation.  They  ar
e in a different  metre  from  the 
rest of the hymn,  have  no apparent  connexion  with what  precedes,  and look like a fragment  of a liberal 
shepherd's  love−song.  The seventh  stanza  should,  it seems,  precede  the sixth:  6 [Ille loquitur].  Adhaerens,
 arcte  adhaerens,  illa quac  mustelae  similis  se abdidit, multum  humorem 
effundens,  dat mihi complexuum  centum  gaudia.  7 [Illa loquitur].  Prope,  prope  accede;  molliter  me tange.
 Ne putes  pilos  corporis  mei−paucos  esse:  tota sum 
villosa  sicut  Gandharidum  ovis.  Professor  Ludwig  thinks  that (multurn  humorem,  i.e., semen  genitale,  eff
undens)  may be the name  of a 
slave−girl.  Gandharidun  ovis:  a ewe of the Gandharis.  The country  of Gandhara  is placed  by Lassen  to the 
west of the Indus  and to the south  of the Kophen  or Kabul  river.  King  Darius  in a rock−inscription  mentio
ns the  Ga(n)dara  together  with the Hi(n)du  as people  subject  to him, and the Gandarii,  together  with the 
Parthians,  Khorasmians,  Sogdians,  and Dadikae,  are said by Herodotus  to have formed  part of the army  of 
Xerxes.  The name  of the country  is prese rved in the modern  Kandahar.  See Muir,  O.S. Texts,  ii. 342, and 
Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  p. 30.  Rig Veda – English Translation  
PAGE  221, HYMN  CLXXIX.  The deified  object  of this omitted  hymn  is said to be Rati or Love,  and its 
Rsis or authors  are Lopamudrd, 
Agastya,  and a disciple.  Lopamudra  is represented  as inviting  the caresses  of her aged husband  Agastya,  a
nd 
complaining  of his coldness  and neglect.  Agastya  responds  in stanza  3, and in the second  half of stanza  4 t
he 
disciple  or the poet briefly  tells the result  of the dialogue.  Stanza  5 is supposed  to be spoken  by the discipl
e who  has overheard  the conversation,  but its connexion  with the rest of the hymn  is not very apparent.  In 
stanza  6 'toiling  with strong  endeavour'  is a paraphrase  and not a translation  of the original  khanama nah 
khanitraib  (ligonibus  fodiens)  which  Sayana  explains  by 'obtaining  the desired  result  by means  of lauds  an
d sacrifices.'   
M. Bergaigne  is of opinion  that the hymn  has a mystical  meaning,  Agastya  being  identifiable  with the 
celestial  Soma  whom  Lopamudra , representing  fervent  Prayer,  succeeds  after long labour  in drawing  dow
n 
from  his secret  dwelling  place.  See La Religion  Vedique,  ii. 394 f.  
1 'Through  many  autumns  have  I toiled  and laboured,  at night  and morn,  through  age−inducing  dawnings.
  
Old age impairs  the beauty  of our bodies.  Let husbands  still come  near unto their spouses.   
2 For even  the men aforetime,  law−fulfillers,  who with the Gods  declared  eternal  statutes,−−   
They  have  decided,  but have  not accomplished:  so now let Wives  come  near unto their husbands.   
3 Non inutilis  est labor  cui Dii favent:  nos omnes  aemulos  et aemulas  vincamus.   
Superemus  in hac centum  artium  pugna  in qua duas partes  convenientes  utrinque  commovemus.   
4 Cupido  me cepit  illius  tauri [viri]  qui me despicit,  utrum  hinc utrum illinc  ab aliqua  parte  nata sit.  
Lopamudra  taururn  [mariturn  suum]  ad se detrahit:  insipiens  illa sapientem  anhelantern  absorbet.   
5 This Soma  I address  that is most  near us, that which  hath been  imbibed  within  the spirit,   
To pardon  any sins we have committed.  Verily  mortal  man is full of longings.   
6 Agastya  thus,  toiling  with strong  endeavour,  wishing  for children,  progeny  and. power,   
Cherished  − a sage of mighty  strength  − both classes,  and with the Gods  obtained  his prayer's  fulfilment.   
By 'both  classes'  probably  priests  and princes,  or institutors  of sacrifices,  are meant.  M. Bergaigne  
understands  the expression  to mean  the two forms  or essences  of Soma,  the celestial  and the terrestrial.   
5 Membrum  suum  virile,  quod  vrotentum  fuerat,  mas ille retraxit.  Rursus  illud quod  in juvenem  filiam  
sublatum  fuerat,  non aggressurus,  ad se rerahit.   
6 Quum  jam in medio  connessu,  semiperfecto  opere,  amorem  in puellam  pater  impleverat,  ambo  disceden
tes 
seminis  paulum  in terrae  superficiem  sacrorum  sede effusum  emiserunt.   
7 Quum  pater  suam  nilam  adiverat,  cum ed congressus  suum  semen  supra  wrrarn  effudit.  Tum Dii benigni  
precem  (brahma)  prgeduerunt,  et Vastoshpatim,  legum  sacrarum  custodem,  formaverunt.   
8 Ille tauro  similis  spumam  in certamine  jactavit,  tunc discedens  pusillaximis  huc profectus  est. Quasi  dex
tro 
pede  claudus  processit,  "inutiles  fuerunt  illi mei complexus,"  ita locutus.   
 
9 'The fire, burning  the people,  does not approach  quickly  (by day):  the naked  (Rakasas  approach)  not A
gni 
by night;  the giver of fuel, and the giver  of food,  he, the upholder  (of the rite),  is born,  overcoming  ene
mies by  his might.'   
PAGE  619, HYMN  CVI I borrow  Wilson's  translation  of the omitted  stanzas.  5 'You  are like two pleasant
ly moving  well−fed  (hills)  like Mitra  and Varuna,  the two bestowers  of felicity, Rig Veda – English Translation  
veracious,  possessors  of infinite  wealth,  happy,  like two horses  plump  with fodder,  abiding  in the firmame
nt, 
like two rams  (are you) to be nourished  with sacrificial  food,  to be cherished  (with  oblations).  6 'You  are l
ike two mad elephants  bending  their forequarters  and smiting  the foe, like the two sons of Nitosa 
destroying  (foes),  and cherishing  (friends);  you are bright  as two water−born  (jewels),  do you, who are 
victorious,  (render)  my decaying  mortal  body  free from  decay.  7 'Fierce  (Asvins),  like two powerful  (hero
es), you enable  this moving,  perishable  mortal  (frame)  to cross 
over to the objects  (of its destination)  as over water;  extremely  strong,  like the Rbhus,  your chariot,  attain
ed 
its destination  swift  as the wind,  it pervaded  (everywhere),  it dispensed  riches.  8 'With  your bellies  full of 
the Soma,  like two saucepans , preservers  of wealth,  destroyers  of enemies.  (you 
are) armed  with hatchets,  moving  like two flying  (birds)  with forms  like the moon,  attaining  success  throu
gh the  mind,  like two laudable  beings,  (you are) approaching  (the sacrifice).'   
PAGE  645, HYMN  CLX II.  
1. MAY  Agni,  yielding  to our prayer,  the Raksas−slayer,  drive  away  The malady  of evil name  that hath b
eset thy labouring  womb.   
2 Agni,  concurring  in the prayer,  drive  off the eater  of the flesh,   
The malady  of evil name  that hath attacked  thy babe  and womb.   
3 That which  destroys  the sinking  germ,  the settled,  moving  embryo,   
That which  will kill the babe  at birth,even  this will we drive  far away.   
4 That which  divides  thy legs that it may lie between  the married  pair,  
That penetrates  and licks  thy side,−even  this will we exterminate.   
5 What  rests by thee in borrowed  form  of brother,  lover,  or of lord,  
And would  destroy  thy Progeny,−even  this will we exterminate.   
6 That which  through  sleep  or darkness  hath deceived  thee and lies down  by thee,   
And will destroy  thy progeny,−−even  this will we exterminate.   
 
PAGE  645, HYMN  CLXIII   
1. FROM  both thy nostrils,  from  thine  eyes,  from  both thine  ears and from  thy chin,   
Forth  from  thy head  and brain  and tongue  I drive  thy malady  away.   
2 From  the neck−tendo ns and the neck,  from  the breast−bones  and from  the spine,   
From  shoulders,  upper,  lower  arms,  I drive  thy malady  away.   
3 From  viscera  and all within,  forth  from  the rectum,  from  the heart,   
From  kidneys,  liver,  and from  spleen,  I drive  thy malady  away.   
4 From  thighs,  from  knee−caps,  and from  heels,  and from  the forepart  of the feet,  
From  hips ' frorn  stomach,  and from  groin  I drive  thy malady  away.   
5 From  what  is voided  from  within,  and from  thy hair, and from  they nails,   
From  all thyself  from  top to toe, I drive  thy malady  away.   
6 From  every  member,  every  hair, disease  that comes  in every  joint,   
From  all thyself,  from  top to toe, I drive  thy malady  away.   
 
PAGE  650, HYMN  CLXXXIV.   
1. MAY  Visnu  form  and mould  the womb,  may Tvastar  duly shape  the form s,  
Prajapati  infuse  the stream,  and Dhatar  lay the germ  for thee.   
2 O Sinivali,  set the germ,  set thou the germ,  Sarasvati:   Rig Veda – English Translation  
 
May the Twain  Gods  bestow  the germ,  the Asvins  crowned  with lotus
es.  
3 That which  the Asvins  Twain  rub forth  with the attrition −sticks  of g
old,−   
That germ  of thine  we invocate,  that in the tenth  month  thou mayst  be
ar.  
 
APPENDIX  II.  
METRE.   
Rhyme is not used in the Rgveda. The metres are regulated by the number of syllables in the stanza, 
which consists generally of three or fou r Padas, measures, divisions, or quarter verses, with a distinctly 
marked  interval at the end of the second Pada, and so forming two hemistichs or semi−stanzas of equal or 
unequal  length. These Padas most usually contain eight or eleven or twelve syllables  each; but 
occasionally they  consist of fewer and sometimes of more than these numbers. The Padas of a stanza are 
generally of equal  length and of more or less corresponding prosodial quantities: but sornetimes two ox 
more kinds of metre are employed in on e stanza, and then the Padas vary in quantity and length. As 
regards quantity, the first  Syllables of the Pada are not subject to very strict laws, but the last four are 
more regular, their measure being generally iambic in Padas of eight and of twelve syl lables and trochaic 
in those of eleven.  
 
In the printed text the first and second Padas form one line, and the third, or third and fourth, or third, 
fourth, and fifth, complete the distich or stanza. This arrangement I have followed in my translation.  
Subjoined, in alphabetical arrangement, are the names, with brief descriptions, of the metres used in the  
Hymns of the Rgveda. The Index of Hymns will show the metre or metres employed in each Hymn.  
Abhtisarini: a species of Trstup, in which two Padas conta in twelve instead of eleven syllables.  
 
Amstup or Anustubh: consisting of four Padas of eight syllables each, two Padas forming a line. This is 
the prevailing form of metre in the Manava−dharma−sastra, the Mahabharata, the Ramayana, and the 
Puranas.  
 
Anustubgarbha:  a metre  of the Usnih  class:  the first Pada  containing  five syllables,  and the three  followin
g Padas  of eight  syllables  each.   
Anustup  Pipilikamadhya:  a species  of Anustup,  having  the second  Pada  shorter  than the first and third  (8 
syllables+  4+8+ 8).  
Asti:  consisting  of four Padas  of Sixteen  syllables  each,  or sixty−four  syllables  in the stanza.   
Astrapaikti:  consisting  of two Padas  of eight  syllables  each,  followed  by two Padas  of twelve  syllables  ea
ch.  
Atidhrti:  four Padas  of nineteen  syllab les each,  = 76 syllables.   
Atijagati:  four Padas  of thirteen  syllables  each.   
Atincrti:  consisting  of three  Padas  containing  respectively  seven,  six, and seven  syllables.   
Atisakvari:  four Padas  of fifteen  syllables  each.   
Atyasti:  four Padas  of seventeen  syllables  each.   
Brhati:  four Padas  ( 8 + 8 + 12 + 8) containing  36 syllables  in the stanza.   
Caturvimsatika  Dvipada:  a Dvipada  containing  24 syllables  instead  of 20.  
Dhrti:  consisting  of seventy−two  syllables  in a stanza.   
Dvipada  Viraj:  a species  of Gayatri consisting  of two Padas  only (12+8  or 10+10  syllables);  inadequately  
represented  in the translation  by two decasyllabic  iambic  lines.   
Ekapada  Tristup:  a Trstup  consisting  of a single  Pada  or quarter  stanza.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Ekapada  Viraj:  a Viraj  consisting  of a single Pada.   
Gayatri:  the stanza  usually  consists  of twenty−four  syllables,  variously  arranged,  but generally  as a triplet  
of 
three  Padas  of eight  syllables  each,  or in one line of sixteen  syllables  and a second  line of eight.  There  are 
eleven  varieties  of this metre,  and the number  of syllables  in the stanza  varies  accordingly  from  nineteen  t
o 
thirty−three.   
Jagati:  a metre  consisting  of forty−eight  syllables  arranged  in four Padas  of twelve  syllables  each,  two Pa
das forming  a line or hemistich  which  in the translation  is represented  by a double  Alexandrine.   
Kakup  or Kakubh:  a metre  of three  Padas  consisting  of eight,  twelve,  and eight  syllables  respectively.   
Kakubh  Nyakusira;  consisting  of three  Padas  of 9+12+4  syllables.   
Krti:  a metre  of four Padas.  of twenty  syllables  each.   
Madhyejyotis:  a metre  in which  a Pada  of eight  syllables  stands  between  two Padas  of twelve.   
Mahibrhati:  four Padas  of eight  syllables  each,  followed  by one of twelve.   
 
Mahapadapank ti: a two−lined  metre  of thirtyone  syllables,  the first line consisting  of four Padas  of five 
syllables  each,  and the second  being  a Tristup  of the usual  eleven  syllables.  See Vedic  Hymns,  part 1. (S. 
Books  of the East,  XXXII),  p. xcviii.   
Mahapankti:  a metre of forty−eight  syllables  8 x 6 or 12 x 4.  
Mahasatobrhati:  a lengthened  form  of Satobrhati.   
Nastarupi:  a variety  of Anustup.   
Nyankusarini:  a metre  of four Padas  of 8 + 12 + 8 + 8 syllables.   
Padanicrt:  a variety  of Gayatri  in which  one syllable  is wanting  in each Pada:  7+3=21  syllables.   
Padapankti:  a metre  consisting  of five Padas  of five syllables  each.   
Pankti:  a metre  of five octosyllabic  Padas,  like Anustup  with an additional  Pada.   
Panktyuttara:  a metre  which  ends with a Pankti  of 5 + 5 syllable s.  
Pipilikamadhya:  any metre  the middle  Pada  of which  is shorter  than the preceding  and the following.   
Pragatha:  a metre  in Book  VIII,  consisting  of strophes  combining  two verses,  viz. a Brhati  or Kakup  follo
wed by a Satobrhati.   
Prastarapankti:  a metre  of forty  syllables:  12+12+8+8   
Pratistha:  a metre  of four Padas  of four syllables  each;  also a variety  of the Gayatri  consisting  of three  Pad
as of eight,  seven,  and six syllables  respectively.   
Purastadbrhati:  a variety  of Brhati  with twelve  syllables  in the first Pada.   
Pura−usnih:  a metre  of three  Padas,  containing  12+8+8  syllables.   
Sakvari:  a metre  of four Padas  of fourteen  syllables  each.   
Satobrhati:  a metre  whose  even Padas  contain  eight  syllables  each,  and the uneven  twelve:  12+8+12+8=4
0.  
Skandhogr iva: consisting  of Padas  of 8 + 12 + 8 + 8 syllables.   
Tanusira:  consisting  of three  Padas  of 11 + 11 + 6 syllables.   
Tristup  or Tristubh:  a metre  of four Padas  of eleven  syllables  each.   
Uparistadbrhati:  consisting  of four Padas  of 12 + 8 + 8 + 8 syllable s.  
Uparistajjyotis:  a Tristup  stanza  the last Pada  of which  contains  only eight  syllables.   
Urdhvabrhati:  a variety  of Brhati.   
Urobrhati:  a variety  of Brhati:  8+12  8 + 8 syllables.   
Usniggarbha:  Gayatri  of three  Padas  of six, seven,  and eleven  syllables  respectively.   
Usnih:  consisting  of three  Padas  of 8 + 8 + 12 syllables.   
Vardhamana:  a species  of Gayatri;  6 + 7 + 8 21 syllables.   
Viparita:  a metre  of four Padas  resembling  Vistarapankti.   
Viradrupa:  a Tristup  metre  of four Padas,  11 + 11 + 11 + 7 or 8 syllables.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Viraj:  a metre  of four Padas  of ten syllables  each.   
Viratpurva:  a variety  of Tristup.   
Viratsthana:  a variety  of Tristup.   
Visamapada:  metre  of uneven  stanzas.   
Vistarabrhati:  a form  of Brhati  of four Padas  containing  8 + 10 + 10 + 8= 36 sylla bles.  
Vistarapankti:  a form  of Pankti  consisting  of four padas  of 8+12+12+8−40  syllables.   
Yavamadhya:  a metre  having  a longer  Pada  between  two shorter  ones.   
   
 
 
 
THE VEDA OF THE  
BLACK YAJUS SCHOOL  
 
entitled  
 
TAITTIRIYA SANHITA  
 
Translated from the original sanskrit  
Prose and verse  
 
By  
 
Arthur Berriedale Keith, D.C.L., D. LITT.  
Of the inner temple, barrister -at-law, and of his majesty's colonial office sometime 
acting professor of sanskrit at the university of oxford author of 'responsible govern ment in 
the dominions' cambridge, massachusetts [1914]  
Source of E -text:  www.sacred -texts.com  
  Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
617 
 KANDA I  
PRAPATHAKA I  
The New and Full Moon Sacrifices  
i. 1. 1.  
a For food thee, for strength thee!  
b Ye are winds, ye are approachers.  
c Let the god Savitr  impel you to the most excellent offering.  
d O invincible ones, swell with the share for the gods,  
Full of strength, of milk, rich in offspring, free from sickness, from disease.  
e Let no thief, no evil worker, have control over you.  
f Let Rudra's dart av oid you.  
g Abide ye, numerous, with this lord of cattle.  
h Do thou protect the cattle of the sacrificer.  
 
i. 1. 2  
a Thou art the substance of the sacriflee.  
b The Raksas is burned up, the evil spirits are burned up.  
c The Vedi hath come to the sacrificial  straw,  
Made by Manu, fashioned with the Svadha call.  
The sages fetch it from in front,  
The delightful straw for the gods to sit on here.  
d Thou art impelled by the gods.  
e Thou art made to grow by the rains.  
f O divine straw, lot me not hit thee either ac ross or along,  
g Let me hit thy joints,  
h Let me come to no harm in cutting thee.  
i O divine straw, rise with a hundred shoots,  
Let us rise with a thousand shoots.  
k Guard from the contact of earth.  
l I gather thee with good gathering.  
m Thou art the girdl e of Aditi, the cord of Indrani.  
 Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
618 
 n Let Pusan tie a knot for thee, that knot shall mount me.  
o I hold thee up with the arms of Indra, I seize thee with the head of Brhaspati.  
p Fare along the wide atmosphere.  
q Thou art going to the gods.  
 
i. 1. 3.  
a Be ye pure for the divine rite, the sacrifice to the gods.  
b Thou art the cauldron of Matariçvan.  
c Thou art the heaven, thou art the earth.  
d Thou art the all -supporting with the highest support.  
e Be firm, waver not.  
f Thou art the strainer of the Vasus, of  a hundred streams, thou art that of the 
Vasus, of a thousand streams.  
g The spot (stoka ) has been offered, the drop has been offered.  
h To Agni, to the mighty firmament!  
i Hail to sky and earth!  
k This is she of all life, this is the all -encompassing, thi s is the all -doing.  
I Be ye united, that follow holy orders,  
Ye that wave and are fullest of sweetness,  
Delightful for the gaining of wealth.  
m With Soma I curdle thee, curds for Indra.  
n O Visnu, guard the offering.  
 
i. 1. 4.  
a For the rite you two, for the gods may I be strong.  
b Thee for accomplishment!  
c The Raksas is burnt up, the evil spirits are burnt up.  
d Thou art the yoke.  
e Injure him who injures us, injure him whom we injure.  
f Thou art of gods the most firmly jointed, the most richly filled,  
the most agreeable, the best of carriers, the best caller of the gods.  
g Thou art the oblation -holder that wavers not.  
h Be firm, waver not.  
i I gaze on thee with the eye of Mitra.  Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
619 
 k Be not afraid, be not troubled, let me harm thee [1] not.  
l (Be thou) wide  open to the wind.  
m On the impulse of the god Savitr, with the arms of the Açvins,  
with the hands of Pusan, I offer thee dear to Agni, to Agni and Soma.  
 
n This of the gods, this of us too.  
o For prosperity thee, not for misfortune.  
p May I behold the li ght, the radiance for all men.  
q May they that have doors stand firm in heaven and earth.  
r Fare along the wide atmosphere.  
s I place thee in the lap of Aditi.  
t O Agni, guard the offering.  
 
i. 1. 5.  
a Let the god Savitr purify you, with a filter that has  no flaw,  
with the rays of the bright sun.  
b Ye divine waters, that go in front and first purify, forward lead  
this sacrifice, place in front the lord of the sacrifice.  
c You Indra chose for the contest with Vrtra, ye chose Indra for  
the contest with Vrtra . 
d Ye are sprinkled.  
e I sprinkle you agreeable to Agni, to Agni and Soma.  
f Be ye pure for the divine rite, for the sacrifice to the gods.  
g The Raksas is shaken off, the evil spirits are shaken off.  
h Thou art the skin of Aditi, may the earth' recognize  thee [1].  
i Thou art the plank' of wood, may the skin of Aditi recognize thee.  
k Thou art the body of Agni, loostener of speech.  
l I grasp thee for the joy of the gods.  
m Thou art the stone of wood.  
n Do thou with good labour elaborate this offering for t he gods.  
 
o Utter food, utter strength;  
p Make ye glorious sounds.  
q May we be victorious in contest.  
r Thou art increased by the rain.  Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
620 
 s May that which is increased by the rain recognize thee.  
t The Raksas is cleared away, the evil spirits are cleared awa y. 
u Thou art the share of the Raksases.  
v Let the wind separate you.  
w Let the god Savitr of golden hands, seize you.  
 
i. 1. 6.  
a The 7 Raksas is shaken off, the evil spirits are shaken off. b Thou art the skin of 
Aditi, may the earth recognize thee.  
c Thou art the supporter of the sky, may the skin of Aditi recognize thee.  
d Thou art a bowl of rock, may the supporter of the sky recognize thee.  
e Thou art a bowl made of the rock, may the rock recognize thee.  
f On the impulse of the god Savity, with the a rms of the Açvins, with the hands of  
Prisan, I pour thee out.  
g Thou art stimulating, stimulate the gods.  
h For expiration thee, for inspiration thee, for through -breathing thee (I pound).  
i May I extend for long the life (of the sacrificer).  
k Let the go d Savitr, of golden hands, seize you.  
 
1. 1. 7  
a Bold art thou, support our prayer.  
b O Agni, drive off the fire that eats raw flesh, send away the corpse -eating one, 
bring  
hither the fire that sacrifices to the gods.  
c The Raksas is burnt, the evil spiri ts are burnt.  
d Thou art firm; make firm the earth, make life firm, make offspring firm, make his  
follows subordinate to this sacrificer.  
e Thou art a supporter, make firm the atmosphere, make expiration firm, make  
inspiration firm, make his fellows subo rdinate to this sacrificer.  
f Thou are supporting, make the heaven firm, make the eye [1] firm, make the ear 
firm,  
make his fellows, &c.  
g Thou art a support, make the quarters firm, make the organ firm, make offspring  
firm, make his fellows, &c.  Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
621 
 h Ye ar e gatherers, bring offspring to this sacrificer, wealth to him, make his 
fellows, &c.  
i Be ye heated with the heat of the Bhrgus and the Angirases.  
k The potsherds which wise men collect for the cauldron, these are in Pusan's  
guardianship. Lot Indra and V ayu set them free.  
 
i. 1. 8.  
a I pour together.  
b The waters have joined with the waters, the plants with sap.  
c Join ye rich ones with the moving ones, sweet ones with the sweet.  
d From the waters ye are born, be united with the waters.  
e For generation I unite thee.  
f For Agni thee, for Agni and Soma.  
g Thou art the head of Makha.  
h Thou art the cauldron that contains all life.  
 
i Be extended wide, let the lord of the sacrifice be extended wide.  
k Grasp the skin.  
I The Raksas is obstructed, the evil spir its are obstructed.  
m Let the god Savitr make thee ready on the highest firmament.  
n May Agni burn not too much thy body.  
 
o O Agni, guard the offering.  
p Be united with our prayer.  
q Hail to Ekata, hail to Dvita, hail to Trita.  
 
i. 1. 9.  
a I grasp (thee) . 
b Thou art Indra's right arm with a thousand spikes, a hundred edges.  
c Thou art the wind of sharp edge.  
d O earth whereon sacrifice is offered to the gods, let me harm not the root of thy 
plant.  
e Araru is smitten away from the earth.  
f Go to the fold w here the cattle are.  Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
622 
 g May heaven rain for thee.  
h O god Savitr, bind thou in the furthest distance with a hundred fetters him who 
hateth us and whom we hate, thence let him not free.  
i Araru is smitten away from the earth, the place of sacrifice.  
k Go to  the fold [1] where the cattle are.  
l May heaven rain for thee.  
m O god Savitr &c.  
n Araru is smitten away from the earth, he that sacrifices not to the gods.  
o Go to the fold where the cattle are.  
p May heaven rain for thee.  
q O god Savitr, &c. [2]  
r Let not Araru mount the sky for thee.  
s Let the Vasus grasp thee with the Gayatri metre, let the Rudras grasp thee with 
the Tristubb. metre, let the Adityas grasp thee with the Jagati metre.  
t On the impulse of the god Savitr wise ones perform the rite.  
u Thou  art the right, thou art the seat of right, thou art the glory of right.  
v Thou art the holder, thou art the self -holder.  
w Thou art broad, and wealthy art thou.  
x Before the cruel foe slips away, O glorious one,  
Taking up the earth, with plenteous drops,  
The earth which they place in the moon by their offerings,  
Which wise men use to guide them in the sacrifice.  
 
i. 1. 10.  
a The Raksas is burnt up, the evil spirits are burnt up.  
b With Agni's keenest flame I burn you.  
c May I not brush the place of the ca ttle, I brush thee that art strong and 
overcomest foes.  
d Speech, breath, eye, ear, offspring, the organ of generation may I not brush, I 
brush thee that art strong and overcomest foes.  
e Beseeching favour, offspring, prosperity, in devotion to Agni,  
I gird my body for good action.  
f With fair offspring, with noble husbands,  
We are come to thee,  
O Agni, to thee that deceivest the foe,  
The undeceivable, we that are not deceived.  Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
623 
 g I loosen this bond of Varuna,  
Which Savitr the kindly hath bound,  
And in the b irthplace of the creator, in the place of good action,  
I make it pleasant for me with my husband.  
h With life, with offspring,  
O Agni, with splendour again,  
As wife with my husband I am united.  
United be my spirit with my body.  
i Of the great ones thou art  the milk, of plants the sap. Of thee that art the 
imperishable I make the offering.  
k Thou art the milk of the great ones, of plants the sap; with undeceived eye I gaze 
on thee for fair offspring.  
l Thou art brilliance; follow thou brilliance; may Agni no t take away the brilliance.  
m Thou art the tongue of Agni, the good one of the gods.  
n Be thou (good) for every sacrifice, for the gods, for every prayer.  
 
o Thou art the shining, the radiance, the brilliance.  
p May the god Savitr purify you  
With a flawles s strainer,  
With the rays of the bright sun.  
q I grasp thee shining in the shining, for every sacrifice, for the gods, for every 
prayer.  
r I grasp thee radiance in the radiance, thee resplendent in the resplendence for 
every sacrifice, for the gods, for ev ery prayer.  
 
i. 1. 11.  
a Thou I art a black deer, living in the lair, to Agni thee, hail!  
b Thou art the altar, to the strew thee, hail!  
c Thou art the strew,' to the ladles thee, hail  
d To the sky thee, to the atmosphere thee, to the earth thee!  
e Be tho u refreshment to the fathers, strength to those that sit on  
the strew.  
f With strength go ye to the earth.  
g Thou art the hair -knot of Visnu.  
h Soft as wool I strew thee, offering a good seat to the gods.  Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
624 
 i Thou art the Gandharva, Viçvavasu (possessing all  wealth), the fence of the 
sacrificer  
from every attacker, praised and to be praised.  
k Thou art the right arm of Indra, the fence of the sacrificer, praised and to be 
praised.  
l May Mitra and Varuna lay thee around in the north with firm law, thou art th e 
fence  
of the sacrificer, praised and to be praised.  
m May the sun in the east protect thee from all evil.  
n May we kindle thee, O wise one,  
That dost invite to the sacrifice, the radiant one,  
O Agni, thee that art mighty at the sacrifice.  
 
o Ye two are the props of the people.  
p Sit on the seat of the Vasus, Rudras, Adityas.  
q Thou art named juhu , upabhrt , dhruva , loving the ghee, sit on thy dear seat 
with thy dear name.  
r These have sat down in the world of good action.  
s Protect them, O Visnu.  
t Protec t the sacrifice, protect the lord of the sacrifice, protect me that conduct the  
sacrifice.  
 
i. 1. 12.  
a Thou art the world, be extended.  
b O Agni, sacrificer, this reverence.  
c O juhu, come hither, Agni summons thee for the sacrifice to the gods.  
d O upabhrt, come hither, the god Savitr summons thee for the sacrifice  
to the gods.  
e O Agni and Visnu, let me not step down upon you.  
f Be ye parted, consume me not.  
g Make ye a place for me, ye place -makers.  
h Thou art the abode of Visnu.  
i Hence Indra wrought  mighty deeds.'  
k Great, grasping the sky, imperishable.  
1 The sacrifice of the lord of the sacrifice is undisturbed.  Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
625 
 m Offered to Indra, hail!  
n Great light.  
 
o Guard me, O Agni, from misfortune, place me in good fortune.  
p Thou art the head of Makha, b e light united with light. 
 
i. 1. 13.  
a With the impulse of strength,  
With elevation he hath lifted me up;  
Then Indra hath made my enemies  
Humble by depression.  
b The gods have increased my prayer.  
What is elevation and depression;  
Then do ye, O Indra and  Agni,  
Scatter my foes on every side.  
c To the Vasus thee, to the Rudras thee, to the Adityas thee!  
d Licking the anointed lot the birds go asunder.  
e May I not brush offispring and the organ.  
f Swell, ye waters and plants.  
g Ye are the spotted steeds of t he Maruts.  
h Fare to the sky [1], thence bring us rain.  
i Guardian of life art thou, O Agni, guard my life.  
k Guardian of the eye art thou, O Agni, guard my eye.  
I Thou art the secure one.  
m The fence which thou didst put round thee  
When thou wast beset by  the Panis, O god Agni,  
That do I bring here to thee that thou mayst rejoice in it,  
That it be not removed from thee.  
n Go ye two to the place of the gods.  
 
o Ye are sharers in the remains (of the oblation), well nourished, mighty  
Ye gods that are on the prastara  and sit on the strew [2].  
Accepting this supplication, do ye all,  
Seated on this strew enjoy yourselves.  Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
626 
 p I set thee in the seat of Agni whose abode is secure.  
q For goodwill, O ye two with goodwill, place me in goodwill.  
r Guard ye the yoke -horse s at the yoke.  
s O Agni, with life unhurt, with not -cool body, guard me this day from the sky, 
guard from bondage, guard from error in sacrifice, guard from evil food, guard 
from ill deed.  
t Make our food free from poison, the lap pleasant to sit in; hail!  
u O ye gods that know the way, knowing the way, go ye the way.  
v O lord of mind, this sacrifice for us place among the gods, O god,  
hail! in speech, hail! in the wind, hail!  
 
i. 1. 14.  
a Ye twain shall be summoned, O Indra and Agni.  
Ye twain shall rejoic e together in the offering.  
You both givers of food and riches,  
You both I summon for the winning of strength.  
b For I have heard that ye both are more generous  
Than a worthless son -in-law or a wife's brother.  
So with the offering of Soma I make for you,  
O 1ndra and Agni, a new hymn of praise;  
c O Indra and Agni, ninety forts  
Of which the Dasas were lords ye overtbrew  
Together in one deed.  
d This pure new -born hymn of praise this day,  
O Indra and Agni, slayers of Vrtra, accept with joy [1].  
For on you both I call that are ready to listen,  
You that are ever readiest to give strength to the eager.  
e We thee, O lord of the path,  
As a chariot to win the prize,  
Have yoked for our prayer, O Pusan.  
f Lord of each way with eloquence;  
Driven by love he went to Arka;  
May he give us the comfort of gold,  
May Pusan further our every prayer.  
g By the lord of the field  
As by a friend may we win  Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
627 
 What nourishes our kine and horses;  
May he be [2] favourable to such as we are.  
h O lord of the field, the honey -bearing wave,  
As a cow milk, so for us milk;  
May the lords of right graciously accord us  
That which drops honey and is well purified like ghee.  
i O Agni, lead us by a fair path to wealth,  
O god, knowing all the ways;  
Keep away from us the sin that makes us wander;  
We will a ccord to thee most abundant honour.  
k We have come to the path of the gods  
To accomplish that which we have power to do;  
Let wise Agni sacrifice [3], let him be Hotr  
Let him arrange the offerings him the seasons.  
l What carrieth best is for Agni;  
Sing alou d, O thou of brilliant radiance.  
 
From thee wealth, like a cow,  
From thee strength riseth forth.  
m O Agni, once more lead us  
With thy favour over every trouble.  
Be a broad, thick, wide fortress for us,  
Health and wealth for our children and descendants.  
Thou, O Agni, art the guardian of law,  
Among the gods and mortals;  
Thou art to be invoked at the sacrifices.  
 
o If laws of you wise ones, O gods,  
In our ignorance we transgress,  
May Agni make good all that,  
He that knoweth the seasons wherein he may satisfy the gods.  
 Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
628 
 PRAPATHAKA II  
The Soma Sacrifice  
i. 2. 1.  
a May I the waters wet (thee) for life,  
For length of days, for glory.  
b O plant, protect him.  
c Axe, hurt him not.  
d Obedient to the gods I shear these.  
e With success may I reach further days.  
f Let the waters, the mothers, purify us,  
With ghee let those that purify our ghee purify us,  
Let them bear from us all pollution,  
Forth from these waters do I come bright, in purity.  
g Thou art the body of Soma, guard my body.  
h Thou art the milk of the great  ones, thou art the giver of splendour; splendour [1]  
place in me.  
i Thou art the pupil of Vrtra's eye, thou art the guardian of the eye, guard my eye.  
k Let the lord of thought purify thee, let the lord of speech purify thee, let the god  
Savitr purify t hee 
With the flawless purifier,  
With the rays of the bright sun.  
l O lord of the purifier, with thy purifier for whatsoever I purify myself, that may I  
have strength to accomplish.  
 
m We approach you, O gods,  
Ye that have true ordinances at the sacrifice  
What O gods ye can assent to,  
For that we ask you, O holy ones.'  
n Indra and Agni, heaven and earth, waters, plants.  
 
o Thou art the lord of consecrations, guard me that am here. 
 Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
629 
 i. 2. 2.  
a To the purpose, to the impulse, to Agni, hail! To wisdom, to tho ught, to Agni, 
hail! To consecration, to penance, to Agni, hail! To Sarasvati, to Prisan, to Agni, 
hail! 
b O ye divine, vast, all -sootbing waters!  
Heaven and earth, wide atmosphere! May Brhaspati rejoice in our oblation, hail!  
c Let every man choose the co mpanionship  
Of the god who leadeth.  
Every man prayeth for wealth;  
Let him choose glory that he may prosper, hail!  
d Ye are images of the Rc and the Saman. I grasp you two; do ye two [1] protect 
me until the completion of this sacrifice.  
e O god,Varuna, do thou sharpen this prayer of him who implores thee,  
Sharpen his strength, his insight;  
May we mount that safe ship  
Whereby we' may pass over all our difficulties.  
f Thou art the strength of the Angirases, soft as wool; grant me strength, guard me,  
harm me not. 
g Thou art the protection of Visnu, the protection of the sacrificer, grant me 
protection.  
h Guard me from the lustre of the Naksatras.  
i Thou art the birthplace of Indra [2]; harm me not.  
k For ploughing thee, for good crops,  
l For the plants with go od berries thee!  
m Thou art of easy access, divine tree. Being erect, guard me until the completion 
(of the sacrifice).  
n Hail! with my mind the sacrifice (I grasp); hail! from heaven and earth, bail! 
from the  
broad atmosphere, hail! from the wind the sac rifice I grasp.  
 
i. 2. 3.  
a The thought divine we meditate,  
Merciful, for our help,  
That giveth glory, and carrieth the sacrifice.  
 