Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
690 
 Agni and Soma, may I be a slayer of foes', he says; by means of Agni and Soma 
Indra slew Vrtra; verily by means of them he lays low his foe. 'By sacrifice to the 
gods, Indra and Agni, may I be powerful and an eater of food', he says ; verily he 
becomes powerful and an eater of food. 'By sacrifice to the god Indra, may I be 
powerful', he says; verily he becomes powerful. 'By sacrifice to the god Mahendra, 
may I attain superiority and greatness', he says; verily he attains superiority a nd 
greatness. 'By sacrifice to the god Agni Svistakrt, may I attain security through the 
sacrifice, enjoying long life', he says; verily he confers long life upon himself and 
attains security through the sacrifice. 
 
i. 6. 12  
a Indra for you we invoke  
On a ll sides from other men;  
Be he ours only.  
a Indra men call in reverence  
That he may cause their prayers to be accomplished;  
Hero, men overpowering, delighting in strength,  
Do thou confer upon us a stall full of kine.  
c O Çatakratu, the strength of thine  
That is in the five folks,  
That do I choose of thee.  
d To thee hath been assigned for mighty power,  
For ever, in the slaying of Vrtra,  
All lordship, and all strength, O thou that art worthy of sacrifice  
In the overcoming of man, by the gods, O Indra [1].  
c In whom the seven Vasavas rest  
As it were firm rooted,  
The Rsi of farthest hearing,  
The glowing pot is the guest of Indra.  
f In the raw thou didst produce the cooked,  
And madest the sun to mount in the sky;  
 
Like the glowing pot heat ye the Saman  
With good prayers, delightful to the lover of song.  Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
691 
 g Indra the singers aloud,  
Indra with praises the praisers,  
Indra the songs have praised.  
h The singers sing thee [2];  
The praisers hymn thy praise;  
The Brahmans raise thee,  
0 Çatakratu, like a pole.  
i Let us offer  our praise to him who delivereth from trouble,  
Swiftest to give, celebrating his loving kindness;  
O Indra, accept this oblation;  
May the desires of the sacrificer be fulfilled.  
k That to which Dhisana impelled me have I produced;  
I shall praise Indra befo re the decisive day;  
Him that goeth as with a ship  
Both parties invoke that there he may rescue us.  
l First lord of sacrifices [3],  
Freeing from trouble, the best of those worthy of offering,  
Son of the waters, the impeller, O ye Açvins;  
Do ye confer power  and strength on this one.  
m Smite away our foes, O Indra;  
Cast down the warriors;  
Make him low  
Who is hostile to us.  
n O Indra, thou wast born for rule, for prosperous strength  
Of the people, O strong one;  
Thou didst smite away the unfriendly folk,  
And ma dest wide room for the gods.  
 
o Like a dread beast, evil, roaming the mountains,  
He hath come from the furthest place [4];  
Sharpening thy lance, thy sharp edge, O Indra,  
Smite the foes, drive away the enemy.  
p Drive away the foe, the enemy,  
Smash the jaws of Vrtra;  
In rage do thou avert the anger  
Of him who is hostile to us.  Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
692 
 q The guardian Indra, the helper Indra,  
The hero ready to hear at every call, Indra,  
I invoke the strong one, invoked of many, Indra;  
May Indra in his bounty bestow on us prosperity.  
 
r May we not [5], O strong one, in this distress,  
Be handed over to evil, O lord of the ways;  
Guard us with true protection;  
May we be dear to you among the princes.  
s The Anus have wrought a chariot for thy steed;  
Tvastr a glorious bolt, O thou invoked of many;  
The Brahmans magnifying Indra with their praises  
Have strengthened him for the slaying of the serpent.  
t What time the strong sang praise to the strong,  
O Indra, the stones and Aditi in unison,  
Without steeds or chariots were the fellies  
Which, sped by Indra, rolled against the Dasyus.  
 
PRAPATHAKA VII  
 
The Part of the Sacrificer in the New and Full Moon Sacrifices  
i. 7. 1. Cattle attend the cooked offerings of him who has established a fire. The 
cooked offering is the Ida; it is placed in the world  of the sacrifice between the 
fore- and the after -offerings. Over it as it is brought up he should say, 'O thou of 
fair rain colour, come hither'; the cattle are the Ida; verily he summons cattle. The 
gods milked the sacrifice, the sacrifice milked the Asu ras; the Asuras, being 
milked by the sacrifice, were defeated; he, who knowing the milking of the 
sacrifice [1] sacrifices, milks another sacrificer. 'May the blessing of this sacrifice 
be fulfilled for me', he says; this is the milking of the sacrifice; v erily with it he 
milks it. The cow is milked willingly, and willingly the Ida is milked for the 
sacrificer; these are the teats of Ida, 'Ida is invoked'. Vayu is the calf. When the 
Hotr summons the Ida, then the sacrificer looking at the Hotr should in min d 
reflect on Vayu [2]; verily he lets the calf go to the mother. By the whole sacrifice Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
693 
 the gods went to the world of heaven; Manu laboured with the cooked offering; the 
Ida went to Manu; the gods and the Asuras called severally upon her, the gods 
directly , the Asuras indirectly; she went to the gods; the cattle choose the gods, 
cattle deserted the Asuras. If he desire of a man, 'May he be without cattle', he 
should invoke the Ida indirectly for him; verily he becomes without cattle [3]. If he 
desire of a m an, 'May he be rich in cattle', he should invoke the Ida directly for 
him; verily he becomes rich in cattle. The theologians say, 'He would invoke the 
Ida indeed who in invoking the Ida should invoke himself in the Ida.' 'To us be she 
dear, victorious, bou ntiful', he says; verily in invoking the Ida he invokes himself 
in the Ida. The Ida is as it were a breach in the sacrifice; half they eat [4], half they 
wipe; in this regard the sacrifice of the Asuras was broken; the gods united it by 
the holy power (Bra hman). 'May Brhaspati extend this for us', he says; Brhaspati is 
the holy power (Brahman) of the gods; verily by the holy power (Brahman) he 
unites the sacrifice. 'May he unite this scattered sacrifice', he says, for continuity. 
'May the All -gods rejoice h ere', he says; verily continuing the sacrifice he indicates 
it to the gods. The [5] sacrificial fee which he gives at the sacrifice his cattle 
accompany; he having sacrificed is like to become without cattle; 'the sacrificer 
must so arrange', they say, 'th at he may place among the gods what is given, but 
keep his cattle with himself.' 'Swell, O ruddy one', he says; the ruddy one is the 
sacrifice; verily he magnifies the sacrifice; thus he places among the gods what is 
given, but keeps his cattle with himsel f. 'May (my act) as I give be not destroyed', 
he says; verily he avoids destruction; 'May (my act) as I work not perish', he says; 
verily he attains prosperity.  
i. 7. 2.  
Samçravas Sauvarcanasa said to Tumiñja Aupoditi: 'When thou hast been a Hotr of 
Sattr ins, what Ida hast thou invoked?' 'Her I have invoked', he said, 'who supports 
the gods by her expiration, men by her cross -breathing, and the Pitrs by her 
inspiration.' 'Does she divide, or does she not divide' (he asked). 'She divides', he 
replied. 'Her body then hast thou invoked', he said. Her body is the cow [1]; of the 
cow were they two talking. She who is given in the sacrifice supports the gods with 
her expiration; she by whom men live (supports) men by her cross -breathing; she 
whom they slay for th e Fathers (supports) the Fathers by her inspiration; he who 
knows thus becomes rich in cattle. 'Her too I have invoked', he said, 'who is 
available to people as they increase.' 'Her food then [2] hast thou invoked', he Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
694 
 replied. This food is plants, plants are available to people as they increase; he who 
knows thus becomes an eater of food. 'Her too I have invoked', he said, who 
supports people in distress and succours them as they improve.' Her support then 
hast thou invoked', he replied. Her support is thi s (earth) [3], this (earth) supports 
people in distress and succours them as they improve; he who knows thus finds 
support. 'Her too I have invoked', he said, 'in whose step people drink the ghee they 
live upon.' 'Does she divide, or does she not divide?' (he asked). 'She does not 
divide', he said, 'but she propagates.' 'Indeed hast thou invoked the Ida herself ', he 
replied. The Ida is rain; in the step of rain people drink the ghee they live upon; he 
who knows thus is propagated with offspring; he becomes  an eater of food. 
 
i. 7. 3.  
Secretly offering is made to one set of gods, openly to another. The gods who 
receive offering secretly, he thus offers to them in sacrifice; in that he brings the 
Anvaharya mess --the Brahmans are the gods openly --them he veri ly delights. This 
is his sacrificial fee: verily he mends the rent in the sacrifice; whatever in the 
sacrifice is harsh or is injured, that he makes good ( anvaharati ) [1] with the 
Anvaharya mess, and that is why it has its name. Now the priests are the 
messengers of the gods; in that he brings the Anvaharya mess, he delights the 
messengers of the gods. Prajapati distributed the sacrifice to the gods; he reflected 
that he was empty; he per ceived this Anvaharya mess unallotted; he conferred it 
upon himself. The Anvaharya is connected with Prajapati; he, who knowing thus 
brings the Anvaharya, assuredly enjoys Prajapati. An unlimited amount should be 
poured out, Prajapati is unlimited; (verily it serves) to win Prajapati [2]. Whatever 
the gods did in the sacrif ice, the Asuras did; the gods perceived the Anvaharya 
connected with Prajapati; they seized it - then the gods prospered, the Asuras were 
defeated; he who knowing thus brings the Anvaharya prospers himself, his foe is 
defeated. By the sacrifice there is of fering, by the cooked food satisfying. He who 
knowing thus brings the Anvaharya, accomplishes at once sacrifice and 
satisfaction. 'Thou art the portion of Prajapati' [3], he says; verily he unites 
Prajapati with his own portion. 'Full of strength and milk' , he says; verily he 
confers upon him strength and milk. 'Protect my expiration and inspiration; protect 
my breathing together and cross -breathing', he says; verily he invokes this blessing. 
'Thou art imperishable, for imperishableness thee; mayst thou not  perish for me, Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
695 
 yonder, in yonder world', he says. Food perishes in yonder world, for given hence 
in yonder world people live upon it; in that he touches thus, he makes it 
imperishable; his food perishes not in yonder world. 
 
i. 7. 4.  
'By I sacrifice to t he divine strew, may I be possessed of children', he says; by the 
strew Prajapati created offspring, verily he creates offspring. 'By sacrifice to the 
god Naraçansa, may I be possessed of cattle', he says; by Naraçansa Prajapati 
created cattle; verily he c reates cattle. 'By sacrifice to the god, Agni Svistakrt, may 
I attain security through the sacrifice, having long life', he says; verily he confers 
life on himself, and finds support through the sacrifice. With the victory of the new 
and full moon sacrific es [1] the gods conquered, and by means of the new and full 
moon sacrifices they drove away the Asuras. 'May I be victorious through the 
victory of Agni', he says; verily through the victory of the deities in the new and 
full moon sacrifices the sacrificer  is victorious, and by means of the new and full 
moon offerings drives away his enemies. With two verses containing the word 
'strength', he accompanies the separation (of the ladles) strength is food verily he 
wins food; (he uses) two, for support. He who sacrifices knowing the two milkings 
of the sacrifice milks thus the sacrifice on both sides [2], in front and behind; this is 
one milking of the sacrifice, another is in the Ida. When the Hotr utters the name of 
the sacrificer, then he should say, 'Hither these blessings have come, fain for 
milking'; verily he milks the deities which he praises together; verily he milks the 
sacrifice on both sides, in front and behind. 'With the red steed may Agni convey 
thee to the god', he says; these are the steeds of th e gods [3], the straw is the 
sacrificer; in that he casts forward the straw with them, he makes the sacrificers to 
go by the steeds of the gods to the world of heaven. 'I unyoke thy head ropes, thy 
reins', he says; that is the unyoking of Agni; verily ther eby he unyokes him. 'By 
sacrifice to the god Visnu, by the sacrifice may I attain health and wealth and 
security', he says; Visnu is the sacrifice; verily the sacrifice finds support at the 
end. 'By sacrifice to the god Soma, possessing good seed [4], may I impregnate 
seed', he says; Soma is the impregnator of seed; verily he confers seed upon 
himself. 'By sacrifice to the god Tvastr, may I prosper the form of cattle'; Tvastr is 
the form -maker of the pairings of cattle, and thereby he confers upon himself t he 
form of cattle. 'The wives of the gods, Agni, the lord of the house, are the pair of Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
696 
 the sacrifice; by sacrifice to these deities may I be propagated with a pair.' 'Thou 
art the bundle, thou art gain, may I gain', he says; by the bundle ( vedena ) the 
gods won ( avindanta ) the desirable wealth of the Asuras, and that is why the 
bundle has its name. Whatever of his foe's he may covet, the name of that he 
should utter; verily he wing it all from him. 'May the bundle bestow increase of 
wealth, rich in ghee, ri ch in houses, a thousandfold, strong', he says; he obtains a 
thousand cattle. In his offspring a strong one is born who knows thus. 
 
i. 7. 5.  
Through the emptying of the Dhruva the sacrifice is emptied, through the sacrifice 
the sacrificer, through the sa crificer offspring. Through the swelling of the Dhruva, 
the sacrifice is made to swell, through the sacrifice the sacrificer, through the 
sacrificer offspring. 'Let the Dhruva swell with ghee', he says; verily he makes the 
Dhruva to swell; through its swel ling the sacrifice is made to swell, through the 
sacrifice the sacri ficer, throuo - h the sacrificer offspring. 'Prajapati's is the world 
called Vibhan. In it I place thee along with the sacrificer', he says [1]; the world of 
Prajapati, named Vibhan, is t his (world); verily he places it in it along with the 
sacrificer. In that he sacrifices he is as it were emptied; in that he eats the 
sacrificer's portion, he fills himself. The sacrifice is the size of the sacrificer's 
portion, the sacrificer is the sacri fice; in that he eats the sacrificer's portion, he 
places the sacrifice in the sacrifice. There is good grass and good water where the 
strew and the waters are [2]; the Vedi is the abode of the sacrificer; in that he 
places the full bowl within the Vedi, h e establishes good grass and good water in 
his own abode. 'Thou art real, be real for me', he says; the sacrifice is the waters, 
ambrosia is the water; verily he bestows upon himself the sacrifice and the waters. 
All creatures attend him who is performing the vow. 'In the eastern quarter may the 
gods, the priests, make (me) bright', he says; this is the concluding bath of the new 
and full moon sacrifices [3]. He goes to the bath along with the creatures which 
attend him as he performs the vow. Headed by Vis nu the gods won these worlds by 
the metres so as to be irrecoverable; in that he takes the steps of Visnu the 
sacrificer becoming Visnu wins these worlds by the metres so as to be 
irrecoverable. 'Thou art the step of Visnu, smiting imprecations', he says; the earth 
is the Gayatri, the atmosphere is connected with the Tristubh, the sky is the Jagati, Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
697 
 the quarters are connected with the Anustubh; verily by the metres he wins these 
worlds in order. 
 
i. 7. 6.  
'We have come to the heaven: to the heaven we have come', he says; verily he goes 
to the world of heaven. 'May I not be cut off from seeing thee; what heat is thine, 
to that of thee may I not be brought low', he says; that is according to the text. 
'Thou art good, the best of rays; thou art life -bestowing,  bestow life upon me', he 
says; verily he invokes this blessing. He falls away from this world, who [1] takes 
the steps of Visnu, for from the world of heaven the steps of Visnu are taken. The 
theologians say, 'He indeed would take the steps of Visnu who a fter acquiring 
these worlds of his foe should descend again to this world.' This is his return 
descent to this world, in that he says,'Here do I exclude my enemy N. N. from 
these quarters, from this sky'; verily having acquired these worlds of his foe he 
descends again to this world. 'I have been united [2] with the light', he says; verily 
he rests on this world. 'I turn the turning of Indra', he says; Indra is yonder sun; 
verily he turns his turning. He turns to the right; verily he revolves round his own 
strength; therefore the right side of a man is the stronger; verily also he turns the 
turning of the sun. 'May I be united with offspring, offspring with me', he says; 
verily [3] he invokes this blessing. 'Kindled, O Agni, shine for me; kindling thee, O 
Agni, may I shine', he says; that is according to the text. 'Be rich the sacrifice; may 
I be rich', he says; verily he invokes this blessing. Within the Garhapatya much 
variegated work is performed; with two verses to Agni, the purifier, he pays 
reverence to  the Garhapatya; verily he purifies the fire, he purifies himself; (he 
uses) two for support. 'O Agni, lord of the house', he says [4]; that is according to 
the text. 'For a hundred winters', he says; 'for a hundred winters may I kindle thee', 
he says in e ffect. He utters the name of his son; verily he makes him an eater of 
food. 'This prayer I utter, bringing light for the race', he should say who has no son 
born to him, verily is born to him a brilliant and resplendent son. 'This prayer I 
utter, bringing light to N. N.', he should say who has a son born [5]; verily he 
bestows upon him brilliance and splendour. He who having yoked the sacrifice 
does not let it free becomes without a support. 'Who yoketh thee? Let him set thee 
free', he says; Who ( ka) is Pra japati; verily by Prajapati he yokes him, by Prajapati 
he lets him free, for support. The vow if not released is liable to consume (the Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
698 
 sacrificer); 'O Agni, lord of vows, I have performed my vow', he says; verily he 
releases his vow [6], for atonement, to  prevent burning. The sacrifice goes away, 
and turns not back; to him who sacrifices knowing the restoration of the sacrifice it 
does turn back; 'The sacrifice hath become, it hath come into being', he says; this is 
the restoration of the sacrifice, and th ereby he restores it. Excellence has not been 
obtained by him who having established a fire has no retinue; cattle indeed are the 
retinue of a Brahman. Having sacrificed, he should step forward to the east and 
say, 'Rich in cattle, in sheep, O Agni, in hor ses is the sacrificer';  
he wins his retinue, he obtains a thousand cattle, in his offspring a strong one is 
born.  
 
The Vajapeya 
 
i. 7. 7.  
a O god Savitr, instigate the sacrifice, instigate the lord of the sacrifice for good 
luck; may the divine Gandharva  who purifieth thoughts purify our thought; may 
the lord of speech to -day make sweet our utterance.  
b Thou art the thunderbolt of Indra, slaying obstructions, with thee may this one 
smite Vrtra.  
c On the instigation of strength, the mother, the mighty one,  
We shall proclaim with our speech, Aditi, by name,  
Into whom all this world hath entered;  
In her may the god Savitr instigate right for us.  
d In the waters [1] is ambrosia, in the waters is medicine;  
Through the guidance of the waters  
Be ye steeds, O ye t hat are strong.  
e Or Vayu thee, or Manu thee,  
The seven and twenty Gandharvas;  
They first yoked the steed;  
They placed swiftness in it.  
f Child of the waters, swift one, the towering onrushing wave most fain to win the  
prize, with it may he win the prize.  
g Thou art the stepping of Visnu, thou art the step of Visnu, thou art the stride of 
Visnu.  Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
699 
 h May the two Ankas, the two Nyankas, which are on either side of the chariot,  
Speeding on with the rushing wind,  
The far -darting, powerful one, the winged one,  
The fires which are furtherers, further us.  
 
i. 7. 8.  
a On the instigation of the god Savitr, through Brhaspati, winner of the prize, may I  
win the prize.  
b On the instigation of the god Savitr, through Brhaspati, winner of the prize, may 
I mount the highe st vault.  
c To Indra utter your voices, make Indra win the prize, Indra hath won the prize.  
d O whip, strong, having strength for the prizes,  
Do thou in the contests strengthen the steeds.  
e The swift art thou, the runner, the strong.  
 
f O steeds, hasten f or the prize; conquer on the instigation of the Maruts: measure 
ye the leagues; establish the ways [1]; attain the goal.  
g For each prize aid us, O ye steeds,  
For the rewards, O ye wise, immortal, righteous ones;  
Drink of this mead, rejoice in it;  
Delighte d go by paths on which the gods go.  
h May the swift coursers, who hear the call,  
All hearken to our cry.  
i Strong limbed, winning a thousand,  
Eager to gain in the gaining of praise,  
The steeds, which have won in the contests great prizes,  
May they be propi tious to us when we call.  
k Among the gods, strong limbed, good praisers,  
Destroying the serpent, the wolf, the Raksases,  
For ever may they remove from us evil [2].  
1 This steed speedeth his swift course,  
Bound at the neck, the shoulder, and the mouth;  
Displaying his strength Dadhikra  
Springeth along the bends of the ways.  
m After him as he hasteneth in triumphant speed  Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
700 
 Bloweth the wind as after the wing of the bird,  
Of the impetuous eagle, (after him) Dadhikravan,  
As in his might he crosseth the winding wa ys. 
n May there come to me the instigation of strength;  
May there come sky and earth with all healing;  
Come to me father [3] and mother;  
May Soma come to me for immortality.  
 
o O ye steeds, prize winning, about to run for the prize, about to win the prize,  do 
ye touch Brhaspati's portion.  
p O ye steeds, prize winning, that have run for the prize, that have won the prize, 
do ye be pure in Brhaspati's portion.  
q True hath been the compact  
That ye did make with Indra.  
r Ye have made Indra win the prize, O tree s; now be ye loosed.  
 
i. 7. 9.  
a Thou art the caul of the kingly class, thou art the womb of the kingly class.  
b O wife, come hither to the heaven; let us two mount! Yes, let us two mount the  
heaven; I will mount the heaven for us both.  
c Strength, insti gation, the later born, inspiration, heaven, the head, the Vyaçniya, 
the offspring of the last, the last, the offspring of being, being, the overlord.  
d May life accord with the sacrifice, may expiration accord with the sacrifice, may  
inspiration accord w ith the sacrifice [1], may cross -breathing accord with the 
sacrifice,  
may eye accord with the sacrifice, may ear accord with the sacrifice, may mind 
accord with the sacrifice, may the body accord with the sacrifice, may the sacrifice 
accord with the sacri fice. 
e We have come to the heaven, to the gods; we have become immortal; we have  
become the offspring of Prajapati.  
f May I be united with offspring, offspring with me; may I be united with increase 
of wealth, increase of wealth with me.  
g For food thee!  For proper food thee! For strength thee! For the conquering of 
strength thee!  
h Thou art ambrosia, thou art prospering, thou art begetting.  Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
701 
  
i. 7. 10.  
a The instigation of strength pressed in aforetime  
This Soma, the lord in the plants, in the waters;  
Be they full of sweetness for us;  
May we as Purohitas watch over the kingship.  
b The instigation of strength hath pervaded  
This (world) and all these worlds on every side;  
He goeth around knowing pre -eminence,  
Increasing offspring and prosperity for us.  
c The instigation of strength rested on this sky  
And all these worlds as king;  
May the wise one make the niggard to be generous,  
And may he accord us wealth [1] with all heroes.  
d O Agni, speak to us;  
To us be thou kindly disposed;  
Further us, O lord of the wo rld 
Thou art the giver of wealth to us.  
e May Aryaman further us,  
May Bhaga, may Brhaspati,  
May the gods, and the bounteous one;  
May the goddess speech be bountiful to us.  
f Aryaman, Brhaspati, Indra,  
Impel to give us gifts,  
Speech, Visnu, Sarasvat!,  
And S avitr the strong.  
g Soma the king, Varuna,  
 
Agni, we grasp, The Adityas, Visnu, Surya And Brhaspati, the Brahman (priest). h 
On the instigation of the god Savitr with the arms of the Açvins, with the hands of 
Pusan, with the bond of Sarasvati, of speech, t he binder, I anoint thee with the 
lordship of Agni, with the lordship of Indra of Brhaspati I anoint thee. 
 Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
702 
 i. 7. 11.  
Agni with one syllable won speech; the Açvins with two syllables won expiration 
and inspiration; Visnu with three syllables won the three  worlds; Soma with four 
syllables won four -footed cattle; Pusan with five syllables won the Parkti; Dhatr 
with six syllables won the six seasons; the Maruts with seven syllables won the 
seven -footed Çakvari; Brhaspati with eight syllables won the Gayatri; Mitra with 
nine syllables won the threefold Stoma [1]; Varuna with ten syllables won the 
Viraj; Indra with eleven syllables won the Tristubh; the All -gods with twelve 
syllables won the Jagati; the Vasus with thirteen syllables won the thirteenfold 
Stoma; t he Rudras with fourteen syllables won the fourteenfold Stoma; the Adityas 
with fifteen syllables won the fifteenfold Stoma; Aditi with sixteen syllables won 
the sixteen fold Stoma; Prajapati with seventeen syllables won the seventeenfold 
Stoma. 
 
i. 7. 12.  
a Thou art taken with a support; thee that sittest among men, that sittest in the 
wood, that sittest in the world, I take acceptable to Indra this is thy birthplace; to 
Indra thee!  
b Thou art taken with a support; thee that sittest in the waters, that sit test in the 
ghee, that sittest in the sky, I take acceptable to Indra; this is thy birthplace; to 
Indra thee!  
c Thou art taken with a support; thee that sittest on the earth, that sittest on the  
atmosphere, that sittest on the vault, I take acceptable to Indra; this is thy 
birthplace; to Indra thee!  
d The cups of the five folk,  
Of which three are of highest birth,  
(And for which) the divine cask [1] has been forced out  
Of these that have no handles  
The food and strength have I seized;  
This is thy birthplac e; to Indra thee!  
e The sap of the waters, the vigorous,  
The ray of the sun that has been gathered,  
The sap of the sap of the waters,  
That of you I take which is the best;  Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
703 
  
This is thy birthplace; to Indra thee!  
f By this shape producing mighty deeds,  
He is dread, a broad way for gain,  
He hath come to the top, bearing sweetness,  
What time he moved a body in his own body.  
g Thou art taken with a support; agreeable to Prajapati I take thee  
this is thy birthplace; to Prajapati thee!  
 
i. 7. 13.  
a The months, t he woods,  
The plants, the mountains,  
The earth and sky in longing,  
The waters, followed Indra on his birth.  
b To thee hath been assigned for mighty power,  
For ever, in the slaying of Vrtra,  
All lordship, and all strength, O thou that art worthy of sacrific e 
In the overcoming of man by the gods, O Indra,  
c Indrani beyond other women  
I have heard to be favoured with a spouse,  
For never at any time [1]  
Shall her husband die of old age.  
d I have not joyed, O Indrani,  
Without my friend Vrsakapi,  
Whose oblation r ich in water  
Goeth dear to the gods.  
e He who first born in his wisdom  
A god, surpassed the gods in insight,  
From whose breath the sky and earth recoiled,  
In the greatness of his manhood, he, O ye men, is Indra.  
f Hitherward be thy might with aid, O dread Indra,  
What time the armies meet in combat,  
And the arrow flieth from the arms of the strong men;  
Let not thine [2] anger spread on every side.  
g Destroy us not; bring and give to us  Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
704 
 That plenteous bounty which thou hast to give to the pious man,  
For this new gift, this song we have sung to thee;  
Let us speak forth in praise of Indra.  
h Bring it to us, let none intercept it;  
For we know thee as wealth lord of riches;  
That mighty gift of thine, O Indra,  
 
Vouchsafe it us, O lord of the bay steeds [3].  
i With our oblation we summon  
1ndra, the giver;  
Fill both thy hands with bounty;  
Give to us from the left and the right.  
k The giver, the bolt -bearer, the bull, the overpowering,  
The impetuous, the king, slayer of Vrtra, drinker of the Soma,  
Seated at this sacrif ice on the strew,  
Be thou health and wealth to the sacrificer.  
l Indra, the protector, the granter of aid with his aids;  
All knowing, be kindly to us;  
Let him restrain the enemy, let him make security,  
May we be lords of strength [4].  
m May we enjoy the fa vour of him the worshipful,  
And also his loving kindness;  
May the protector Indra, the granter of aid,  
For ever fend far from us the enemy.  
n Rich banquets be ours with Indra,  
With mighty strength,  
Wherewith fed we may be glad.  
 
o To Indra, here sing stren gth 
To place his chariot in the front;  
Even in conflict in battle he maketh wide room;  
Slayer of foes in the contests  
Be thou our comforter;  
Let the feeble bowstrings  
Of the others break on their bows.  Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
705 
  
PRAPKTHAKA VIII  
The Rajasuya  
i. 8. 1.  
a Anumati h e offers a cake on eight potsherds; the sacrificial fee is a cow. The 
(grains) which are thrown down to the west of the support he (offers) on one 
potsherd to Nirrti; the sacrificial fee is a black garment with a black fringe.  
Go away, hail! rejoicing in the oblation.  
This is thy share, O Nirrti;  
 
O thou who hast prospered, thou art rich in oblation;  
Free him from evil. Hail!  
Honour to him who hath done this.  
 
He offers an oblation to Aditya; the sacrificial fee is a choice (ox). (He offers) to 
Agni and Vi snu on eleven potsherds; the sacrificial fee is a dwarf beast of burden. 
(He offers) to Agni and Soma [1] on eleven potsherds; the sacrificial fee is gold. 
(He offers) to Indra on eleven potsherds; the sacrificial fee is a bull as a beast of 
burden. (He of fers) to Agni on eight potsherds, and curds to Indra; the sacrificial 
fee is a bull as a beast of burden. (He offers) to Indra and Agni on twelve 
potsherds, and an oblation ( caru ) to the All -gods; the sacrificial fee is a first -
born calf. (He offers) an ob lation of millet to Soma; the sacrificial fee is a garment. 
(He offers) an oblation to Sarasvati, and an oblation to Sarasvant; the sacrificial fee 
is a pair of oxen. 
 
i. 8. 2.  
He offers to Agni on eight potsherds, an oblation to Soma, to Savitr on twelve  
potsherds, an oblation to Sarasvati, an oblation to Pusan, to the Maruts on seven 
potsherds, clotted curds to the All -gods, and on eleven potsherds to sky and earth. Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
706 
  
i. 8. 3.  
a He offers on eleven potsherds to Indra and Agni, clotted curds to the Maruts , 
clotted curds to Varuna, and on one potsherd to Ka.  
b The voracious we invoke,  
The Maruts who bear the sacrifice,  
Rejoicing in the mush.  
c Be not against us in battles, O god Indra  
Let there be expiation to satisfy thee, O impetuous one;  
For great is the  barley heap of this bountiful one;  
Rich in oblation are the Maruts whom our song praises.'  
d The wrong we have done in village or wild,  
In the assembly, in our members,  
The wrong to Çudra or Aryan,  
The wrong contrary to the law of either,  
Of that thou art  the expiation; hail!  
e The doers of the deed have performed the deed,  
With wondrous speech;  
Having done the deed to the gods go ye  
To your home, ye bounteous ones.  
 
i. 8. 4.  
a To Agni Anikavant he offers a cake on eight potsherds as the sun rises, an 
oblation to the Maruts as the heaters at midday, and to the Maruts as lords of the 
house he milks at evening an oblation of all (the cows).  
b O ladle, fly away filled,  
And well filled do thou fly back;  
Like wares, O Çatakratu,  
Let us barter food and strength.  
c Give thou to me; I shall give to thee;  
Bestow upon me; I shall bestow upon thee;  
Accept my offering;  
I shall accept thy offering [1].  
d To the Maruts, the playful, he offers a cake on seven potsherds at the rising of the  Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
707 
 sun; he ofibrs to Agni on eight  potsherds, an oblation to Soma, to Savitr on twelve  
potsherds, to Sarasvati an oblation, to Pusan an oblation, to Indra and Agni on 
eleven potsherds, to Indra an oblation, to Viçvakarman on eleven potsherds.  
 
i. 8. 5.  
a He offers to Soma with the Pitrs a cake on six potsherds, to the Pitrs who sit on 
the straw fried grains, for the Pitrs prepared by Agni he milks a beverage from a 
cow which has to be won over (to another calf).  
b This for thee, O father, and for thy line;  
This for thee, O grandfather, gr eat-grandfather, and for thy line  
Do ye Pitrs rejoice in your portions.  
c May we gladden thee,  
O bountiful one, fair to see;  
Forth now with full chariot seat  
Being praised, dost thou fare according to our will;  
Yoke, O Indra, thy two bay steeds [1].  
d The y have eaten, they have rejoiced,  
The dear ones have dispelled (evil),  
The radiant sages have been praised with newest hymn;  
Yoke, O Indra, thy two bay steeds.  
e The Pitrs have eaten, the Pitrs have rejoiced, the Pitrs have been glad, the Pitrs 
have purifi ed themselves.  
f Go away, O ye Pitrs, Soma loving,  
With your majestic ancient paths;  
Then reach ye the kindly Pitrs  
 
Who carouse in company with Yama.  
h Mind let us summon hither  
With the praise of Naraçansa  
And the reverence of the Pitrs.  
h Let mind retur n to us [2]  
For vigour, for insight, for life,  
And that long we may see the sun.'  
i May the Pitrs restore mind to us,  
May the host of the gods;  Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
708 
 May we belong to the band of the living.  
k Whatever hurt we have done to atmosphere, to earth, to sky,  
To mother  or to father,  
May Agni of the house free me from this sin;  
May he make me blameless  
In respect of all the ill we have wrought.  
 
i. 8. 6.  
a For each he offers on one potsherd, and one over.  
b As many as we are of the house, to them have I made prosperity.  
c Thou art the protection of cattle, the protection of the sacrifice; give  
me protection.  
d Rudra alone yieldeth to no second.  
e The mole is thy beast, O Rudra; rejoice in it.  
f This is thy portion, O Rudra, with thy sister Ambika; rejoice in it.  
g (Give)  medicine for ox, for horse, for man,  
And medicine for us, medicine  
That it be rich in healing,  
Good [1] for ram and sheep.  
h We have appeased, O lady, Rudra,  
The god Tryambaka;  
That he may make us prosperous,  
That he may increase our wealth,  
That he may m ake us rich in cattle,  
That he may embolden us.  
i To Tryambaka we make offering,  
The fragrant, increaser of prosperity;  
Like a cucumber from its stem,  
From death may I be loosened, not from immortality.  
k This is thy portion, O Rudra; rejoice in it; with i t for food, do thou go away 
beyond the Mujavants.  
 
l With unstrung bow, thy club in thy hand, clad in skins. 
 Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
709 
 i. 8. 7.  
a (He I offers) to Indra and Agni on twelve potsherds, an oblation to the All -gods, 
a cake on twelve potsherds to Indra Çunasira, milk t o Vayu, to Sarya on one 
potsherd; the sacrificial fee is a plough for twelve oxen. b To Agni he offers on 
eight potsherds, to Rudra an oblation of Gavidhuka, to Indra curds, to Varuna an 
oblation made of barley; the sacrificial fee is a cow for draught pur poses. c The 
gods that sit in the east, led by Agni; that sit in the south, led by Yama; that sit in 
the west, led by Savitr; that sit in the north, led by Varuna; that sit above, led by 
Brhaspati; that slay the Raksases; may they protect us, may they help  us; to them 
homage; to them hail! [1] d The Raksases are collected, the Raksases are burnt up; 
here do I burn up the Raksases. e To Agni, slayer of Raksases, hail! To Yama, 
Savitr, Varuna, Brhaspati, the worshipful, the slayer of Raksases, hail! f The 
sacrificial fee is a chariot with three horses. g On the instigation of the god Savity, 
with the arms of the Açvins, with the hands of Pusan, I offer (for) the death of the 
Raksases; the Raksases are slain; we have killed the Raksases. h The sacrificial fee 
is what he wears. 
 
i. 8. 8.  
He offers a cake on twelve potsherds to Dhatr, to Anumati an oblation, to Raka an 
oblation, to Sinivali an oblation, to Kuhu an oblation; the sacrificial fee is a pair of 
cattle. To Agni and Visnu he offers on eleven potsherds, to Indra and Visnu on 
eleven potsherds, to Visnu on three potsherds; the sacrificial fee is a dwarf beast of 
burden. To Agni and Soma he offers on eleven potsherds, to Indra and Soma on 
eleven potsherds, to Soma an oblation; the sacrificial fee is a brown (animal). To 
Soma and Pusan he offers an oblation, to Indra and Pusan an oblation, to Pusan an 
oblation; the sacrificial fee is a dark (animal). To (Agni) Vaiçvanara he offers on 
twelve potsherds; the sacrificial fee is gold. To Varuna (he offers) an oblat ion 
made of barley; the sacrificial fee is a horse. 
 
i. 8. 9.  
To Brhaspati he offers an oblation in the house of the Brahman (priest); the 
sacrificial fee is a white -backed (animal). (He offers) to Indra on eleven potsherds Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
710 
 in the house of a Rajanya; the sacrificial fee is a bull. To Aditya (he offers) an 
oblation in the house of the chief wife; the sacrificial fee is a cow. To Nirrti (he 
offers) an oblation in the house of the neglected wife, made up of rice broken by 
the nails; the sacrificial fee is a b lack hornless (cow). To Agni (he offers) on eight 
potsherds in the house of the leader of the host; the sacrificial fee is gold. To 
Varuna (he offers) on ten potsherds in the house of the minstrel; the sacrificial fee 
is a great castrated (ox). To the Maru ts (he offers) on seven potsherds in the house 
of the village headman; the sacrificial fee is a dappled (cow). To Savitr (he offers) 
on twelve potsherds [1] in the house of the carver; the sacrificial fee is a speckled 
(ox). To the Açvins (he offers) on tw o potsherds in the house of the charioteer; the 
sacrificial fee is two born of one mother. To Pusan (he offers) an oblation in the 
house of the divider; the sacrificial fee is a black (ox). To Rudra (he offers) an 
oblation of Gavidhuka in the house of the thrower of the dice; the sacrificial fee is 
a speckled (ox) with raised tail. To Indra, the good protector, he offers a cake on 
eleven potsherds and to Indra, who frees from distress, (with the words),  
May the king, the slayer of Vrtra,  
Be our king and sl ay the foe.  
 
There is (an offering) to Mitra and Brhaspati; in the milk of a white (cow) with a 
white calf which has curdled itself, and in butter which has churned itself, in a dish 
of Açvattha wood [2] with four corners (made) of a branch which has falle n of 
itself, he should scatter husked and unhusked rice grains; the husked ones in the 
milk are Brhaspati's, the unhusked in the butter are Mitra's; the Vedi must be self -
made, the strew self -cut, the kindling -stick self -made; the sacrificial fee is the 
white (cow) with a white calf. 
 
i. 8. 10.  
a To Agni, lord of the house, he offers a cake of black rice on eight potsherds; to 
Soma, lord of the forest, an oblation of millet; to Savitr, of true instigation, a cake 
of swift -growing rice on twelve potsherds; to Rudra, lord of cattle, an oblation of 
Gavidhuka; to Brhaspati, lord of speech, an oblation of wild rice; to Indra, the 
noblest, a cake of large rice on eleven potsherds; to Mitra, the true, an oblation of Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
711 
 Amba grain, and to Varuna, lord of right, an obl ation made of barley.  
b May Savity of instigations instigate thee, Agni of lords of the house, Soma of 
lords of the forest, Rudra of cattle [1], Brhaspati of speech, Indra of nobles, Mitra 
of truth, Varuna of lords of right.  
c O ye gods that instigate the gods, do ye instigate him, descendant of N. N., to  
freedom from foes, to great lordship, to great overlordship, to great rule over the 
people.  
d This is your king, O Bharatas; Soma is the king of us Brahmans.  
e This kingdom hath verily been conferred,  
Varuna hath diffused his own body;  
We have become obedient to pure Mitra;  
We have magnified the name of the great holy order.  
f These have become all the hosts of Varuna,  
Mitra in his course hath overcome hostility;  
The worshipful ones have taken order accord ing to sacred law:  
Trita hath taken possession of our old age.  
g Thou art the stepping of Visnu, thou art the step of Visnu, thou art the stride of 
Visnu.  
 
i. 8. 11.  
a Ye are active, thou art the lord of the waters, thou art the male wave, thou art the  
male host, ye are the pen -dwellers, ye are the strength of the Maruts, ye have the  
radiance of the sun, ye have the brightness of the sun, ye are delightful, ye are 
obedient,  
ye are powerful, ye are all supporters, ye are supporters of men, ye have the 
brilliance of Agni, ye are the sap of the waters, of the plants.  
b They have taken the waters, divine,  
Rich in sweetness, full of strength, caring for the royal consecration;  
Whereby they anointed Mitra and Varuna,  
Whereby they led Indra beyond his foes.  
c Ye are givers of the kingdom; give ye the kingdom, hail! Ye are givers of the  
kingdom; give N. N. the kingdom.  
 Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
712 
 i. 8. 12.  
a. O ye divine waters, be ye unitedFull of sweetness with the sweet,  
Winning great radiance for the Ksatriya.  
b Unsurpassed, sit ye d own, full of strength,  
Bestowing great radiance upon the Ksatriya.  
c Friend of speech, born of heat, thou art undefeated; thou art the share of Soma.  
d The pure I purify you with the pure, the bright with the bright, the immortal with  
ambrosia, hail! cari ng for the royal consecration.  
e Clothed in these (waters), sharing joy, glorious in strength,  
Undefeated and busy,  
In the waters hath Varuna made his abode,  
The child [1] of the waters in those most motherly.  
f Thou art the caul of kingly power, thou art the womb of kingly power.  
g Notified is Agni, lord of the house; notified is Indra, of ancient fame; notified is  
Pusan, all -knower; notified are Mitra and Varuna, increasing holy order; notified 
are sky and earth, of sure vows; notified is the goddess Adi ti, of all forms; notified 
is he, N. N., descendant of N. N., in this folk, this kingdom, for great lordship, for 
great overlordship, for great rule over the people.  
h This is your king, O Bharatas; Soma is the king of us Brahmans.  
i Thou art the bolt of I ndra [2] slaying foes; with thee may he slay his foe.  
k Ye are overcomers of foes.  
l Protect me in front, protect me at the side, protect me from behind; from the 
quarters  
protect me; from all deadly things protect me.  
m Gold hued in the glowing of the da wns, 
Bronze pillared at the rising of the sun,  
O Varuna, O Mitra, mount your chariot seat,  
And thence behold ye Aditi and Diti.  
 
i. 8. 13.  
a Do I thou mount the kindling (quarter); let the Gayatri of metres help thee; the 
Trivrt Stoma, the Rathantara Sama n, the deity Agni, the treasure the Brahman 
class.  
b Do thou mount the dread (quarter); let the Tristubh of metres help thee, the  
Pañcadaça Stoma, the Brhat Saman, the deity Indra, the treasure the ruling class.  Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
713 
 c Do thou mount the shining (quarter); let the Jagati of metres help thee, the 
Saptadaça Stoma, the Vairapa Saman, the deity the Maruts, the treasure the peasant 
class.  
d Do thou mount the northern (quarter); let the Anustubh of metres help thee [1], 
the Ekavinça Stoma, the Vairaja Saman, the deity  Mitra and Varuna, the treasure 
the host.  
e Do thou mount the zenith; let the Pañkti of metres help thee, the Trinava, and  
Trayastrinça Stomas, the Çakvara and Raivata Samans, the deity Brhaspati, the 
treasure radiance.  
f Such like, other like, thus like,  similar, the measured, commensurate, 
harmonious,  
g Of pure radiance, of varied radiance, of true radiance, the radiant, true, protector 
of holy order [2], beyond distress.  
h To Agni hail! To Soma hail! To Savitr hail! To Sarasvati hail!  
To Pusan hail! To Brhaspati hail! To Indra hail! To sound hail!  
To verse hail! To Ança hail! To Bhaga hail! To the lord of the field hail!  
i To earth hail! To atmosphere hail! To sky hail! To the sun hail! To the moon hail! 
To the Naksatras hail! To the waters hail! To plan ts hail! To trees hail! To moving  
creatures hail! To swimming creatures hail! To creeping creatures hail!  
 
i. 8. 14.  
a Thou art the glittering of Soma; as thine may my glittering be. b Thou art 
ambrosia; from death protect me.  
c From the thunderbolt pro tect me.  
d Propitiated are biting flies.  
e Cast away is Namuci's head.  
f Soma, king Varuna, and the gods which instigate righteousness, may they 
instigate  
thy speech, may they instigate thy breath, may they instigate thy sight, may they  
instigate thine e ar. 
g With the glory of Soma I besprinkle thee, with the brilliance of Agni [1], with the  
radiance of the sun, with the power of Indra, with the strength of Mitra and 
Varuna, with the force of the Maruts.  
h Thou art the lord of kingly powers.  
i Protect fr om the sky.  Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
714 
 k Out from below have they come,  
Following the serpent of the deep;  
On the back of the mountain, the hill,  
The ships that pour spontaneously go ever.  
l O Rudra, that highest active name of thee, to that thou art offered, thou art offered 
to Yam a. 
m O Prajapati, none other than thou  
Hath encompassed all these beings;  
Be that ours for which we sacrifice to thee  
May we be lords of wealth.  
 
i. 8. 15.  
a Thou art the bolt of Indra, slaying foes; with thee may he slay his foe.  
b By the precept of Mitr a and Varuna, the directors, I yoke thee with the yoking of 
the sacrifice.  
c Thou art the stepping of Visnu, thou art the step of Visnu, thou art the stride of 
Visnu  
d On the instigation of the Maruts may I conquer.  
e Be mind ready.  
f May I be united with power and strength.  
g Thou art the spirit of cattle; like them may my spirit be.  
h Homage to mother earth; may I not harm mother earth [1]; may mother earth 
harm me not.  
i So great art thou, thou art life, bestow life upon me; thou art strength, bestow 
strength upon me; thou art the yoker; thou art radiance, bestow radiance upon me.  
k To Agni, lord of the house, hail! To Soma, lord of the forest, hail! To Indra's 
strength hail! To the Maruts' force hail!  
I The gander seated in purity, the bright one seated in the atmosphere,  
The Hotr seated at the altar, the guest seated in the house,  
Seated among men, seated in the highest, seated in holy order, seated in the 
firmament,  
Born of the waters, born of the cows, born of holy order, born of the mountain, the 
great holy order. 
 Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
715 
 i. 8. 16.  
a Thou art Mitra, thou art Varuna.  
b May I be united with the All -gods.  
c Thou art the navel of kingly power, thou are the womb of kingly power.  
d Sit thou on the smooth, sit thou on the pleasant seat.  
e May she hurt thee not; may  she hurt me not.  
f Varuna, of sure vows, hath set him down  
In the waters, with keen insight, for lordship.  
g O Brahman! Thou, O king, art the Brahman priest, thou art Savitr of true 
instigation.  
O Brahman! Thou, O king, art the Brahman priest, thou art I ndra of true force [1]. 
O Brahman! Thou, O king, art the Brahman priest; thou art Indra, the kindly. O 
Brahman!  
Thou, O king, art the Brahman priest; thou art Varuna, of true rule.  
h Thou art the bolt of Indra, slaying foes; with this subject to me.  
i Thi s king hath surmounted the quarters.  
k O thou of good fame! O thou of prosperity! O thou of true rule!  
l To the son of the waters hail! To the son of strength hail! To Agni, lord of the 
house,  
hail! 
 
i. 8. 17.  
He offers to Agni on eight potsherds; the sa crificial fee is gold. (He offers) to 
Sarasvati an oblation; the sacrificial fee is a calf. To Savitr (he offers) on twelve 
potsherds; the sacrificial fee is a speckled (ox). To Pusan (he offers) an oblation; 
the sacrificial fee is a dark (ox), To Brhaspat i (he offers) an oblation; the sacrificial 
fee is a white -backed (ox). To Indra (he offers) on eleven potsherds; the sacrificial 
fee is a bull. To Varuna (he offers) on ten potsherds; the sacrificial fee is a great 
castrated (ox). To Soma (he offers) an ob lation; the sacrificial fee is a brown (ox). 
To Tvastr (he offers) on eight potsherds; the sacrificial fee is a white (ox) To 
Vishnu (he offers) on three potsherds; the sacrificial fee is a dwarf (ox). 
 Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
716 
 i. 8. 18.  
On the same day they consecrate, on the sa me day they buy the Soma. He presents 
a lotus wreath. He buys the Soma with calves. There is a drink for ten. A hundred 
Brahmans drink. The Stotra is the Saptadaça. The two ornaments he gives to the 
Adhvaryu, the garland to the Udgatr, the round ornament t o the Hotr, a horse to the 
Prastotr and Pratihartr, twelve heifers to the Brahman, a cow to the Maitravaruna, a 
bull to the Brahmanacchansin, garments to the Nestr and Potr, a wagon drawn by 
one ox laden with barley to the Achavaka, a draught ox to the Agn idh. The Hotr is 
a Bhargava; the Saman of the Brahman is the Çrayantiya; the Agnistoma Saman is 
the Varavantiya. He takes water of the Sarasvati. 
 
i. 8. 19.  
To Agni he offers on eight potsherds; the sacrificial fee is gold. To Indra (he 
offers) on eleven potsherds; the sacrificial fee is a bull. To the All -gods (he offers) 
an oblation; the sacrificial fee is a tawny heifer. To Mitra and Varuna (he offers) 
clotted curds; the sacrificial fee is a cow. To Brhaspati (he offers) an oblation; the 
sacrificial fee  is a white -backed (ox). To the Adityas he sacrifices a sheep in 
young, to the Maruts a dappled heifer. To the Açvins and Pusan he offers a cake on 
twelve potsherds; to Sarasvati of true speech an oblation; to Savitr of true 
instigation a cake on twelve po tsherds; the sacrificial fee is a dry skin bag and a 
bow with three arrows. 
 
i. 8. 20.  
To Agni he offers on eight potsherds; to Soma, an oblation; to Savitr on twelve 
potsherds; to Brhaspati an oblation; to Tvastr on eight potsherds; to (Agni) 
Vaiçvanara on twelve potsherds; the sacrificial fee is the southern drawer of the 
chariot stand. To Sarasvati he offers an oblation; to Pusan an oblation; to Mitra an 
oblation; to Varuna an oblation; to the lord of the fields an oblation; to the Adityas 
an oblation; the sacrificial fee is the northern drawer of the chariot stand. 
 Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
717 
 i. 8. 21.  
a The sweet with the sweet, bitter with the bitter, immortal with the immortal, with 
the Soma I unite thee; thou art Soma; be ready for the Açvins, be ready for 
Sarasvati, be read y for Indra, the good protector.  
b Let the daughter of the Sun  
Purify for thee the flowing Soma  
With the eternal sieve.  
c Vayu purified by the strainer,  
Soma hath sped away,  
Indra's dear friend.  
d What then? As men who have barley  
Reap the barley in order,  removing it,  
Hither bring the food of those  
 
Who have not gone to the reverential cutting of the straw.  
e To the Açvins he sacrifices a dusky (ox), to Sarasvati a ram, to Indra a bull.  
f To Indra he offers on eleven potsherds, to Savitr on twelve potsherd s, to Varuna 
on ten potsherds.  
g O Pitrs, beaded by Soma, rejoice.  
h The sacrificial fee is a mare.  
 
i. 8. 22.  
a O Agni and Visnu, great is your greatness;  
Rejoice ye in the secret names of the ghee;  
Placing in every house seven treasures,  
May your tongue  move forth to the ghee.  
b O Agni and Visnu, great is your dear abode;  
Ye taste the ghee, rejoicing in its secrets;  
In every home increasing lauds,  
May your tongue move forth to the ghee.  
c May the goddess Sarasvati  
With strength, rich in mares,  
Further us , she that aideth prayer.  
d To us from the sky, from the great [1] mountain;  
May Sarasvati, the worshipful, come to the sacrifice  Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
718 
 May the goddess rejoicing in our supplication, rich in ghee,  
May she hearken gladly to our effectual speech.  
e O Brhaspati, wi th the All -gods,  
Do thou rejoice in our oblations;  
Grant riches to the generous giver.  
f Then to the father, with the All -gods, to the strong one,  
Let us pay honour with sacrifices, with reverence, with oblations;  
O Brhaspati, with good offspring, with her oes, 
May we be lords of wealth.  
g That various wealth bestow upon us,  
O Brhaspati, that shall surpass the enemy,  
That shall shine glorious, with insight among men,  
That shall be resplendent in glory, O thou who art born of holy order [2].  
h O Mitra and Var una, 
Bedew our pasturage with ghee  
With mead the regions, O ye wise ones.  
i Do ye unloose your arms for us to live;  
Do ye bedew our pasturage with ghee;  
Make us famous among the folk, O ye young ones;  
 
Hearken, O Mitra and Varuna, to these my supplications . 
k Agni for you I honour in song,  
The god first of the bright ones;  
Honouring him who prospereth the fields  
Like a much loved friend.  
l Swiftly (goeth) the chariot of the worshipper [3]  
Like a hero in every contest;  
He who by sacrifice is fain to win the mind of the gods  
Shall prevail over those who sacrifice not.  
m Thou art not harmed, O sacrificer,  
Nor thou, O pourer, nor thou, O pious one;  
There shall be wealth of heroes,  
And plenteousness of swift steeds;  
No one shall in act approach him,  
No one shall anticipate him nor stay him.  
n Streams, health -bringing, like milch cows,  Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
719 
 Pour up to the man who hath sacrificed and shall sacrifice;  
Him who filleth and satiateth [4], bringing fame,  
Streams of ghee approach on all sides.  
 
o O Soma and Rudra, do ye drive away  
The evil spirit that hath entered our abode;  
Far away from us smite misfortune;  
Whatever sin we have done remove from us.  
p O Soma and Rudra, do ye give to us,  
In our bodies, all these medicines;  
Loosen and remove the evil we have done  
That is bound w ithin our bodies.  
q O Soma and Pusan, begetters of wealth,  
Begetters, of sky, begetters of earth,  
Born as protectors of the whole world,  
The gods have made (you) the navel of immortality.  
r In the birth of these gods they rejoiced;  
They concealed the hatef ul darkness;  
Through these two, Soma and Pusan,  
The Indra made the cooked (milk) among the raw cows.  
 
Sacred -Texts Index  Hinduism In dex  Yajur Veda Index Previous Next  
 
 