Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
1170  
 To the boneless hail!  
To that which hath marrow hail!  
To the marrowless hail!  
 
To that which hath limbs hail!  
To the limbless hail!  
To the trunk hail!  
To the trunkless hail!  
 
vii. 5. 13.  
Who yoketh thee? Let him yoke thee. Let Visnu yoke thee, for the prosperity of 
this sacrifice, for my pre -eminence, for N.N.'s pleasure; for life thee, for expiration 
thee, for ins piration thee, for cross -breathing thee, for dawning thee, for wealth 
thee, for prosperity thee, for sound thee, for nourishing thee, for calling from afar 
thee, for falling thee (I yoke). 
 
vii. 5. 14.  
To Agni, of the Gayatri (metre), the Trivrt (Stoma), the Rathantara (Saman), the 
spring (season), (offering is made) on eight potsherds. To Indra, of the Tristubh 
(metre), the Pañcadaça, (Stoma), the Brhat (Saman), the summer (season), 
(offering is made) on eleven potsherds. To the All -gods of the Jagati (me tre), the 
Saptadaça (Stoma), the Vairupa (Saman), the rainy (season), (offering is made) on 
twelve potsherds. To Mitra and Varuna, of the Anustubh (metre), the Ekavinça 
(Stoma), the Vairaja (Saman), the autumn (season), curds. To Brhaspati, of the 
Pankti ( metre), the Trinava (Stoma), the Çakvara (Saman), the winter (season), an 
oblation (is made). To Savitr, of the Atichandas (metre), the Trayastrinça (Stoma), 
the Raivata (Saman), the cool (season), (offering is made) on twelve potsherds. To 
Aditi, as Visnu 's consort, an oblation (is made). To Agni Vaiçvanara (offering is 
made) on twelve potsherds. To Anumati an oblation (is made). To Ka (offering is 
made) on one potsherd. 
 Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
1171  
 vii. 5. 15.  
Now for the fire which is produced on the fire -altar and for Soma, the k ing, the 
beast for Agni and Soma is the guest -offering. Again the fire which is piled up is 
cruel, and if one were not to cast upon the fire which has been piled up these 
oblations, the cruel fire would spring up in wrath, and injure the offspring and 
cattle of the sacrificer. In that he casts the oblations on the fire which has been 
piled up, he appeases it with its own portion, and the cruel fire [1] does not spring 
up in wrath and injure his offspring and cattle. There are ten oblations. Nine are the 
breaths in man, and the navel is the tenth; verily he places breaths in the sacrificer. 
Again the Viraj is of ten syllables; the Viraj is food; verily he finds support in the 
Viraj as food. 'It must be piled with the seasons, the metres, the Stomas, and the 
Prsthas', they say. In that he casts these oblations, he piles it with the seasons, the 
metres, the Stomas, and the Prsthas. 'The quarters can be won by one who has 
pressed the Soma' they say [2]. In that he casts these oblations, (it is) for the 
winning of  the quarters. The gods made Indra sacrifice with it, and therefore is it 
Indra's pressing; men made Manu sacrifice with it, and therefore is it Manu's 
pressing. As Indra among the gods, as Manu among men, becomes he who 
knowing thus sacrifices with this s acrifice. The Puronuvakyas contain the word 
'quarter', for the conquest of the quarters.  
vii. 6. 16.  
a Who is the sole lord of the world,  
Which breatheth and winketh, through his greatness,  
Who is the lord of biped and of quadruped here,  
Who is the god wh om we are to worship with oblation?  
b Thou art taken with a foundation. I take thee dear to Prajapati. Of thee the sky is 
the greatness, the Naksatras the form, the sun the splendour; to his greatness, to 
Prajapati, thee (I offer). Hail!  
 
vii. 5. 17.  
a He who is the giver of soul, the giver of strength,  
On whose instruction all, on whose (instruction) the gods depend.  
Whose shadow is immortality, whose shadow is death;  
Who is the god whom we are to worship with oblation?  Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
1172  
 b Thou art taken with a foundation.  I take thee dear to Prajapati. Of thee the earth 
is the greatness, the plants and trees the form, the fire the splendour; to his 
greatness, to Prajapati, thee (I offer). Hail!  
 
vii. 5. 18.  
In the priesthood may a Brahmana be born of spiritual glory. In t his kingdom may 
a prince be born, an archer, a hero, and a great car fighter; a milk cow; a draught 
ox; a swift racer; a prolific woman; a victorious warrior; a youth fit for the 
assembly. To this sacrificer be a hero born. May Parjanya rain for us whensoe ver 
we desire. May our plants ripen with fruit. May union and peace be ours. 
 
vii. 5. 19.  
a The steed hath come to the earth; the strong steed hath made Agni his yoke -
fellow. The steed hath come to the atmosphere; the strong steed hath made Vayu 
his yoke  follow.  
The steed hath come to the sky; the strong steed hath made Surya his yoke -fellow.  
b Agni is thy yoke -fellow, O steed; I grasp thee; bear me prosperously.  
Vayu is thy yoke -fellow, O steed; I grasp thee; bear me prosperously [1].  
The Aditya is thy y oke-fellow, O steed; I grasp thee; bear me prosperously.  
Thou art the supporter of expiration; support my expiration.  
Thou art the supporter of cross -breathing; support my cross -breathing.  
Thou art the supporter of inspiration; support my inspiration.  
Thou  art the eye; place the eye in me.  
Thou art the ear; place the ear in me.  
Thou art life; place life in me.  
 
vii. 5. 20.  
May the seed be living, Parjanya rain, the corn be ripened, the plants rich in leaves, 
this (earth) easy to walk on, the fire easy of a pproach, the atmosphere easy to see 
through, the wind purifying, the sky easy of access, he that burns yonder kindly, 
the day and night as of old, the half months of fifteen days, the months of thirty 
days, the seasons in due order, and the year auspicious . Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
1173  
  
vii. 5. 21.  
To) Agni (offering is made) on eight potsherds; to Soma an oblation; to Savitr 
(offering) on eight potsherds; to Pusan an oblation; to Rudra an oblation; to Agni 
Vaiçvanara (offering) on eight potsherds; if he should not go to the wild beas t's 
lair; to Agni, saviour from distress, (offering is made) on eight potsherds; to Surya 
milk (is offered); Vayu receives a share in the butter offering. 
 
vii. 5. 22.  
To Agni, saviour from distress, (offering is made) on eight potsherds; to Indra, 
saviou r from distress, on eleven potsherds; to Mitra and Varuna, saviours from sin, 
a milk offering; to Vayu and Savitr saviours from sin, an oblation; to the Açvins, 
saviours from sin, grain; to the Maruts, saviours from evil, on seven potsherds; to 
the All -gods, saviours from evil, on twelve potsherds; to Anumati an oblation; to 
Agni, Vaiçvanara on twelve potsherds; to heaven and earth, saviours from evil, on 
two potsherds. 
 
vii. 5. 23.  
To Agni he made obeisance; to the earth he made obeisance; as Agni with th e earth  
made harmony, so for me may favourable harmonies be made.  
To Vayu he made obeisance, to the atmosphere he made obeisance; as Vayu with 
the atmosphere (made harmony, so &c.).  
To Surya he made obeisance, to the sky he made obeisance; as Surya with t he sky  
(made harmony, so &c.).  
To the moon he made obeisance, to the Naksatras he made obeisance; as the moon 
with the Naksatras (made harmony, so &c.).  
To Varuna he made obeisance, to the waters he made obeisance [1]; as Varuna 
with the waters (made harm ony, so &c.).  
To the Saman he made obeisance, to the Rc he made obeisance; as the Saman with 
the Rc (made harmony, so &c.).  
To the Brahman (caste) he made obeisance, to the Ksatriya (caste) he made 
obeisance; as the Brahman with the Ksatriya (made harmony,  so &c.).  Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
1174  
 To the king he made obeisance, to the people he made obeisance; as the king with 
the people (made harmony, so &c.).  
To the chariot he made obeisance, to the horses he made obeisance; as the chariot 
with the horses (made harmony, so &c.).  
To Praja pati he made obeisance, to creatures he made obeisance; as Prajapati with  
creatures made harmony, so for me may favourable harmonies be made.  
 
vii. 5. 24.  
a Thine ancient paths, O Savitr,  
That are extended dustless through the atmosphere,  
With these to -day, with thy paths easy to travel,  
Guard us, and, O God, speak for us.  
b Reverence to Agni, dweller on earth, maker of room; grant room to this thy 
sacrificer. Reverence to Vayu, dweller in the atmosphere, maker of room; grant 
room to this thy sacrificer. Reverence to Surya, dweller in the sky, maker of room; 
grant room to this thy sacrificer.  
 
vii. 5. 25.  
He who knows the head of the sacrificial horse becomes possessed of a head and 
fit for sacrifice. The head of the sacrificial horse is the dawn, the eye  the sun, the 
breath the wind, the ear the moon, the feet the quarters, the ribs the intermediate 
quarters, the winking the day and night, the joints the half -months, the joinings the 
months, the limbs the seasons, the trunk the year, the hair the rays (of  the gun), the 
form the Naksatras, the bones the stars, the flesh the mist, the hair the plants, the 
tail hairs the trees, the mouth Agni, the open (mouth) Vaiçvanara [1], the belly the 
sea, the anus the atmosphere, the testicles the sky and the earth, the  membrum 
virile , the pressing -stone, the seed the Soma. When it chews, there is lightning; 
when it moves about, there is thundering; when it makes water, there is rain; its 
speech is speech. The Mahiman (cup) indeed is born before the birth of the horse 
as the day. The Mahiman (cup) is born after it as the night. These two Mahiman 
(cups) surround on either side the horse. As Haya (steed) it carried the gods, as 
Arvan (courser) the Asuras, as Vajin (racer) the Gandharvas, as Açva (horse) men. 
The birthplace of the horse, indeed, is the sea, its kindred is the sea.  
  Hymns of the Sama Veda - Translation - Griffith  
 
1175  
  
 
 
HYMNS OF THE SAMAVEDA  
Translated with a Popular Commentary  
Ralph T.H. Griffith  
1895  
  Hymns of the Sama Veda - Translation - Griffith  
 
1176  
 PREFACE  
The Samaveda , or Veda of Holy Songs, third in the usual order of enumeration of the three 
Vedas, ranks next in sanctity and liturgical importance to the Rgveda  or Veda of Recited praise. 
Its Sanhita, or metrical portion, consists chiefly of hymns to be chanted by the Udgatar priests at 
the performance of those important sacrifices in which the juice o f the Soma plant, clarified and 
mixed with milk and other ingredients, was offered in libation to various deities. The Collection 
is made up of hymns, portions of hymns, and detached verses, taken mainly from the Rgveda , 
transposed and re -arranged, without  reference to their original order, to suit the religious 
ceremonies in which they were to be employed. In these compiled hymns there are frequent 
variations, of more or less importance, from the text of the Rgveda  as we now possess it which 
variations, al though in some cases they are apparently explanatory, seem in others to be older 
and more original than the readings of the Rgveda . In singing, the verses are still further altered 
by prolongation, repetition and insertion of syllables, and various modulat ions, rests, and other 
modifications prescribed, for the guidance of the officiating priests, in the Ganas or Song -books. 
Two of these manuals, the Gramageyagdna, or Congregational, and the Aranyagana or Forest 
Song -Book, follow the order of the verses of part I, of the Sanhita, and two others, the Uhagana, 
the Uhyagana, of Part II. This part is less disjointed than part I, and is generally arranged in 
triplets whose first verse is often the repetition of a verse that has occurred in part I.  
There is no clu e to the date of the compilation of the Samaveda Hymns , nor has the compiler's 
name been handed down to us. Such a manual was unnecessary in the early times when the 
Aryans first came into India, but was required for guidance and use in the complicated rit ual 
elaborated by the invaders after their expansion and settlement in their new homes.  
There are three recensions of the text of the Samaveda Sanhita , the Kauthuma Sakha or 
recension is current in Guzerat, the Jaiminiya in the Carnatic, and the Ranayaniya  in the 
Mahratta country. A translation, by Dr. Stevenson, of the Ranayaniya recension -or, rather, a free 
version of Sayana's paraphrase -was edited by Professor Wilson, in 1842; in 1848 Professor 
Benfey of Göttingen brought out an excellent edition of the same text with a metrical translation, 
a complete glossary, and explanatory notes; and in 1874 -78 Pandit Satyavrata Samasrami of 
Calcutta published in the Bibliotheca Indicaa. most meritorious edition of the Sanhita according 
to the same recension, with Sa yana's commentary, portions of the Song -books, andi other 
illustrative matter. I have followed Benfey's text, and have, made much use of his glossary and 
notes. Pandit Satyavrata Samasrami's edition also has been of the greatest service to me. To Mr. 
Venis , Principal of the Benares Sanskrit College, I am indebted for, the loan of the College 
manuscripts of the text and commentary.  
I repeat the expression of my obligations to those scholars whose works assisted me in my 
translation of the Hymns of the Rgveda . For help in translating the non -Rgvedic Hymns of the Hymns of the Sama Veda - Translation - Griffith  
 
1177  
 Samaveda , I am additionally indebted to the late Professor Benfey and to Professor Ludwig 
whose version will be found in his Der Rgveda , vol. III, pp. 19 -25. 
For further information regarding the Samav eda Weber's History Of Indian Literature , and Max 
Müller's History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature , or the article on the Veda in Chamber's 
Encyclopaedia  should be consulted.  
R.T.H. GRIFFITH  
Kotagiri, Nilgiri  
25th May,1893.  
  Hymns of the Sama Veda - Translation - Griffith  
 
1178  
 FIRST PART  
BOOK I  
CHAPTER I  
Om. Glory to the Samaveda! To Lord Ganesa glory! Om.  
DECADE I Agni  
1. Come, Agni, praised with song, to feast and sacrificial offering: sit  
As Hotar on the holy grass!  
2. O Agni, thou hast been ordained Hotar of every sacrifice,  
By Gods, among the race of men . 
3. Agni we choose as envoy, skilled performer of this holy rite,  
Hotar, possessor of all wealth.  
4. Served with oblation, kindled, bright, through love of song may Agni, bent  
On riches, smite the Vritras dead!  
5. I laud your most beloved guest like a dea r friend, O Agni, him  
Who, like a chariot, wins us wealth.  
6. Do thou, O Agni, with great might guard us from all malignity,  
Yea, from the hate of mortal man!  
7. O Agni, come; far other songs of praise will I sing forth to thee.  
Wax mighty with these Soma -drops!  
8. May Vatsa draw thy mind away even from thy loftiest dwelling place!  
Agni, I yearn for thee with song.  
9. Agni, Atharvan brought thee forth by rubbing from the sky, the head  
Of all who offer sacrifice.  
10. O Agni, bring us radiant light to be our mighty succour, for  
Thou art our visible deity!  
DECADE II Agni  
1. O Agni, God, the people sing reverent praise to thee for strength:  
With terrors trouble thou the foe  
2. I seek with song your messenger, oblation -bearer, lord of wealth,  
Immortal, best at sa crifice.  
3. Still turning to their aim in thee the sacrificer's sister hymns  
Have come to thee before the wind.  
4. To thee, illuminer of night, O Agni, day by day with prayer,  Hymns of the Sama Veda - Translation - Griffith  
 
1179  
 Bringing thee reverence, we come.  
5. Help, thou who knowest lauds, this work, a lovely hymn in Rudra's praise,  
Adorable in every house!  
6. To this fair sacrifice to drink the milky draught art thou called forth:  
O Agni, with the Maruts come!  
7. With homage will I reverence thee, Agni, like a long -tailed steed,  
Imperial lord of holy ri tes. 
8. As Aurva and as Bhrigu called, as Apnavana called, I call  
The radiant Agni robed with sea.  
9. When he enkindles Agni, man should with his heart attend the song:  
I kindle Agni till he glows.  
10. Then, verily, they see the light refulgent of primeval  seed,  
Kindled on yonder side of heaven.  
DECADE III Agni  
1. Hither, for powerful kinship, I call Agni, him who prospers you,  
Most frequent at our solemn rites.  
2. May Agni with his pointed blaze cast down each fierce devouring fiend:  
May Agni win us wealth  by war!  
3. Agni, be gracious; thou art great: thou hast approached the pious man,  
Hast come to sit on sacred grass.  
4. Agni, preserve us,from distress consume our enemies, O God,  
Eternal, with thy hottest flames  
5. Harness, O Agni, O thou God, thy steeds which are most excellent!  
The fleet ones bring thee rapidly.  
6. Lord of the tribes, whom all must seek, we worshipped Agni set thee down,  
Refulgent, rich in valiant men.  
7. Agni is head and height of heaven, the master of the earth is he  
He quickeneth the waters' seed.  
8. O Agni, graciously announce this our good fortune of the Gods,  
And this our newest hymn of praise!  
9, By song, O Agni, Angiras! Gopavana hath brought thee forth  
Hear thou my call, refulgent one!  
10. Agni, the Sage, the Lord of Strength, ha th moved around the sacred gifts,  
Giving the offerer precious things.  
11. His heralds bear him up aloft, the God who knoweth all that lives,  
The Sun, that all may look on him.  
12, Praise Agni in the sacrifice, the Sage whose holy laws are true  Hymns of the Sama Veda - Translation - Griffith  
 
1180  
 The God who driveth grief away.  
13. Kind be the Goddesses to lend us help, and kind that we may drink:  
May their streams bring us health and wealth  
14. Lord of the brave, whose songs dost thou in thine abundance now inspire,  
Thou whose hymns help to win the kine?  
DECA DE IV Agni  
1. Sing to your Agni with each song, at every sacrifice for strength.  
Come, let us praise the wise and, everlasting God even as a well -beloved friend,  
2. Agni, protect thou us by one, protect us by the second song,  
Protect us by three hymns, O L ord of power and might, bright God, by four hymns guard us 
well!  
3. O Agni, with thy lofty beams, with thy pure brilliancy, O God,  
Kindled, most youthful one! by Bharadvaja's hand, shine on us richly, holy Lord!  
4. O Agni who art worshipped well, dear let our princes be to thee,  
Our wealthy patrons who are governors of men, who part, as gifts, the stall of kine!  
5. Agni, praise -singer! Lord of men, God! burning up the Rakshasas,  
Mighty art thou, the ever -present, household -lord! home -friend and guardian fro m the sky.  
6. Immortal Jatavedas, thou bright -hued refulgent gift of Dawn,  
Agni, this day to him who pays oblations bring the Gods who waken with the morn!  
7. Wonderful, with thy favouring help, send us thy bounties, gracious Lord.  
Thou art the charioteer,  Agni, of earthly wealth: find rest and safety for our seed!  
8. Famed art thou, Agni, far and wide, preserver, righteous, and a Sage.  
The holy singers, O enkindled radiant one, ordainers, call on thee to come.  
9. O holy Agni, give us wealth famed among men  and strengthening life!  
Bestow on us, O helper, that which many crave, more glorious still through righteousness!  
10. To him, who dealeth out all wealth, the sweet -toned Hotar -priest of men,  
To him like the first vessels filled with savoury juice, to Agni  let the lauds go forth.  
DECADE V Agni  
1. With this mine homage I invoke Agni for you, the Son of Strength,  
Dear, wisest envoy, skilled in noble sacrifice, immortal messenger of all.  
2. Thou liest in the logs that are thy mothers: mortals kindle thee.  
Alert thou bearest off the sacrifleer's gift, and then thou shinest to the Gods.  
3. He hath appeared, best prosperer, in whom men lay their holy acts:  
So may our songs of praise come nigh to Agni who was born to give the Arya strength!  
4. Chief Priest is Agni at the laud, as stones and grass at sacrifice.  
Gods! Maruts! Brahmanaspati! I crave with song the help that is most excellent.  Hymns of the Sama Veda - Translation - Griffith  
 
1181  
 5. Pray Agni of the piercing flame, with sacred songs, to be our help;  
For wealth, famed Agni, Purumilha and ye men! He is Suditi 's sure defence.  
6. Hear, Agni who hast ears to hear, with all thy train of escort Gods!  
With those who come at dawn let Mitra, Aryaman sit on the grass at sacrifice.  
7. Agni of Divodasa, God, comes forth like Indra in his might.  
Rapidly hath he moved alon g his mother earth: he stands in high heaven's dwelling -place.  
8. Whether thou come from earth or from the lofty lucid realm of heaven,  
Wax stronger in thy body through my song of praise: fill full all creatures, O most wise!  
9. If, loving well the forests , thou wentest to thy maternal floods,  
Not to be scorned, Agni, is that return of thine when, from afar, thou now art here.  
10. O Agni, Manu stablished thee a light for all the race of men:  
With Kanva hast thou blazed, Law -born and waxen strong, thou whom the people reverence.  
CHAPTER II  
DECADE I Agni  
1. The God who giveth wealth accept your full libation poured to, him!  
Pour ye it out, then fill the vessel full again, for so the God regardeth you.  
2. Let Brahmanaspati come forth, let Sunrita the Goddess co me, 
And Gods bring to our rite which yields a fivefold gift the hero, lover of mankind!  
3. Stand up erect to lend us aid, stand up like Savitar the God,  
Erect as strength -bestower when we call on thee with priests who balm our offerings!  
4. The man who bri ngeth gifts to thee, bright God who fain wouldst lead to wealth,  
Winneth himself a brave son, Agni! skilled in lauds, one prospering in a thousand ways.  
5. With hymns and holy eulogies we supplicate your Agni, Lord  
Of many families who duly serve the Gods,  yea, him whom others too inflame.  
6. This Agni is the Lord of great prosperity and hero, strength,  
Of wealth with noble offspring and with store of kine, the Lord of battles with the foe.  
7. Thou, Agni, art the homestead's Lord, our Hotar -priest at sacrif ice. 
Lord of all boons, thou art the Potar, passing wise. Pay worship, and enjoy the good!  
8. We as thy friends have chosen thee, mortals a God, to be our help.  
The Waters' Child, the blessed, the most mighty one, swift conqueror, and without a peer.  
DECAD E II Agni  
1. Present oblations, make him splendid: set ye as Hotar in his place the Home's Lord, 
worshipped  
With gifts and homage where they pour libations! Honour him meet for reverence in our houses.  
2. Verily wondrous is the tender youngling's growth wh o never draweth nigh to drink his Hymns of the Sama Veda - Translation - Griffith  
 
1182  
 mother's milk.  
As soon as she who hath no udder bore him, he, faring on his. great errand, suddenly grew 
strong.  
3. Here is one light for thee, another yonder: enter the third and, be therewith united.  
Beautiful be thy uni on with the body, beloved in the Gods' sublimest birthplace!  
4. For Jatavedas, worthy of our praise, will we frame with our mind this eulogy as 'twere a car;  
For good, in his assembly, is this care of ours. Let us not, in thy friendship, Agni, suffer harm!  
5. Agni Vaisvanara, born in course of Order, the messenger of earth, the head of heaven,  
The Sage, the sovran, guest of men, our vessel fit for their mouth, the Gods have generated.  
6. Even as the waters from the mountain ridges, so sprang the; Gods, thro ugh lauds, from thee, O 
Agni.  
To thee speed hymns and eulogies, as horses haste, bearing him who loves the song, to battle.  
7. Win to protect you, Rudra, lord of worship, priest of both worlds, effectual sacrificer,  
Agni, invested with his golden colours, before the thunder strike and lay you senseless!  
8. The King whose face is decked with oil is kindled with homage offered by his faithful servant.  
The men, the priests adore him with oblations. Agni hath shone forth at the flush of morning.  
9. Agni advance th with his lofty banner: through earth and heaven the Bull hath loudly bellowed  
He hath come nigh from the sky's farthest limit: the Steer hath waxen in the waters' bosom.  
10. From the two fire -sticks have the men engendered with thoughts, urged by the ha nd, the 
glorious Agni,  
Far-seen, with pointed flame, Lord of the Homestead.  
DECADE III Agni  
1. Agni is wakened by the people's fuel to meet the Dawn who cometh like a milch -cow.  
Like young trees shooting up on high their branches, his flames. are mounting to the vault of 
heaven.  
2. Set forth the gleaming one, the song -inspirer, not foolish with. the foolish, fort -destroyer,  
Who leadeth with his hymns to thought of conquest, gold -bearded, richly splendid with his 
armour  
3. Thou art like heaven: one form is b right, one holy, like Day and Night dissimilar in colour.  
All magic powers thou aidest, self -dependent! Auspicious bethy bounty here, O Pushan!  
4. As holy food, Agni, to thine invoker give wealth in cattle, lasting, rich in marvels!  
To us be born a son and  spreading offspring. Agni, be this thy gracious will to us -ward!  
5. Stablished to fill the juice with vital vigour, giver of wealth, guard of his servant's body,  
The great Priest, born, who knows the clouds, abider with men, is seated in the waters' eddy.  
6. Let the song, honouring the best, with longing honour the Asura's most famous sovran,  
The deeds of him the mighty, deeds like Indra's, the manly one in whom the folk must triumph!  
7. In the two kindling -blocks lies Jatavedas like the well -cherished ger m in pregnant women, -- Hymns of the Sama Veda - Translation - Griffith  
 
1183  
 Agni who day by day must be entreated by men who watch provided with oblations.  
8. Agni, from days of old thou slayest demons: never shall Rakshasas in fight o'ercome thee.  
Burn up the foolish ones, raw flesh devourers: let none of t hem escape thine heavenly arrow!  
DECADE IV Agni  
1. Bring us most mighty splendour thou, Agni, resistless on thy way:  
Prepare for us the path that leads to glorious opulence and strength!  
2. May the brave man, if full of zeal he serve and kindle Agni's flam e, 
Duly presenting sacred gifts, enjoy the Gods' protecting help.  
3. Thy bright smoke lifts itself aloft, and far -extended shines in heaven,  
For, Purifier! like the Sun thou beamest with thy radiant glow.  
4. Thou, Agni, even as Mitra, hast a princely glory  of thine own.  
Bright, active God, thou makest fame increase like means of nourishment.  
5. At dawn let Agni, much -beloved, guest of the house, be glorified,  
In whom, the everlasting one, all mortals make their offerings blaze.  
6. Most moving song be Agni's : shine on high, O rich in radiant light!  
Like the chief consort of a King riches and strength proceed from thee.  
7. Exerting all our strength with thoughts of power we glorify in speech  
Agni your dear familiar friend, the darling guest in every house.  
8. His beam hath lofty power of life: sing praise to Agni, to the God  
Whom men have set in foremost place, like Mitra for their eulogy!  
9. To noblest Agni, friend of man, chief Vritra -slayer, have we come - 
Who with Srutarvan, Riksha's son, in lofty presence i s inflamed.  
10. Born as the loftiest Law commands, comrade of those who grew with him.  
Agni, the sire of Kasyapa by faith, the mother, Manu, Sage.  
DECADE V Agni  
1. We in King Soma place our trust, in Agni, and in Varuna,  
The Aditya, Vishnu, Surya, and the Brahman -priest Brihaspati.  
2. Hence have these men gone up on high and mounted to the heights of heaven:  
On! conquer on the path by which Angirasas travelled to the skies!  
3. That thou mayst send us ample wealth, O Agni, we will kindler thee:  
So, for the g reat oblation, Steer, pray Heaven and Earth to come to us!  
4. He runs when one calls after him, This is the prayer of him who prays.  
He holds all knowledge in his grasp even as the felly rounds the wheel.  
5. Shoot forth, O Agni, with thy flame: demolish th em on every side!  
Break down the Yatudhana's strength, the vigour of the Rakshasa!  Hymns of the Sama Veda - Translation - Griffith  
 
1184  
 6. Worship the Vasus, Agni! here, the Rudras and Adityas, all  
Who know fair sacrifices, sprung from Mann, scattering blessings down!  
BOOK II  
CHAPTER I  
DECADE I Agni  
1. Agni,  thy faithful servant I call upon thee with many a gift,  
As in the keeping of the great inciting God.  
2. To Agni, to the Hotar -priest offer your best, your lofty speech,  
To him ordainer -like who bears the light of songs.  
3. O Agni, thou who art the lord of  wealth in kine, thou Son of Strength,  
Bestow on us, O Jatavedas, high renown  
4. Most skilled in sacrifice, bring the Gods, O Agni, to the pious, man:  
A joyful Priest, thy splendour drives our foes afar  
5. Taught by seven mothers at his birth was he, for g lory of the wise.  
He, firm and sure, hath set his mind on glorious wealth  
6. And in the day our prayer is this: May Aditi come nigh to help,  
With loving -kindness bring us weal and chase our foes  
7. Worship thou Jatavedas, pray to him who willingly accepts,  
Whose smoke wanders at will, and none may grasp his flame  
8. No mortal man can e'er prevail by arts of magic over him  
Who hath served Agni well, the oblation -giving God.  
9. Agni, drive thou the wicked foe, the evil -hearted thief away,  
Far, far, Lord of th e brave! and give us easy paths!  
10. O hero Agni, Lord of men, on hearing this new laud of mine  
Burn down the Rakshasas, enchanters, with thy flame!  
DECADE II Agni  
1. Sing forth to him the holy, most munificent, sublime with his refulgent glow,  
To Agni, ye  Upastutas  
2. Agni, he conquers by thine aid that brings him store of valiant sons and does great deeds,  
Whose bond of friendship is thy choice  
3. Sing praise to him the Lord of light! The Gods have made the God to be their messenger,  
To bear oblation to t he Gods.  
4. Anger not him who is our guest! He is the bright God Agni, praised by many a man,  
God Hotar, skilled in sacrifice.  Hymns of the Sama Veda - Translation - Griffith  
 
1185  
 5. May Agni, worshipped, bring us bliss: may the gift, blessed one! and sacrifice bring bliss.  
Yea, may our eulogies bring bliss.  
6. Thee have we chosen skilfullest in sacrifice, immortal Priest among the Gods,  
Wise finisher of this holy rite.  
7. Bring us that splendour, Agni, which may overcome each greedy fiend in our abode,  
And the malicious wrath of men!  
8. Soon as the eager Lor d of men is friendly unto Manu's race  
Agni averteth from us all the Rakshasas!  
DECADE III Indra  
1. Sing this, beside the flowing juice, to him your hero, much -invoked,  
To please him as a mighty Bull  
2. O Satakratu Indra, now rejoice with that carouse of th ine 
Which is most glorious of all!  
3. Ye cows, protect the fount: the two mighty ones bless the sacrifice.  
The handles twain are wrought of gold.  
4. Sing praises that the horse may come; sing, Srutakaksha, that the cow  
May come, that Indra's might may come  
5. We make this Indra very strong to strike, the mighty Vritra dead:  
A vigorous hero shall he be.  
6. Based upon strength and victory and power, O Indra, is thy birth:  
Thou, mighty one! art strong indeed,  
7. The sacrifice made Indra great when he unrolled the earth, and made  
Himself a diadem in heaven.  
8. If I, O Indra, were, like thee, the single ruler over wealth  
My worshipper should be rich in kine.  
9. Pressers, blend Soma juice for him, each draught most excellent, for him  
The brave, the hero, for his j oy. 
10. Here is the Soma juice expressed. O Vasu, drink till thou art full:  
Undaunted God, we give it thee  
DECADE IV Indra  
1. Surya, thou mountest up to meet the hero famous for his wealth,  
Who hurls the bolt and works for man.  
2. Whatever, Vritra -slayer! thou, Surya hast risen upon to -day, 
That, Indra, all is in thy power.  
3. That Indra is our youthful friend, who with his trusty guidanceled  
Turvasa, Yadu from afar.  Hymns of the Sama Veda - Translation - Griffith  
 
1186  
 4. O Indra, let not ill designs surround us in the sunbeams' light  
This may we gain with th ee for friend!  
5. Indra, bring wealth that gives delight, the victor's ever -conquering wealth,  
Most excellent, to be our aid  
6. In mighty battle we invoke Indra, Indra is lesser fight,  
The friend who bends his bolt at fiends.  
7. In battle of a thousand arm s Indra drank Kadru's Soma juice  
There he displayed his manly might.  
8. Faithful to thee, we sing aloud, heroic Indra, songs to thee  
Mark, O good Lord, this act of ours!  
9. Hitherward! they who light the flame and straightway trim the sacred grass,  
Whose f riend is Indra ever young.  
10. Drive all our enemies away, smite down the foes who press around,  
And bring the wealth for which we long!  
DECADE V Indra and others  
1. I Hear, as though 'twere close at hand, the cracking of the whips they hold:  
They gather s plendour on their way.  
2. Indra, these friends of ours, supplied with Soma, wait and look to thee  
As men with fodder to the herd.  
3. Before his hot displeasure all the peoples, all the men bow down,  
As rivers bow them to the sea.  
4. We choose unto ourselve s that high protection of the mighty Gods,  
That it may help and succour us.  
5. O Brahmanaspati, make thou Kakshivan Ausija a loud  
Chanter of flowing Soma juice!  
6. Much honoured with libations may the Vritra -slayer watch for us:  
May Sakra listen to our pra yer 
7. Send us this day, God Savitar, prosperity with progeny  
Drive thou the evil dream away!  
8. Where is that ever -youthful Steer, strong -necked and never yet bent down?  
What Brahman ministers to him?  
9. There where the mountains downward slope, there at the meeting of the streams  
The Sage was manifest by song.  
10. Praise Indra whom our songs must laud, sole sovran of mankind, the chief  
Most liberal who controlleth men  Hymns of the Sama Veda - Translation - Griffith  
 
1187  
 CHAPTER II  
DECADE I Indra and others  
1. Indra whose jaws are strong hath drunk of worshi pping Sudaksha's draught,  
The Soma juice with barley brew.  
2. O Lord of ample wealth, these songs of praise have called aloud to thee,  
Like milch -kine lowing to their calves!  
3. Then straight they recognized the mystic name of the creative Steer,  
There in the mansion of the Moon.  
4. When Indra, strongest hero, brought the streams, the mighty waters down,  
Pushan was standing by his side.  
5. The Cow, the streaming mother of the liberal Maruts, pours her milk,  
Harnessed to draw their chariots on.  
6. Come, Lord  of rapturous joys, to our libation with thy bay steeds, come  
With bay steeds to the flowing juice  
7. Presented strengthening gifts have sent Indra away at sacrifice,  
With night, unto the cleansing bath.  
8. I from my Father have received deep knowledge of eternal Law:  
I was born like unto the Sun.  
9. With Indra splendid feasts be ours, rich in all strengthening things, wherewith,  
Wealthy in food, we may rejoice  
10. Soma and Pushan, kind to him who travels to the Gods, provide  
Dwellings all happy and secure.  
DECADE II Indra  
1. Invite ye Indra with a song to drink your draught of Soma steeds, juice,  
All-conquering Satakratu, most munificent of all who live  
2. Sing ye a song, to make him glad, to Indra, Lord of tawny  
The Soma -drinker, O my friends!  
3. This, eve n this, O Indra, we implore: as thy devoted friends  
The Kanvas praise thee with their hymns!  
4. For Indra, lover of carouse, loud be our songs about the juice  
Let poets sing the song of praise.  
5. Here, Indra, is thy Soma draught, made pure upon the sacred  grass:  
Run hither, come and drink thereof  
6. As a good cow to him who milks, we call the doer of good deeds  
To our assistance duy by day.  
7. Hero, the Soma being shed, I pour the juice for thee to drink  Hymns of the Sama Veda - Translation - Griffith  
 
1188  
 Sate thee and finish thy carouse!  
8. The Soma, Indra , which is shed in saucers and in cups for thee,  
Drink thou, for thou art lord thereof!  
9. In every need, in every fray we call, as friends, to succour us,  
Indra, the mightiest of all.  
10. O come ye hither, sit ye down: to Indra sing ye forth your song,  
Companions, bringing hymns of praise  
DECADE III Indra  
1. So, Lord of affluent gifts, this juice hath been expressed for thee with strength:  
Drink of it, thou who lovest song!  
2. Great is our Indra from of old; greatness be his, the Thunderer  
Wide as the heav en extends his might.  
3. Indra, as one with mighty arm, gather for us with thy right hand  
Manifold and nutritious spoil!  
4. Praise, even as he is known, with song Indra the guardian of the kine,  
The Son of Truth, Lord of the brave.  
5. With what help will h e come to us, wonderful, ever -waxing friend?  
With what most mighty company?  
6. Thou speedest down to succour us this ever -conquering God of yours  
Him who is drawn to all our songs.  
7. To the assembly's wondrous Lord, the lovely friend of Indra, I  
Had praye d for wisdom and successs.  
8. May all thy paths beneath the sky whereby thou speddest Vyasva on,  
Yea, let all spaces hear our voice  
9. Bring to us all things excellent, O Satakratu, food and strength,  
For, Indra, thou art kind to us!  
10. Here is the Soma r eady pressed: of this the Maruts, yea, of this,  
Self-luminous the Asvins drink.  
DECADE IV Indra and others  
1. Tossing about, the active ones came nigh to Indra at his birth,  
Winning themselves heroic might.  
2. Never, O Gods, do we offend, nor are we ever o bstinate  
We walk as holy texts command.  
3. Evening is come: sing loudly thou Atharvan's nobly singing son:  
Give praise to Savitar the God!  
4. Now Morning with her earliest light shines forth, dear daughter of the Sky:  Hymns of the Sama Veda - Translation - Griffith  
 
1189  
 High, Asvins, I extol your praise.  
5. Armed with the bones of dead Dadhyach, Indra, with unresisted might  
The nine -and-ninety Vritras slew.  
6. Come, Indra, and delight thee with the juice at all our Soma feasts,  
Protector, mighty in thy strength  
7. O thou who slayest Vritras, come, O Indra, hi ther to our side,  
Mighty one, with thy mighty aids!  
8. That might of his shone brightly forth when Indra brought together, like  
A skin, the worlds of heaven and earth,  
9. This is thine own Thou drawest near, as turns a pigeon to his mate:  
Thou carest, too,  for this our prayer.  
10. May Vata breathe his balm on us, healthful, delightful to our heart:  
May he prolong our days of life  
DECADE V Indra and others  
1. Ne'er is he injured whom the Gods Varuna, Mitra, Aryam.  
The excellently wise, protect.  
2. According to our wish for kine, for steeds and chariots, as of old,  
Be gracious to our wealthy chiefs  
3. Indra, these spotted cows yield thee their butter and the milky draught,  
Aiders, thereby, of sacrifice.  
4. That thou much -lauded! many -named! mayst, with this th ought, that longs for milk,  
Come to each Soma sacrifice.  
5. May bright Sarasvati, endowed with plenteous wealth and spoil, enriched  
With prayer, desire the sacrifice.  
6. Why 'mid the Nahusha tribes shall sate this Indra with his Soma juice?  
He shall bring precious things to us.  
7. Come, we have pressed the juice for thee; O Indra, drink this Soma here:  
Sit thou on this my sacred grass  
8. Great, unassailable must be the heavenly favour of the Three,  
Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman.  
9. We, Indra, Lord of ample wealth,  our guide, depend on one like thee,  
Thou driver of the tawny steeds!  
BOOK III  
CHAPTER I  
DECADE I Indra  Hymns of the Sama Veda - Translation - Griffith  
 
1190  
 1. Let Soma juices make thee glad! Display thy bounty, Thunderer:  
Drive off the enemies of prayer!  
2. Drink our libation, Lord of hymns! with streams of  meath thou art bedewed:  
Yea, Indra, glory is thy gift.  
3. Indra hath ever thought of you and tended you with care. The God,  
Heroic Indra, is not checked.  
4. Let the drops pass within thee as the rivers flow into the sea  
O Indra, naught excelleth thee!  
5. Indra, the singers with high praise, Indra reciters with their lauds,  
Indra the choirs have glorified.  
6. May Indra give, to aid us wealth handy that rules the skilful ones!  
Yea, may the Strong give potent wealth  
7. Verily Indra, conquering all, drives eve n mighty fear away,  
For firm is he and swift to act.  
8. These songs with every draught we pour come, lover of the song, to thee  
As milch -kine hasten to their calves.  
9. Indra and Wishan will we call for friendship and prosperity,  
And for the winning of the  spoil.  
10. O Indra, Vritra -slayer, naught is better, mightier than thou  
Verily there is none like thee!  
DECADE II Indra  
1. Him have I magnified, our Lord in common, guardian of your folk,  
Discloser of great wealth in kine.  
2. Songs have outpoured themselv es to thee, Indra, the strong, the guardian Lord,  
And with one will have risen to thee!  
3. Good guidance hath the mortal man whom Arya -man, the Marut host,  
And Mitras, void of guile, protect.  
4. Bring us the wealth for which we long, O Indra, that which is  concealed  
In strong firm place precipitous.  
5. Him your best Vritra -slayer, him the famous champion of mankind  
I urge to great munificence.  
6. Indra, may we adorn thy fame, fame of one like thee, hero! deck,  
Sakra! thy fame at highest feast!  
7. Indra, acc ept at break of day our Soma mixt with roasted corn,  
With groats, with cake, with eulogies!  
8. With waters' foam thou torest off, Indra, the head of Namuchi,  
When thou o'ercamest all the foes.  Hymns of the Sama Veda - Translation - Griffith  
 
1191  
 9. Thine are these Soma juices, thine, Indra, those still to be  expressed:  
Enjoy them, Lord of princely wealth!  
10. For thee, O Indra, Lord of light, Somas are pressed and grass is strewn:  
Be gracious to thy worshippers!  
1. We seeking strength, with Soma drops fill full your Indra like a well,  
Most liberal, Lord of bo undless might.  
2. O Indra, even from that place come unto us with food that gives  
A hundred, yea, a thousand powers!  
3. The new -born Vritra -slayer asked his mother, as he seized his shaft,  
Who are the, fierce and famous ones?  
4. Let us call him to aid whos e hands stretch far, the highly -lauded, who  
Fulfils the work to favour us  
5. Mitra who knoweth leadeth us, and Varuna who guideth straight,  
And Aryaman in accord with Gods.  
6. When, even as she were present here, red Dawn hath shone from far away,  
She spre adeth light on every side.  
7. Varuna, Mitra, sapient pair, pour fatness on our pastures, pour  
Meath on the regions of the air!  
8. And, at our sacrifices, these, sons, singers, have enlarged their bounds,  
So that the cows must walk knee -deep.  
9. Through all  this world strode Vishnu: thrice his foot he planted, and the whole  
Was gathered in his footstep's dust.  
DECADE IV Indra  
1. Pass by the wrathful offerer; speed the man who pours libation, drink  
The juice which he presents to thee!  
2. What is the word addr essed to him, God great and excellently wise?  
For this is what exalteth him.  
3, His wealth who hath no store of kine hath ne'er found out recited laud,  
Nor song of praises that is sung.  
4. Lord of each thing that giveth strength, Indra delighteth most in l auds,  
Borne by bay steeds, libations' friend.  
5. With wealth to our libation come, be not thou angry with us, like  
A great man with a youthful bride.  
6. When, Vasu, wilt thou love the laud? Now let the Channel bring the stream.  
The juice is ready to fermen t. 
7. After the Seasons. Indra, drink the Soma from the Brahman's gift:  Hymns of the Sama Veda - Translation - Griffith  
 
1192  
 Thy friendship is invincible!  
S. O Indra, lover of the song, we are the singers of thy praise  
O Soma -drinker, quicken us!  
9. O Indra, in each fight and fray give to our bodies manly st rength:  
Strong Lord, grant ever -conquering might!  
10. For so thou art the brave man's friend; a hero, too, art thou, and strong:  
So may thine heart be won to us!  
DECADE V Indra  
1. Like kine unmilked we call aloud, hero, to thee, and sing thy praise,  
Looker  on heavenly light, Lord of this moving world, Lord, Indra, of what moveth not!  
2. That we may win us wealth and power we poets, verily, call on thee:  
In war men call on thee, Indra, the hero's Lord, in the steed's race -course call on thee:  
3. To you will I sing Indra's praise who gives good gifts as well we know;  
The praise of Maghavan who, rich in treasure, aids his singers with wealth thousandfold.  
4. As cows low to their calves in stalls, so with our songs we glorify  
This Indra, even your wondrous God w ho checks attack, who takes delight in precious juice.  
5. Loud singing at the sacred rite where Soma flows we priests invoke  
With haste, that he may help, as the bard's cherisher, Indra who findeth wealth for you  
6. With Plenty for his true ally the active  man will gain the spoil.  
Your Indra, much -invoked, I bend with song, as bends a wright his wheel of solid wood.  
7. Drink, Indra, of the savoury juice, and cheer thee with our milky draught!  
Be, for our weal, our friend and sharer of the feast, and let thy  wisdom guard us well!  
8. For thou --come to the worshipper! --wilt find great wealth to make us rich.  
Fill thyself full, O Maghavan, for gain of kine, full, Indra, for the gain of steeds!  
9. Vasishtha will not overlook the lowliest one among you all  
Beside our Soma juice effused to -day let all the Maruts drink with eager haste!  
10. Glorify naught besides, O friends; so shall no sorrow trouble you!  
Praise only mighty Indra when the juice is shed, and say your lauds repeatedly!  
CHAPTER II  
DECADE I Indra  
1. No one by deed attains to him who works and strengthens evermore:  
No, not by sacrifice, to Indra. praised of all, resistless, daring, bold in might.  
2 He without ligature, before making incision in the neck,  
Closed up the wound again, most wealthy Maghavan, w ho healeth the dissevered parts.  
3. A thousand and a hundred steeds are harnessed to thy golden car:  Hymns of the Sama Veda - Translation - Griffith  
 
1193  
 Yoked by devotion, Indra, let the long -maned bays bring thee to drink the Soma juice!  
4. Come hither, Indra, with bay steeds, joyous, with tails like peaco ck's plumes!  
Let no men check thy course as fowlers stay the bird: pass o'er them as o'er desert lands!  
5. Thou as a God, O mightiest, verily blessest mortal man.  
O Maghavan, there is no comforter but thou: Indra, I speak my words to thee.  
6. O Indra, thou  art far -renowned, impetuous Lord of power and might.  
Alone, the never -conquered guardian of mankind, thou smitest  
down resistless foes.  
7. Indra for worship of the Gods, Indra while sacrifice proceeds,  
Indra, as warriors in the battle -shock, we call, Indr a that we may win the spoil.  
8. May these my songs of praise exalt thee, Lord, who hast abundant wealth!  
Men skilled in holy hymns, pure, with the hues of fire, have sung them with their lauds to thee.  
9. These songs of ours exceeding sweet, these hymns of  praise ascend to thee,  
Like ever -conquering chariots that display their strength gain wealth and give unfailing help.  
10. Even as the wild -bull, when he thirsts, goes to the desert's watery pool,  
Come to us quickly both at morning and at eve, and with the  Kanvas drink thy fill!  
DECADE II Indra and others  
1. Indra, with all thy saving helps assist us, Lord of power and might!  
For after thee we follow even as glorious bliss, thee, hero, finderout of wealth.  
2. O Indra, Lord of light, what joys thou broughtes t from the Asuras,  
Prosper therewith, O Maghavan, him who lauds that deed, and those whose grass is trimmed for 
thee!  
3. To Aryaman and Mitra sing a reverent song, O pious one,  
A pleasant hymn to Varuna who shelters us: sing ye a laud unto the Kings!  
4. Me n with their lauds are urging thee, Indra, to drink the Soma first.  
The Ribhus in accord have lifted up their voice, and Rudras sung thee as the first.  
5. Sing to your lofty Indra, sing, Maruts, a holy hymn of praise  
Let Satakratu, Vritra -slayer, slay the foe with hundred -knotted thunderbolt!  
6. To Indra sing the lofty hymn, Maruts! that slays the Vritras best,  
Whereby the holy ones created for the God the light divine that ever wakes.  
7. O Indra, give us wisdom as a sire gives wisdom to his sons  
Guide us, O much -invoked, in this our way: may we still live and look upon the light!  
8. O Indra, turn us not away: be present with us at our feast  
For thou art our protection, yea, thou art our kin: O Indra, turn us not away!  
9. We compass these like waters, we who se grass is trimmed and Soma pressed.  
Here where the filter pours its stream, thy worshippers round  
thee, O Vritra -slayer, sit.  Hymns of the Sama Veda - Translation - Griffith  
 
1194  
 10. All strength and valour that is found, Indra, in tribes of Nahushas,  
And all the splendid fame that the Five Tribes enjoy, b ring, yea, all manly powers at once!  
DECADE III Indra  
1. Yea, verily thou art a Bull, our guardian, rushing like a bull:  
Thou, mighty one, art celebrated as a Bull, famed as a Bull both near and far.  
2. Whether, O Sakra, thou be far, or, Vritra -slayer, nea r at hand,  
Thence by heaven -reaching songs he who bath pressed the juice invites thee with thy long -
maned steeds.  
3. In the wild raptures of the juice sing to your hero with high laud, to him the wise,  
To Indra glorious in his name, the mighty one, even as  the hymn alloweth it!  
4. O Indra, give us for our weal a triple refuge, triply strong!  
Bestow a dwelling -place on our rich lords and me, and keep thy dart afar from these!  
5. Turning, as 'twere, to meet the Sun enjoy from Indra all good things!  
When he wh o will be born is born with power we look to treasures as our heritage.  
6. The godless mortal gaineth not this food, O thou whose life is long!  
But one who yokes the bright -hued horses, Etasas; then Indra yokes his tawny steeds.  
7. Draw near unto our Indra  who must be invoked in every fight!  
Come, thou most mighty Vritra -slayer, meet for praise, come to, libations and to hymns!  
8. Thine, Indra, is the lowest wealth, thou cherishest the midmost wealth,  
Thou ever rulest all the highest: in the fray for cattle  none resisteth thee.  
9. Where art thou? Whither art thou gone? For many a place attracts thy mind.  
Haste, warrior, fort -destroyer, Lord of battle's din! haste, holy songs have sounded forth!  
10. Here, verily, yesterday we let the thunder -wielder drink his  fill. 
Bring him the juice poured forth in sacrifice to -day. Now range you by the glorious one!  
DECADE IV Indra  
1. He who as sovran Lord of men moves with his chariots unrestrained,  
The Vritra -slayer, vanquisher of fighting hosts, pre -eminent, is praised i n song.  
2. Indra, give us security from that whereof we are afraid  
Help us, O Maghavan, let thy favour aid us thus; drive away foes and enemies!  
3. Strong pillar thou, Lord of the home! armour of Soma -offerers!  
The drop of Soma breaketh all the strongholds  down, and Indra is the Rishis' friend.  
4. Verily, Surya, thou art great; truly, Aditya, thou art great!  
O most admired for greatness of thy majesty, God, by thy greatness thou art great!  
5. Indra! thy friend, when fair of form and rich in chariots, steeds , and kine,  
Hath ever vital power that gives him strength, and joins the company with radiant men.  
6. O Indra, if a hundred heavens and if a hundred earths were thine, -- Hymns of the Sama Veda - Translation - Griffith  
 
1195  
 No, not a hundred suns could match thee at thy birth, not both the worlds, O Thunderer ! 
7. Though, Indra, thou art called by men eastward and west ward, north and south,  
Thou chiefly art with Anava and Turvasa, brave champion urged by men to come.  
8. Indra whose wealth is in thyself, what mortal will attack this man?  
The strong will win the  spoil on the decisive day through faith in thee, O Maghavan!  
9. First, Indra! Agni! hath this Maid come footless unto those with feet.  
Stretching her head and speaking loudly with her tongue, she hath gone downward thirty steps.  
10. Come, Indra, very near  to us with aids of firmly -based resolve  
Come, most auspicious, with thy most auspicious help; good kinsman, with good kinsmen come!  
DECADE V Indra.  
1. Call to your aid the eternal one who shoots and none may shoot at him,  
Inciter, swift, victorious, best of charioteers, unconquered, Tugriya's strengthener!  
2. Let none, no, not thy worshippers, delay thee far away from us  
Even from faraway come thou unto our feast, or listen if' already here!  
3. For Indra Soma -drinker, armed with thunder, press the Soma jui ce; 
Make ready your dressed meats: cause him to favour us! The giver blesses him who gives.  
4. We call upon that Indra who, most active, ever slays the foe  
With boundless spirit, Lord of heroes, manliest one, help thou and prosper us in fight!  
5. Ye rich i n strength, through your great power vouchsafe us blessings day and night!  
The offerings which we bring to you shall never fail gifts brought by us shall never fail.  
6. Whenever mortal worshipper will sing a bounteous giver's praise,  
Let him with song insp ired laud Varuna who supports the folk who follow varied rites.  
7. Drink milk to Indra in the joy of Soma juice, Medhyatithi!  
To golden Indra ever close to his bay steeds, the thunder -armed, the golden one!  
8. Both boons, -may Indra, hitherward turned liste n to this prayer of ours,  
And mightiest Maghavar, with thought inclined to us come near to drink the Soma juice!  
9. Not for an ample price dost thou, Stone -caster! give thyself away,  
Not for a thousand, Thunderer! nor ten thousand, nor a hundred, Lord of c ountless wealth!  
10. O Indra, thou art more to me than sire or niggard brother is.  
Thou and my mother, O good Lord, appear alike, to give me wealth abundantly.  
BOOK IV  
CHAPTER I  
DECADE I Indra and others  Hymns of the Sama Veda - Translation - Griffith  
 
1196  
 1. These Soma juice mixt with curd have been express ed for Indra here:  
Come with thy bay steeds, Thunder -wielder, to our home, to drink them till they make thee glad!  
2. Indra, these Somas with their lauds have been prepared for thy delight.  
Drink of the pleasant juice and listen to our songs; lover of song , reward the hymn!  
3. I call on thee, Sabardugha, this day, inspirer of the psalm.  
Indra, the richly -yielding milch -cow who provides unfailing food in ample stream.  
4. Indra, the strong and lofty hills are powerless to bar thy way  
None stays that act of th ine when thou wouldst fain give wealth to one like me who sings thy 
praise.  
5. Who knows what vital power he wins, drinking beside the flowing juice?  
This is the fair -cheeked. God who, joying in the draught, breaks down the castles in his strength.  
6. What  time thou castest from his seat and punishest the riteless man,  
Strengthen for opulence, O Indra Maghavan, our plant desired by many a one!  
7. Let Tvashtar, Brahmanaspati, Parjanya guard our heavenly word,  
Aditi with her sons, the brothers, guard for us t he invincible, the saving word!  
8. Ne'er art thou fruitless, Indra, ne'er dost thou desert the worshipper:  
But now, O Maghavan, thy bounty as a God is poured forth ever more and more.  
9. Best slayer of the Vritras, yoke thy bay steeds, Indra, far away  
Come  with the high ones hither, Maghavan, to us, mighty, to, drink the Soma juice!  
10. O Thunderer, zealous worshippers gave thee drink this time yesterday:  
So, Indra, listen here to him who offers lauds: come near unto, our dwelling -place!  
DECADE II  
1. Advanc ing, sending forth her rays, the daughter of the Sky is seen.  
The mighty one lays bare the darkness with her eye, the friendly Lady makes the light.  
2. These morning sacrifices call you, Asvins, at the break of day.  
For help have I invoked you rich in powe r and might: for, house by house, ye visit all.  
3. Where are ye, Gods? What mortal man, O Asvins, glows with zeal for you,  
Urging you with the crushing stone and with the stalk of Soma thus or otherwise?  
4. This sweetest Soma juice hath been expressed for you at morning rites.  
Asvins, drink this prepared ere yesterday and give treasures to him who offers it!  
5. Let me not, still beseeching thee with might and sound of Soma drops,  
Anger at sacrifice a fierce wild creature! Who would not beseech the almighty one! 
6. Adhvaryu, let the Soma flow, for Indra longs to drink thereof.  
He even now hath yoked his vigorous bay steeds: the Vritraslayer hath come nigh.  
7. Bring thou all this unto the good, O Indra, to the old and young!  
For, Maghavan, thou art rich in tre asures from of old, to be invoked in every fight.  
8. If I, O Indra, were the lord of riches ample as thine own,  Hymns of the Sama Veda - Translation - Griffith  
 
1197  
 I would support the singer, God who scatterest wealth! and not abandon him to woe.  
9. Thou in thy battles, Indra, art subduer of all hostile ban ds. 
Father art thou, all -conquering, cancelling the curse, thou victor of the vanquisher!  
10. For in thy might thou stretchest out beyond the mansions of the sky.  
The earthly region, Indra, comprehends thee not. Thou hast waxed mighty over all.  
DECADE III  
1. Pressed is the juice divine with milk commingled: thereto hath Indra ever been accustomed.  
We wake thee, Lord of bays, with sacrifices: mark this our laud in the wild joys of Soma!  
2. A home is made for thee to dwell in, Indra: O much -invoked one, with the men go thither!  
Thou, that thou mayest guard us and increase us, givest us wealth and joyest in the Somas.  
3. The well thou clavest, settest free the fountains, and gavest rest to floods that were obstructed.  
Thou, Indra, laying the great mountain open , slaying the Ddnava, didst loose the torrents.  
4. When we have pressed the juice we laud thee, Indra, most valorous! even about to win the 
booty.  
Bring us prosperity, and by thy great wisdom, under thine own protection, may we conquer!  
5. Thy right hand h ave we grasped in ours, O Indra, longing, thou very Lord of wealth, for 
treasures.  
Because we know thee, hero, Lord of cattle: vouchsafe us mighty and resplendent riches!  
6. Men call on Indra in the armed encounter that he may make the hymns they sing deci sive. 
Hero in combat and in love of glory, give us a portion of the stall of cattle!  
7. Like birds of beauteous wing the Priyamedhas, Rishis, imploring, have come nigh to Indra.  
Dispel the darkness and fill full our vision: deliver us as men whom snares en tangle!  
8. They gaze on thee with longing in their spirit, as on a strongwinged bird that mounteth sky -
ward;  
On thee with wings of gold, Varuna's envoy, the Bird that hasteneth to the home of Yama.  
9. First in the ancient time was Prayer engendered: Vena d isclosed the bright ones from the 
summit,  
Laid bare this world's lowest and highest regions, womb of the existent and the non -existent.  
10. They have prepared and fashioned for this hero words never matched, most plentiful, most 
auspicious,  
For him the anc ient, great, strong, energetic, the very mighty wielder of the thunder.  
DECADE IV Indra  
1. The black drop sank in Ansumati's bosom, advancing with ten thousand round about it.  
Indra with might longed for it as it panted: the hero -hearted King laid down his  weapons.  
2. Flying in terror from the snort of Vritra all deities who were thy friends forsook thee.  
So, Indra, with the Maruts be thy friendship: in all these battles thou shalt be the victor.  Hymns of the Sama Veda - Translation - Griffith  
 
1198  
 3. The old hath waked the young Moon from his slumber who run s his circling course with many 
round him.  
Behold the God's high wisdom in its greatness: he who died yesterday to -day is living.  
4. Then, at thy birth, thou wast the foeman, Indra, of those the seven who ne'er had met a rival.  
The hidden pair, heaven and the earth, thou foundest, and to the mighty worlds thou gavest 
pleasure.  
5. A friend we count thee, sharp -edged, thunder -wielder, Steer strong of body, overthrowing 
many.  
Thou, helping, causest pious tribes to conquer: Indra, I laud the, heavenly Vritra -slayer.  
6. Bring to the wise, the great, who waxeth mighty your offerings,. and make ready your 
devotion!  
Go forth to many tribes as man's controller!  
7. Call we on Maghavan, auspicious Indra, best hero in this fight where spoil is gathered,  
Strong, listenin g to give us aid in battles, who slays the Vritras, wins and gathers riches!  
8. Prayers have been offered up -through love of glory: Vasishtha, honour Indra in the battle!  
He who with fame extends through all existence hears words which I, his faithful serv ant, utter.  
9. May the sweet Soma juices make him happy to cast his quoit that lies in depth of waters!  
Thou from the udder which o'er earth is fastened hast poured the milk into the kine and herbage.  
DECADE V Indra and others  
1. This vigorous one whom dei ties commission, the conqueror of cars, the strong and mighty,  
Swift, fleet to battle, with uninjured fellies, even Tarkshya for our weal will we call hither.  
2. Indra the rescuer, Indra the helper, hero who listens at each invocation,  
Sakra I call, Indra invoked of many. May Indra Maghavan accept our presents!  
3. Indra whose right hand wields the bolt we worship, driver of bay steeds seeking sundered 
courses.  
Shaking his beard with might he hath arisen, terrible with his weapons, with his bounty.  
4. The ev er-slaying, bold and furious Indra, the bright bolt's Lord, the strong, the great, the 
boundless,  
Who slayeth Vritra and acquireth booty, giver of blessings, Maghavan the bounteous.  
5. The man who lies in wait and fights against us, deeming himself a giant  or a hero, -- 
By battle or with strength destroy him, Indra! With thy help, manly -souled! may we be victors!  
6. He whom men call when striving with their foemen, or speeding onward in array of battle,  
Whom bards incite where heroes win the booty, or in the  way to waters, He is Indra.  
7. On a high car, O Parvata and Indra, bring pleasant viands, with brave heroes, hither!  
Enjoy our presents, Gods, at sacrifices: wax strong by hymns, rejoice in our oblation!  
8. In ceaseless flow hath he poured forth his prais es, as waters from the ocean's depth, to Indra,  
Who to his car on both its sides securely hath fixed the earth and heaven as with an axle.  Hymns of the Sama Veda - Translation - Griffith  
 
1199  
 9. May our friends turn thee hitherward to friendship! Mayst thou approach us even o'er many 
rivers!  
May the Disposer , radiant in this mansion with special lustre, bring the father's offspring!  
10. Who yokes to -day unto the pole of Order the strong and passionate steers of checkless spirit,  
Health -bringing, bearing in their mouths no fodder? Long shall he live who richly  pays their 
service.  
CHAPTER II  
DECADE I Indra  
1. The singers hymn thee, they who chant the psalm of praise are lauding thee.  
The Brahmans have exalted thee, O Satakratu, like a pole.  
2. All sacred -songs have magnified Indra expansive as the sea,  
Best of a ll warriors borne on cars, the Lord of heroes, Lord of strength.  
3. This poured libation, Indra, drink, immortal, gladdening, excellent:  
Streams of the bright have flowed to thee here at the seat of holy Law.  
4. Stone -darting Indra, wondrous God, what weal th thou hast not given me here,  
That bounty, treasure -finder! bring, filling full both thy hands, to us!  
5. O Indra, hear Tiraschi's call, the call of him who serveth thee!  
Satisfy him with wealth of kine and valiant offspring! Great art thou.  
6. This Soma  hath been pressed for thee, O Indra: bold one, mightiest, come!  
May Indra -vigour fill thee full, as Surya fills mid -air with rays  
7. Come hither, Indra, with thy bays, come thou to Kanva's eulogy!  
Ye by command of yonder Dyaus, God bright by day! have gon e to heaven.  
8. Song -lover! like a charioteer come songs to thee when Soma flows.  
Together, they have called to thee as mother -kine unto their calves.  
9. Come now and let us glorify pure Indra with pure Sama hymn!  
Let milk -blent juice delight him made stro nger with pure, pure songs of praise!  
10. That which, most wealthy, makes you rich, in splendours most illustrious,  
Soma is pressed: thy gladdening drink, Indra libation's Lord! is this.  
DECADE II Indra. Dadhikravan  
1. Bring forth oblations to the God who knoweth all who fain would drink,  
The wanderer, lagging not behind the hero, coming nigh with speed!  
2. To us the mighty, lying in all vital power, who resteth in the deep, who standeth in the east.  
Drive thou the awful word away.  
3. Even as a car to give us aid, we draw thee nigh to favour us,  
Strong in thy deeds, quelling attack, Indra, Lord, mightiest! of the brave.  