Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
780 
 may not be climbed. If he were to add anything further, it would be just as when (a 
libation) falls outside the barriers. Th ere are three Agnis, the oblation bearer of the 
gods, the bearer of the offering of the Pitrs, the guardian of the Asuras. They 
repeat, 'Me will he choose, me' [6]. 'Choose ye the bearer of the oblation', he says; 
'let him choose him who is of the gods. He  chooses one of a Rsi's family; verily he 
departs not from the connexion, (and so it serves) for continuity. He chooses, 
beginning at the further end, in order of descent; therefore the Pitrs drink after men 
in order of descent, beginning at the further en d. 
 
ii. 5. 9.  
'O Agni, thou art great', he says, for Agni is great. 'O Brahman', he says, for he is a 
Brahman. 'O Bharata',' he says, for he bears the sacrifice to the gods. 'Kindled by 
the gods', he says, for the gods kindled him. 'Kindled by Manu', he s ays, for Manu 
kindled him after the gods. 'Praised by the Rsis', he says, for the Rsis praised him. 
'Rejoiced in by sages', he says [1], for learned people are sages. 'Celebrated by the 
poets', he says, for learned people are the poets. 'Quickened by the h oly power 
(Brahman)', he says, for he is quickened by the holy power (Brahman). 'With ghee 
offering', he says, for ghee is his dearest offering. 'Leader of the sacrifices', he says, 
for he is the leader of the sacrifices. 'Charioteer of the rites', he says , for he is the 
chariot of the gods. 'The Hotr unsurpassed', he says, for no one surpasses him [2]. 
'Surpassing, bearing the oblation', he says, for he surpasses all. 'The mouth dish, 
the ladle of the gods', he says, for he is the ladle of the gods. 'The b owl from which 
the gods drink', he says, for he is the bowl from which the gods drink. 'O Agni, like 
a felly the spokes, thou dost surround the gods', he says, for he surrounds the gods. 
If he were to say, 'Bring hither the gods to the pious sacrificer', h e would produce 
an enemy for him [3].2 'Bring hither the gods to the sacrificer', he says; verily with 
that be makes the sacrificer to grow great. 'O Agni, bring Agni hither, bring Soma 
hither', he says; verily he summons the gods in order. 'Bring hither t he gods, O 
Agni; and sacrifice to them with a fair sacrifice, O Jatavedas', he says; verily he 
quickens Agni, and quickened by him he bears the oblation to the gods. 'Agni the 
Hotr' [4], he says; Agni is the Hotr of the gods; him he chooses who is the Hotr  of 
the gods. 'We are', he says; verily he makes himself attain reality. 'Fair be to thee 
the deity, O sacrificer', he says; verily he invokes this blessing (on him). If he were 
to say 'Who hast chosen Agni as Hotr', he would surround the sacrificer with A gni Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
781 
 on both sides, and he would be liable to perish. The ladle has the sacrificer for its 
deity, the Upabhrt the enemy as its deity [5]. If he were to say two as it were, he 
would produce an enemy for him. 'Take, Adhvaryu, the spoon ( sruc ) with ghee', 
he says; verily by it he causes the sacrificer to wax great. 'Pious', he says, for he 
aids the gods, 'With all boons', he says, for he aids all. 'Let us praise the gods 
worthy of praise; let us honour those worthy of honour; let us sacrifice to those 
worthy of  sacrifice', he says. Those worthy of praise are men; those worthy of 
honour are the Pitrs; those worthy of sacrifice are the gods; verily he sacrifices to 
the deities according to their portions. 
 
ii. 5. 10.  
In the case of a Rajanya let him repeat the Tr cas thrice three other sorts of men are 
there besides the warrior, the Brahman, Vaiçya and Çudra; verily he makes them 
obedient to him. He should repeat fifteen (Samidhenis) in the case of a Rajanya; 
the Rajanya is fifteenfold; verily he makes him find sup port in his own Stoma. Let 
him surround it with a Tristubh; the Tristubh is power, the Rajanya sacrifices in 
desire of power; verily by the Tristubh he secures power for him. If he desires [1], 
'May there be splendour', he should surround it with a Gayatri , the Gayatri is 
splendour; verily there is splendour. He should repeat seventeen for a Vaiçya; the 
Vaiçya is seventeenfold; verily he makes him find support in his own Stoma. He 
should surround it with a Jagati; cattle are connected with the Jagati, the V aiçya 
sacrifices in desire of cattle; verily by the Jagati he secures cattle for him. He 
should repeat twenty one for one who desires support; the Ekavinça is the support 
of the Stomas; (verily twenty -one serve) for support [2]. He should repeat twenty -
four for one who desires splendour: the Gayatri has twenty -four syllables, 
splendour is the Gayatri; verily by the Gayatri he secures splendour for him. He 
should repeat thirty for one who desires food; the Viraj has thirty syllables, the 
Viraj is food; veril y by the Viraj he secures food for him. He should repeat thirty -
two, for one who desires support; the Anustubh has thirty -two syllables, the 
Anustubh is the support of the metres; (verily thirty -two serve) for support. He 
should repeat thirty -six for one w ho desires cattle; the Brhati has thirty -six 
syllables, cattle are connected with the Brhati; verily by the Brhati he secures cattle 
for him [3]. He should repeat forty -four for one who desires power, the Tristubh 
has forty -four syllables, the Tristubh is power; verily by the Tristubh he secures 
power for him. He should repeat forty -eight for one who desires cattle; the Jagati Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
782 
 has forty -eight syllables, cattle are connected with the Jagati; verily with the Jagati 
he secures cattle for him. He should repeat all the metres for one who makes many 
sacrifices, for all the metres are won by him who makes many sacrifices. He 
should repeat indefinitely to win that which is not definite. 
 
ii. 5. 11.  
The thread is worn around the neck for men, over the right shoulder  for the Pitrs, 
over the left for the gods. He puts it over the left shoulder; verily he makes the 
mark of the gods. He repeats standing, for standing he speaks more audibly. He 
repeats standing, to conquer the world of heaven. He sacrifices sitting; veril y he 
finds support in this world. In that he repeats in the Krauñca, note, that is 
connected with the Asuras, in the low note, that is connected with men, in the 
intermediate note, that is connected with the gods. One should repeat in the 
intermediate note , to secure the gods. Clever indeed [1] were the Hotrs of old; 
there fore the ways were held apart, and the paths did not conflict. One foot should 
be within the sacrificial altar, the other outside; then he repeats, to hold the ways 
apart and to avoid con flict of the paths. Then does he win the past and the future, 
the measured and the unmeasured does he win, domestic and wild cattle both does 
he win [2]; verily also the world of the gods and the world of men he conquers.  
The gods having repeated the Sami dhenis could not see the sacrifice. Prajapati in 
silence performed the sprinkling of the butter. Then indeed did the gods see the 
sacrifice. In that he silently sprinkles, (it serves) to light up the sacrifice. Verily 
also he anoints the kindling -sticks. H e who knows thus becomes soft. Verily also 
he delights them. He delights in offspring and cattle [3] who knows thus. If he 
were to sprinkle with one (verse), he would delight one; if with two, (he would 
delight) two; if with three, he would make (the offer ing) go beyond (all others). He 
sprinkles (repeating the verse) in the mind, for what is imperfect is made perfect by 
mind. He sprinkles across so as not to make a failure. Speech and mind disputed; 'I 
will bear the offering to the gods', speech said; 'I t o the gods', mind said. They went 
to question Prajapati; he said [4], Prajapati, 'Thou art the messenger of mind, for 
what one thinks of in the mind, one utters in speech'. 'Then assuredly they will not 
sacrifice to you with speech', said (speech). Therefo re in the mind they offer to 
Prajapati, for Prajapati is, as it were, the mind; (verily it serves) to obtain Prajapati. Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
783 
 He rubs the enclosing -sticks; verily he purifies them. (He rubs) the middle one 
thrice; the breaths are three; verily he conquers the br eaths. (He rubs) the southern 
one thrice; these worlds are three [5]; verily he conquers these worlds. (He rubs) 
the northern one thrice; three are the paths leading to the gods; verily he conquers 
them. Thrice he fans (the fire); the worlds of the gods ar e three; verily he conquers 
the worlds of the gods. They make twelve; the year has twelve months; verily he 
delights the year; verily also he brings up the year for him, to gain the world of 
heaven. He sprinkles; the world of heaven is as it were secret [6 ]; verily he makes 
the world of heaven resplendent for him. He sprinkles straight, for the breath is as 
it were straight. He sprinkles continuously, for the continuity of the breaths and of 
food and for the smiting away of the Raksases. If he desire of a m an, 'May he be 
likely to perish', he should sprinkle crookedly for him; verily he leads his breath 
crookedly from him, and swiftly he perishes. The sprinkling is the head of the 
sacrifice, the ladle is the body [7]. Having sprinkled, he anoints the ladle; verily he 
places the head of the sacrifice on its body. Agni was the messenger of the gods, 
Daivya of the Asuras; they went to question Prajapati. Prajapati spake to a 
Brahman (saying), 'Explain the phrase, "Make announcement"', 'Hearken to this, O 
ye gods ', he said; 'Agni the god is the Hotr', (he said). He chose him of the gods. 
Then the gods [8] prospered, the Asuras were defeated. The man, who knows thus 
and for whom they chose his list of ancestors, prospers himself, his enemy is 
defeated. If a Brahman  and a non -Brahman have a litigation, one should support 
the Brahman; if one supports the Brahman, one supports oneself; if one opposes 
the Brahman, one opposes oneself therefore one should not oppose a Brahman. 
 
ii. 5. 12.  
a Life to thee. b Life -giving, O Agni, c Swell up. d Together thee. e Thy wrath. f 
The uppermost. g Forward, O goddess. h From the sky to us. i O Agni and Visnu. k 
O Agni and Visnu. l This for me, O Varuna. m To thee for that I go. n Upwards 
that.  
o The radiant.  
p The child of the wate rs hath mounted the lap  
Of the devious ones, rising up and clothed in the lightning;  
Bearing his highest greatness  
The golden -coloured young ones go about.  
q Some [1] meet, some go up,  Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
784 
 The streams fill their common stall;  
Round the pure shining son of the waters  
The pure waters stand.  
r The austere maidens, go around the youth;  
The waters, making him clean;  
Agni shineth forth with pure radiance with wealth,  
Unkindled, butter -clad in the waters.  
s I seek the help  
Of Mitra and Varuna, joint kings;  
May they be  gracious to such as I.  
t O Indra and Varuna, grant ye great protection  
To our tribe, our people, for the sacrifice [2]  
May we conquer in battle the evil -minded,  
Him who is fain to overpower the man who long sacrificeth.  
u To us, O Mitra and Varuna.  
v Fort h your arms.  
w O Agni, do thou, wise one,  
Appease by sacrifice for us the wrath of Varuna;  
Best sacrificer, best of bearers, radiant,  
Free us from every foe.  
x Do thou, O Agni, be nearest to us,  
 
Closest to help, at the dawning of this dawn;  
Appease for us  by sacrifice Varuna [3], bestowing (on him);  
Show thy mercy and be ready to hear our call.  
y Far -famed is this Agni of Bharata,  
Since his great light shineth like the sun;  
He who overcame Puru in battle,  
Hath shone forth, the heavenly guest, propitious fo r us. 
z I sacrifice to thee, I cast forward my prayer to thee,  
That thou mayst be invoked at our invocation;  
Thou art like a well in the desert,  
Thou, O Agni, to the man eager to worship, O ancient king [4].  
aa With his lustre.  
bb With light.  
cc Agni, with  thy front,  Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
785 
 Burn the sorceresses,  
Shining in the broad dwellings.  
dd Thee of fair face, of fair look, the rapid one,  
The wiser, let us ignorant people follow;  
Let him sacrifice who knoweth all the ways,  
Let him proclaim the oblation among the immortals.  
ee To the freer from trouble.  
ff Which hath entered me.  
gg Away for us, O Indra.  
hh O Indra, might.  
ii Powers, O Çatakratu.  
kk To thee hath been given.  
 
PRAPATHAKA VI  
The New and Full Moon Sacrifices  
ii. 6. 1.  
He offers to the kindling -sticks; verily he wins spring among the seasons. He offers 
to Tanunapat; verily he wins the hot season. He offers to the oblations; verily he 
wins the rains. He offers to the sacrificial strew, verily lie wins autumn. He offers 
with the cry of 'Hail!'; verily he wins the wi nter. Therefore in winter animals over 
which the cry of 'Hail!' is raised perish. He offers to the kindling -sticks; verily he 
wins the dawns of the goddesses. He offers to Tanunapat; verily he wins the 
sacrifice [1]. He offers to the oblations; verily he w ins cattle. He offers to the 
sacrificial strew; verily he wins offspring. He takes (the oblation) from the 
Upabhrt. The oblation is brilliance, the sacrificial strew off spring; verily he places 
brilliance in offspring. He offers with the cry of 'Hail!'; v erily he wins speech. 
They make up ten, the Viraj has ten syllables, the Viraj is food; verily he wins food 
by the Viraj. He offers to the kindling -sticks; verily he finds support in this world. 
He offers to Tanunapat [2]; verily in the sacrifice and in th e atmosphere he finds 
support. He offers to the oblations; verily in cattle he finds support. He offers to the 
sacrificial strew; verily he finds support in the paths that lead to the gods. He offers 
with the cry of 'Hail!'; verily he finds support in the world of heaven. So many are 
the worlds of the gods; verily in them in order he finds support. The gods and the Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
786 
 Asuras contended as to these worlds. The gods by the fore -sacrifices drove the 
Asuras away from these worlds; that is why the fore -sacrifices [3 ] are so called. He 
for whom knowing thus are offered the fore -sacrifices, drives his enemy away 
from these worlds. He offers stepping near, for conquest. He who knows the 
pairing of the fore sacrifices is propagated with offspring, with cattle, with 
pairings. He offers to the kindling -sticks as many, to Tanunapat as one, and that 
makes a pair. He offers to the kindling -sticks as many, to the sacrificial strew as 
one, and that makes a pair. That is the pairing of the fore -sacrifices. He who knows 
thus [4] i s propagated with offspring, with cattle, with pairings. These deities were 
not sacrificed to by the gods; then the Asuras were fain to harm the sacrifice. The 
gods divided the Gayatri, five syllables in front and three behind. Then the 
sacrifice was prote cted, and the sacrificer. In that the fore - and after -sacrifices are 
offered, protection is afforded to the sacrifice and to the sacrificer, for the 
overcoming of the enemy. Therefore a covering is larger in front and smaller 
behind. The gods thought that the sacrifice must be completed (in the fore -
sacrifice) before the Raksases [5] with the cry of 'Hail!' They completed it with the 
cry of 'Hail!' in the fore -sacrifices. They split the sacrifice who complete it with the 
cry of 'Hail!' in the fore -sacrifice s. Having offered the fore sacrifices he sprinkles 
the oblations, for the continuity of the sacrifice; then verily he makes the oblation, 
and then he proceeds in order. The fore -sacrifices are the father, the after -sacrifices 
the son; in that having offere d the fore -sacrifices he sprinkles the oblations, the 
father makes common property with the son [6]. Therefore they say, who know it 
or who know not, 'How is it the son's only, how is the father's common?' That 
which spills when the fore -sacrifices are off ered is not really spilt. The Gayatri 
conceives through it, and produces offspring and cattle for the sacrificer. 
 
ii. 6. 2.  
The two portions of the oblation are the eyes of the sacrifice. In that he offers the 
two portions of the oblation, he inserts the  two eyes of the sacrifice. He offers in 
the front place; therefore the eyes are in front. He offers evenly; therefore the eyes 
are even. By Agni the sacrificer discerns the world of the gods, by Soma the world 
of the Pitrs; in the north part he offers to Agni, in the south to Soma, for these 
worlds are thus, as it were, to illumine these worlds. Agni and Soma are the kings 
of the gods [1]. They are sacrificed to between the gods, to separate the gods. Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
787 
 Therefore men are separated by the king. The theologian s say, 'What is it that the 
sacrificer does in the sacrifice to support both those animals which have incisors on 
one side only and those which have incisors on both?' When he has repeated a Rc, 
he makes an offering of the portion of the oblation with the jusana  formula; by 
that means he supports those with incisors on one side only. When he has repeated 
a Rc, he makes an offering of the sacrificial food ( havis ) with a Rc; by that 
means he supports those with incisors on both sides. The Puronuvakya contains  the 
word 'head'; verily he makes him head of his peers [2]. He offers with averse 
containing the word 'team' ( niyut ); verily he appropriates ( ni-yu) the cattle of 
his enemy. Keçin Satyakami said to Keçin Darbhya, 'The seven -footed Çakvari I 
shall use for thee at the sacrifice to -morrow, by whose strength one defeats the 
enemies that have arisen and those that shall be, by the first half of whose strength 
the ox feeds, by the second half the cow.' The Puronuvakya is marked in front; 
verily he defeats the en emies that have arisen; the Yajya is marked behind [3]; 
verily he defeats the enemies that shall be. The Puronuvakya is marked in front; 
verily he places light in this world; the Yajya is marked behind; verily he places 
light in yonder world. Full of light  become these worlds to him who knows thus. 
The Puronuvakya, is marked in front; therefore the ox feeds with the first half. The 
Yajya is marked behind; therefore the cow feeds with the second half. Him who 
knows thus these two enjoy. The oblation is a bol t, the portions of the oblation are 
a bolt [4], the Vasat call is a bolt; thus forges be a threefold bolt and hurls it at his 
foe, so as not to make a failure. He utters the Vasat call in anger, to lay low his foe. 
The Puronuvakya is the Gayatri, the Yajya  the Tristubh; verily he makes the ruling 
class dependent on the priestly class; therefore the Brahman is the chief. The chief 
he becomes who knows thus. He proclaims him with the Puronuvakya, leads him 
forward with the Yajya, and makes him go with the Vas at call. He takes him with 
the Puronuvakya, he gives him with the Yajya, and [5] establishes him with the 
Vasat call. The Puronuvakya has three feet; these worlds are three; verily he finds 
support in these worlds. The Yajya has four feet; verily he wins f our footed cattle. 
The Vasat call has two syllables, the sacrificer has two feet; verily afterwards he 
finds support in cattle. The Puronuvakya is the Gayatri, the Yajya, the Tristubh, 
and this is the sevenfooted Çakvari. Whatever the gods were fain to do by it, that 
they were able to do; he who knows thus can do whatever he is fain to do. 
 Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
788 
 ii. 6. 3.  
Prajapati assigned the sacrifices to the gods. He placed in himself the oblation. The 
gods said to him, 'The oblation is the sacrifice; let us have a share in  it.' He said, 
'Lot them offer to you the portions of the oblation, let them pour out (a layer), let 
them sprinkle (it).' Therefore they offer the portions of the oblation, they pour out 
(a layer), and sprinkle (it). The theologians say, 'For what reason a re the other 
offerings worn out, but the oblation fresh?' He should reply, 'Because it is 
Prajapati's [1], for Prajapati is of the gods the fresh one.' The metres ran away from 
the gods (saying), 'We will not bear the offering, if we have no share.' They k ept 
for them (the offering) divided into four parts, for the Puronuvakya, the Yajya, the 
deity, the Vasat call. In that he offers (the offering) in four parts, he delights the 
metres, and they delighted by him carry the offering to the gods. The Angirases 
were the last to go hence to the world of heaven. The Rsis came to the place of 
sacrifice; they [2] saw the sacrificial cake creeping about, having become a 
tortoise. They said to it, 'Be firm for Indra; be firm for Brhaspati: be firm for the 
All-gods.' It  did not become firm. They said to it, 'Be firm for Agni.' It became firm 
for Agni. In that (the cake) for Agni on eight potsherds is unmoved at the full and 
at the new moon, (it serves) to conquer the world of heaven. They said to it, 'How 
hast thou been left?' 'I have not been anointed', he said, 'just as an axle not anointed 
[3] goes wrong, so I have gone wrong.' After anointing it above, he anoints it 
below, to gain the world of heaven. He spreads (the cake) on all the fragments; so 
many cakes does he c onquer in yonder world. That which is burnt belongs to 
Nirrti, that which is not cooked to Rudra, that which is cooked to the gods. 
Therefore one should cook it, without burning it, for the gods. He covers it with 
ashes; therefore the bones are clothed wit h flesh. He covers it with the bunch of 
grass; therefore [4] the head is covered with hair. The offering which is cooked 
without being sprinkled has fallen from this world, but has not reached the world 
of the gods. He sprinkles it before covering it; veri ly he makes it go among the 
gods. If one fragment were lost, one month of the year would be omitted, and the 
sacrificer would perish. If two were lost, two months of the year would be omitted, 
and the sacrificer would perish. He counts before covering, to guard the sacrificer 
[5]. If it be lost, be should make an offering on two potsherds to the Açvins, and on 
one potsherd to sky and earth. The Açvins are the physicians of the gods; verily by 
them he heals it. Then is offered an offering on one potsherd to sky and earth; in 
them is lost what is lost; verily in them he finds it, (and it serves) for support. Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
789 
  
ii. 6. 4.  
(Saying) 'On the impulse of the god Savitr thee', he takes the sword, for impelling. 
'With the arms of the Açvins', he says, for the Açvins we re the Adhvaryus of the 
gods. 'With the hands of Pusan', he says, for restraint. 'Thou art a hundred -edged, 
of the tree, slayer of the foe', he says; verily he sharpens the bolt, being about to 
hurl it at his enemy. He throws away the grass with a Yajus. T he earth is the size of 
the altar; verily he deprives his enemy of so much of that [1]. Therefore they do not 
deprive one who has no share. He throws it away thrice; these worlds are three; 
verily he excludes him from these worlds. He throws it silently a fourth time; 
verily he excludes him from the unmeasured. He uproots it; verily what of it is 
impure he cuts off. He uproots it; therefore the plants perish. He cuts the root; 
verily he cuts the root of the enemy. If dug too deep, it has the Pitrs for its d eity; so 
much does he dig as is measured [2] by Prajapati as the mouth of the sacrifice. He 
digs until (he reaches) support; verily he causes the sacrificer to reach support. He 
makes it higher on the south; verily he makes it the form of the sacrificial g round. 
He makes it full of loose earth; loose earth is offspring and cattle; verily he makes 
him full of offspring and cattle. He performs the second drawing of a boundary. 
The earth is the size of the altar; verily having excluded his enemy from so much 
of it, he performs the second drawing of a boundary for himself. Cruelly he acts [3] 
in making an altar. (With the words) 'Thou art the holder, thou art the self holder', 
it is made smooth, for healing. He places the sprinkling waters; the waters are 
Raksas -slaying; (verily they serve) for slaying the Raksases. He places them in the 
path made by the sword, for the continuity of the sacrifice. He should think of any 
one whom he hates; verily does he inflict trouble upon him. 
 
ii. 6. 5.  
The theologians say, ' Thou hast sprinkled the offerings with water; but the waters 
with what?' 'With the holy power (Brahman)', he should say, for verily he sprinkles 
the offerings with water, and the waters with the holy power (Brahman). He 
sprinkles the kindling -wood and the sacrificial strew; verily he makes it pure. He 
sprinkles the altar, the altar was rough, hairless, and impure; verily he makes it 
pure. 'To the sky thee, to the atmosphere thee, to earth thee', (with these words) he Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
790 
 places the sacrificial strew and sprinkl es it [1]; verily he sprinkles it for these 
worlds. Cruelly indeed does he act in that he digs. He pours down the waters, for 
healing. He takes the bunch in front; verily he makes it the chief. He takes so much 
as is measured by Prajapati as the mouth of t he sacrifice. He spreads the sacrificial 
strew, the sacrificial strew is offspring, the altar is the earth; verily he places 
offspring on the earth. He strews it so as not to be very discernible; verily he makes 
him not very discernible by offspring and ca ttle [2]. He puts the bundle over the 
sacrificial strew, the strew is offspring, the bundle the sacrificer; verily he makes 
the sacrificer superior to the non -sacrificer. Therefore the sacrificer is superior to 
the non -sacrificer. He puts (grass) between, for separation. He anoints it; verily he 
makes it into an offering and causes it to go to the world of heaven. He anoints it in 
three places; these worlds are three; verily he anoints it for these worlds. He does 
not break off (its edges); if he were to br eak them off, it would not go aloft for the 
sacrificer. He pushes it upwards as it were [3], for the world of heaven is upwards 
as it were. He depresses it; verily he brings down rain for him. He should not put 
forward the points too much; if he were to do  so, there would be a violent torrent to 
destroy the Adhvaryu. He should not throw it (so that the roots are) in front. If he 
were to do this, he would thrust the sacrificer from the world of heaven. He puts it 
forward (with its points) to the east; verily  he makes the sacrificer go to the world 
of heaven. He should not spread (the bunch) in all directions. If he were to spread 
(it) in all directions [4], a daughter would be born to him. He strews it upwards, for 
upwards is as it were connected with a man; verily a male child is born to him. If 
he were to smooth it with the sword or the poking -stick, that would be his ruin. He 
smooths it with his hand, for the protection of the sacrificer. The theologians say, 
'What in the sacrifice is the sacrificer' 'The b undle' (is the reply). 'Where in it is the 
world of heaven?' 'The Ahavaniya (fire)' he should reply. In that he puts the bundle 
on the Ahavaniya, he makes the sacrificer [5] go to the world of heaven. The 
sacrificer is rent in that they smooth the bundle; he throws the strew along after it, 
for calming. The Adhvaryu has no support, and he is liable to be seized by 
shivering. (With the words), 'Thou art firm ( dhruva )', he strokes it; the Dhruva 
is this (earth); verily he finds support in it, and shivers not.  'Has he gone, O 
Agnidh? he says. If (the Agnidh) were to say, 'Agni has gone?' he would make 
Agni go into the fire, and exclude the sacrificer from the world of heaven. So he 
should say only 'Has he gone?' Verily he makes the sacrificer go to the world of  
heaven. Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
791 
  
ii. 6. 6.  
Agni had three elder brothers; they perished while carrying the offering to the 
gods. Agni was afraid, 'Thus indeed will this one fall on misfortune.' He ran away, 
and entered the waters. The gods sought to start him up. The fish procl aimed him, 
and he cursed it, 'At Pleasure may they slay thee, since thou hast proclaimed me.' 
So they slay the fish at pleasure, for he is cursed [1]. They found him; they said, 
'Come to us, and carry the offering for us.' He said, 'Let me choose a boon; 
whatever of the offering when it is taken (in the ladle) falls outside the enclosing -
sticks, let that be the share of my brothers.' There fore whatever of the offering 
when it is taken falls outside the enclosing sticks is their share; verily by it he 
delig hts them. He puts the enclosing sticks around, to smite away the Raksases. He 
makes them touch [2], so that the Raksases may not creep through. He puts none in 
front, for the sun rises in front and smites away the Raksases. He places the two 
kindling -stick s upright, for upwards they smite away the Raksases. (He places) one 
with a Yajus, the other in silence, to make a pair. He places two, the sacrificer has 
two feet, for support. The theologians say, 'He indeed would be a sacrificer who 
should be the strong er for a failure in the sacrifice.' (The words), 'To the lord of 
earth hail! To the lord of the world, hail! To the lord of creatures [3] hail! ' he 
should pronounce over the spilt (offering). Thus by a failure in the sacrifice he 
becomes stronger, for he delights more gods (than usual). There is sameness in the 
sacrifice, in that there are two sacrificial cakes (offered) in order. Between them he 
offers the silent sacrifice, to break the sameness and to make a pair. Agni was in 
yonder world, Yama in this. The gods said, 'Come, let us interchange them'; with 
food the gods invited Agni [4], with the kingdom the Pitrs Yama; therefore is Agni 
the food -eater of the gods, Yama the king of the Pitrs; he who knows thus obtains 
the kingdom and food. To him they gave  that share which they cut off for Agni 
Svistakrt. In that he cuts off a share for Agni Svistakrt, he gives Rudra a share. He 
cuts off one in each case, for Rudra is one as it were. He cuts off from the north 
part, for this is Rudra's [5] quarter; verily h e appeases Rudra in his own quarter. He 
sprinkles it twice, to make it divided into four. The former offerings are cattle, 
Agni is Rudra here; if he were to pour over the former offerings, he would give 
Rudra cattle, and the sacrificer would be without cat tle. He offers leaving the 
former oblations aside, to protect the cattle.  Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
792 
 The Part of the Hotr in the New and Full Moon Sacrifice 
 
ii. 6. 7.  
Manu desired what of earth was sacrificial. He found the poured out ghee. He said, 
'Who is able to produce this a lso at the sacrifice?' Mitra and Varuna said, 'We are 
able to produce the cow.' Then they set the cow in motion. Wherever she stepped, 
there ghee was pressed out; therefore she is called ghee -footed; that is her origin. 
'The Rathantara is invoked with the earth', he says [1]. The Rathantara is this 
(earth); verily he invokes her with food. 'The Vamadevya is invoked with the 
atmosphere', he says. The Vamadevya, is cattle; verily he invokes cattle with the 
atmosphere. 'The Brhat is invoked with the sky', he s ays. The Brhat is connected 
with food; verily he invokes food with the sky. ' The seven Hotras are invoked', he 
says; verily he invokes the Hotras. 'The cow is invoked with the bull', he says [2]; 
verily he invokes a pair. 'The friend food is invoked', he says; verily he invokes the 
Soma drink. 'It is invoked; ho!' he says; verily he invokes the self, for the self is the 
best of those invoked. He invokes food, food is cattle; verily he invokes cattle. He 
invokes four, for cattle are four -footed. 'Offspring of Manu', he says, for Manu first 
saw her [3]. 'Ghee -footed', he says. Because ghee was pressed out of her foot, 
therefore be says thus. 'Of Mitra and Varuna', he says, for Mitra and Varuna set her 
in motion. 'The Brahman, god made, is invoked', he says; v erily he invokes the 
Brahman. 'The divine Adhvaryus are invoked, the human are invoked', he says; 
verily he invokes the gods and men. 'Who shall help this sacrifice and make the 
lord of the sacrifice prosper', he says [4]; verily he invokes a blessing for the 
sacrifice and the sacrificer. 'Sky and earth are invoked', he says; verily he invokes 
sky and earth. 'Born of yore, the righteous', he says, for they were born of yore and 
are righteous. 'Divine, with gods for children', he says, for they are divine an d have 
gods for children. 'Invoked is this sacrificer', he says; verily he invokes the 
sacrificer. 'Invoked in the highest sacrifice, invoked in the greater offering, invoked 
in the divine abode' [5], he says. The highest sacrifice is offspring, the greate r 
offering is cattle, the divine abode is the world of heaven. (With the words), 'Thou 
art this; thou art this', he invokes the dear abode of the sacrifice. 'All that is dear to 
it is invoked', he says; verily not vainly does he invoke. 
 Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
793 
 ii. 6. 8.  
Food is  cattle, he takes it himself; verily by himself he fills his desires of cattle, for 
no one else can grant him his desire of cattle. 'Thee offered to the lord of speech I 
eat', he says; verily he delights speech with a share. 'Thee offered to the lord of th e 
Sadas I eat', he says, for completion.' (The food) is divided. in four; what is divided 
in four is the offering, what is divided in four is cattle; if the Hotr were to eat it, the 
Hotr would [1] experience misfortune; if he were to offer it in the fire, he would 
give the cattle to Rudra, and the sacrificer would be without cattle. 'Thee offered to 
the lord of speech I eat', he says; verily secretly does he offer it. 'Thee offered to 
the lord of the Sadas', he says, for completion. They eat; they eat at a suitable 
moment; he gives a sacrificial gift; at a suitable moment be gives a gift. They 
cleave the sacrifice [2], if they eat in the middle. They purify it with water; all the 
gods are the waters; verily they connect the sacrifice with the gods. The gods 
excluded Rudra from the sacrifice; he pierced the sacrifice, the gods gathered 
round it (saying), 'May it be right for us.' They said, 'Well offered will this be for 
us, if we propitiate him.' That is why Agni is called the 'well offerer' ( svistakrt ). 
When  it was pierced (by him) [3] they cut off (a piece) of the size of a barleycorn; 
therefore one should cut off (a piece) the size of a barleycorn. If one were to cut off 
more, he would confuse that part of the sacrifice. If he were to make a layer and 
then to sprinkle, lie would make it swell on both sides. He cuts it off and sprinkles 
it; there are two operations; the sacrificer has two feet, for support. If he were to 
transfer it (to the Brahman) crosswise, he would pierce the unwounded part of the 
sacrifi ce; lie transfers it in front; verily he transfers it in the proper way. They 
transferred it for Pusan [4]. Pusan having eaten it lost his teeth; therefore Pusan has 
pounded food for his share, for he has no teeth. The gods said of him, 'He has lost 
(his t eeth), he is not fit for the offering.' They transferred it to Brhaspati. Brhaspati 
was afraid, 'Thus indeed will this one fall on misfortune.' He saw this Mantra; 
'With the eye of the sun I gaze on thee', he said, for the eye of the sun harms no one 
[5]. He was afraid, 'It will harm me as I take it.' 'On the impulse of the god Savitr, 
with the arms of the Açvins, with the hands of Pusan I take thee', he says; verily, 
impelled by Savitr, he took it with the holy power (Brahman) and with the gods. 
He was afr aid, 'It will harm me as I eat.' 'Thee with the mouth of Agni I eat', he 
said, for nothing harms the mouth of Agni. He was afraid [6], 'It will harm me 
when I have eaten.' 'With the belly of the Brahman', he said, for nothing harms the 
belly of the Brahman . 'With the holy power (Brahman) of Brhaspati', (he said), for 
he is fullest of the holy power (Brahman). The breaths indeed depart from him who Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
794 
 eats this offering; by purifying it with water he grasps the breaths; the breaths are 
ambrosia, the waters ambr osia; verily he summons the breaths according to their 
places. 
 
ii. 6. 9.  
He takes a portion for the Agnidh; verily he delights the seasons whose mouth is 
Agni. He takes a kindling -stick, for the support of the subsequent offerings; verily 
he pours on tha t which has a kindling stick. He rubs the enclosing -sticks; verily he 
purifies them. He rubs each once, for the sacrifice there is as it were turned away. 
It makes up four, cattle are four -footed; verily he wins cattle. 'O Brahman, will we 
set out?' he say s; there indeed is the sacrifice placed [1], where the Brahman is; 
where the sacrifice is placed, thence does he commence it. If he were to instigate 
him with his hand, he would shiver; if with his head, he would have a headache; if 
he were to sit in silen ce, the sacrifice would not proceed; he should say, 'Set out! In 
speech the sacrifice is placed; where the sacrifice is placed, thence does he bestow 
it. 'O god Savitr, that he  
[2] hath proclaimed to thee', he says, for impelling. 'Brhaspati is the (pries t) 
Brahman', he says, for he is fullest of the holy power (Brahman). 'Do thou guard 
the sacrifice, guard the lord of the sacrifice, guard me', he says; for the sacrifice, 
the sacrificer, and himself, for these he thus invokes a blessing, to prevent 
misfort une, Having caused (him) to call out, he says, 'Utter the verse for sacrifice 
to the gods.' The theologians say, 'The gods have been sacrificed to; what gods are 
they?' 'The metres', he should reply, 'Gayatri Tristubh [3], and Jagati.' Then they 
say, 'The metres are the Brahmans'; verily he sacrifices to them. The deities were 
sacrificed to by the gods; then Agni did not burn forth; the gods found him by the 
offerings in the after -sacrifices; in that he offers the after -sacrifices verily thus one 
kindles Ag ni. There was an Asura, named Etadu. He then appropriated the blessing 
of the sacrifice. If one were to say, 'That indeed ( etád u ) hath been glorious, O 
sky and earth' [4], one would cause Etadu to attain the blessing of the sacrifice. 
'This (idám ) has bee n glorious, sky and earth', he should say; verily he makes the 
sacrificer attain the blessing of the sacrifice. 'We have won the utterance of prayer 
and homage', he says; 'we have won this', he says in effect. 'It resteth on sky and 
earth', he says, for th e sacrifice rests on the sky and earth. 'Helpful for thee in this 
sacrifice, O sacrificer, be sky and earth' [5], he says; verily he invokes this 
blessing. If he were to say, 'easy of access and easy to dwell on', the sacrificer Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
795 
 would be likely to perish, for when he perishes he has recourse to this (earth). 'Easy 
of approach, and easy to move on', he should say; verily he invokes for him a 
wider sphere, and he is not likely to perish. 'In the knowledge of these two Agni 
hath rejoiced in this offering', he says; 'the gods we have sacrificed to [6], we have 
made them to prosper', he says in effect. If he were not to indicate (the sacrificer), 
the blessing of the sacrifice would go to his neighbour. 'This sacrificer imploreth (a 
blessing) N. N.', he says; veri ly by indicating him he makes him attain the world of 
heaven. 'He imploreth length of days, he imploreth a noble offspring, he says; 
verily he invokes this blessing. 'He imploreth superiority over his equals', he says; 
his equals are the breaths; verily he  does not obstruct his breaths [7]. 'Agni shall 
win, god, from the gods, we men from Agni', he says, 'Agni wins from the gods, 
we from men', he says in effect. 'Here is the path of favour, and this our homage to 
the gods', he says; to both the gods whom he  sacrifices to and those to whom he 
does not sacrifice, he pays homage, for his own security. 
 
ii. 6. 10.  
The gods could not find any one to utter the call Svaga at the sacrifice. They spoke 
to Çamyu Barhaspatya, 'Perform the Svaga call at this sacrifice for us.' He said, 
'Let me choose a boon; if a faithless man sacrifice, or a man sacrifices without 
prescription, let the blessing of such a sacrificer be mine.' Therefore if a faithless 
man sacrifices, or a man sacrifices without prescription, the blessing  of such a 
sacrifice goes to Çamyu Barhaspatya. 'That is mine', he said, 'What is to belong to 
my offspring? [1].' 'Him, who reviles him, he shall fine with a hundred; him, who 
strikes him, he shall fine with a thousand; he, who draws blood from him, shall  not 
behold the world of the Pitrs for as many years as are the grains of dust which the 
blood in its fall seizes upon', (they replied). Therefore one should not revile a 
Brahman, nor strike him, nor draw blood from him; for so great is his sin. 'That 
health and wealth we choose', he says; verily he utters the call Svaga, over the 
sacrifice. 'That [2] health and wealth we choose', he says; verily he gives Çamyu 
Barhaspatya his portion. 'Success to the sacrifice, success to the sacrificer', he says; 
verily h e invokes this blessing. He sacrifices to Soma; verily he places seed; he 
sacrifices to Tvastr; seed is placed and Tvastr moulds forms; he sacrifices to the 
wives of the gods, to make a pair; he sacrifices to Agni, lord of the house, for 
support. There is sameness in the sacrifice [3] in that the fore -sacrifices are offered Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
796 
 with butter, and the sacrifices to the wives (are offered) with butter. Having 
repeated the Rc, of the sacrifices to the wives he offers with a Rc, to prevent 
sameness, and to make a pai ring. The sacrifice has a fivefold prelude and a fivefold 
end; there are offered five fore -sacrifices; there are four sacrifices to the wives, the 
fifth is the Samistayajus by they make up five as a prelude, and five as an end. 
 
ii. 6. 11.  
a. Yoke like a charioteer, Agni,The steeds that best invite the gods  
Set down as ancient Hotr.  
b And, O god, for us do thou the gods,  
Most wise one, call hither;  
Make all our wishes true;  
c Since thou, O most young,  
O son of strength, who art sacrificed to,  
Art righteous  and worthy of sacrifice.  
d This Agni is lord of a thousandfold,.  
 
A hundredfold, strength;  
The sage, the head of wealth.  
e Bring him hither with common call  
Lower to our sacrifice, O Angiras.  
As the Rbhus bend the felly (of the chariot) [I]  
f To him, the heavenly,  
Now with constant voice, O Virupa,  
To the strong one urge the hymn of praise.  
g What Pani shall we lay low among the kine  
With the missile of this Agni  
Who seeth from afar?  
h May not the clans of the gods forsake us,  
Like the dawns entering the w aters,  
As cows a poor man.  
i Let not the assault  
Of any ill -minded foe smite us,  
As a wave a ship.  Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
797 
 k Homage to thee, O Agni, for might,  
The people sing, O god;  
With strength [2] trouble thou the foe.  
l Wilt thou not, O Agni,  
Bring us wealth for our quest f or cattle?  
O room maker, make room for us.  
m Cast us not aside in this great contest,  
Like a bearer his burden;  
Gather wealth and conquer it.  
n May this terror, this misfortune,  
O Agni, fasten on another than us;  
Increase our impetuous strength.  
 
o The rev erent or generous man  
In whose offering he hath delighted,  
Agni aideth indeed with furtherance.  
p From a far [3] region  
Come hither to these lower ones,  
Favour those in the region where I am.  
q Since we have known of old  
Of thy help, O Agni, as a father's,  
Now we seek thy favour.  
r Thou, who art like a mighty man who slayeth with the dart  
Or a sharp -horned bull,  
O Agni, hast rent the forts.  
 
s O friends, together (offer) fit  
Food and praise to Agni,  
Highest over the folk,  
The son of strength, the mighty.  
t Thou gatherest, O strong one,  
All that belongeth, O Agni, to the niggard;  
Thou art kindled in the place of offering;  
Do thou bear us good things.  
u O Prajapati.  
v He knoweth.  Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
798 
 w O Soma and Pusan.  
x These gods.  
 
ii. 6. 12.  
a Eagerly we hail thee,  
Eagerly wo uld we kindle thee;  
Eager bring the eager,  
The fathers, to eat the offering.  
b Thou, O Soma, art pre -eminent in wisdom;  
Thou movest along the straightest path;  
Through thy guidance, O drop, our fathers wisely divided  
The treasure among the gods.  
By thee, O  Soma Pavamana, our ancient fathers  
Wisely ordained the offerings;  
Conquering, untroubled, do thou open the barriers;  
Be generous to us in heroes and horses [1].  
d Thou, O Soma, in accord with the fathers,  
Hast stretched over sky and earth;  
To thee, O drop , let us make sacrifice with offering;  
Let us be lords of wealth.  
e O fathers, made ready by Agni, come hither;  
With good leadership sit ye on each seat;  
Eat ye the offerings set out on the strew;  
And give us wealth with many heroes.  
f O fathers that sit o n the sacrificial strew, come hither with your aid;  
We have made these offerings for you; accept them,  
And then come to us with your most healing aid,  
Give us [2] health, wealth, and safety!  
g I have found the kindly fathers,  
The scion and the step of Visn u; 
 
They that sit on the sacrificial strew and enjoy the drink  
That is pressed for them with the Svadha call are most eager to come  
hither.  
h Invoked are the fathers who love the Soma  Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
799 
 To their dear homes on the sacrificial strew;  
May they come hither; may  they hear us here  
May they speak for us; and may they aid us.  
i Let them arise, the lower and the higher  
And the middle fathers who love the Soma;  
They who lived their lives [3] in goodness and without sin;  
May these fathers help us when we call.  
k Be thi s homage to -day to the fathers,  
Who went before and who went after;  
Who are seated in the earthly region  
Or who are now in abodes with fair dwellings.  
l As our fathers before,  
Of old, O Agni, furthering right,  
Sought the pure, the devotion, singing hymns  
Cleaving the earth they disclosed the red ones.  
m When, O Agni [4], bearer of oblations,  
Thou sacrificest to the righteous fathers,  
Thou shalt bear the oblations  
To the gods and to the fathers.  
n Thou, O Agni, praised, all -knower,  
Didst carry the offerings making them fragrant;  
Thou didst give them to the fathers who ate them at the Svadha call;  
Eat thou, O god, the offerings set before thee.  
 
o Matali with the Kavyas, Yama with the Angirases,  
Brhaspati rejoicing with the Rkvans,  
Those whom the gods magnifie d and those who magnified the gods;  
Some in the Svaha call, some in the Svadha rejoice [5].  
p Sit on this strew, O Yama,  
In accordance with the Angirases, the fathers  
Let the verses made by the poets bring thee hither  
Rejoice, O king, in this offering.  
Com e with the Angirases who deserve the sacrifice  
Yama, rejoice here with the Vairupas;  
I summon Virasvant who is thy father,  
Sitting down on the strew at this sacrifice.  Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
800 
 r The Angirases, our fathers, the Navagvas,  
Atharvans, Bhrgus, who love the Soma;  
 
May w e be in the favour of those ones worthy of sacrifice, May we have their 
kindly good will.  
Sacred -Texts Index  Hinduism Index  Yajur  Veda Index Previous Next  
 
 Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
801 
 KANDA III  
PRAPATHAKA I  
The Supplement to the Soma Sacrifice  
iii. 1. 1.  
Prajapati desired, 'May I create offspring.' He did penance, he created serpents. He 
desired, 'May I create offspring.' He did penance a second time,  he created birds. 
He desired, 'May I create offspring.' He did penance a third time, he saw this 
speech of the consecrated, he spoke it. Then indeed did he create offspring. In that 
after undergoing penance he speaks the speech of the consecrated, the sac rificer 
thus [1] creates offspring. If one who is consecrated sees anything impure, the 
consecration departs from him; his dark colour, his beauty goes away. 'Mind 
unbound; eye weak; sun best of lights; O consecration, forsake me not', he says, 
and consecr ation departs not from him, his dark colour and his beauty go not away. 
If rain falls on one who is consecrated, the heavenly waters if unappeased destroy 
his force, might, consecration [2], and penance. 'Do ye flowing waters place might 
(in me), place for ce, place might; do not destroy my consecration, nor my penance', 
he says; verily he places all that in himself; they do not destroy his force, might, 
consecration, or penance. Agni is the divinity of the consecrated man, and he is 
concealed as it were fro m him, when he goes (out), and the Raksases are able to 
hurt him [3]. 'From good to better do thou advance; may Brhaspati be thy 
forerunner', he says. Brhaspati is the holy power (Brahman) of the gods; verily he 
grasps hold of him, and he brings him safely  through. 'Here we have come ( a-
idam ) to the place on earth for sacrifice to the gods', he says, for he comes to the 
place on earth for sacrifice, who sacrifices. 'Wherein aforetime all the gods 
rejoiced', he says, for all the gods delight in it, in that t he Brahmans so do. 
'Accomplishing (the rite) with Rc, Saman, and Yajus', he says, for he who 
sacrifices accomplishes (the rite) with Rc, Saman, and Yajus. 'Let us rejoice in 
fullness of wealth, in sustenance', he says; verily he invokes this blessing. 
 Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
802 
 iii. 1. 2.  
'This is thy Gayatri part', say for me to Soma.  
'This is thy Tristubh, Jagati, part', say for me to Soma.  
 
'Become lord of the Chandomas', say for me to Soma. He who purchases King 
Soma after making it go to the world of lordship, becomes lord of his own 
(people). The world of lordship of King Soma is the metres; he should utter these 
verses before the purchase of Soma. It is to the world of lordship that he makes it 
go when he buys (Soma) [1], and he becomes lord of his own. He, who knows the 
supp ort of the Tanunaptra finds support. The theologians say, 'They do not eat, nor 
offer; then where does the Tanunaptra find support?' 'In Prajapati, in the mind, he 
should reply. He should smell at it thrice, (saying), 'In Prajapati thee, in the mind I 
offer'; this indeed is the support of the Tanunaptra; he who knows thus finds 
support. He who [2] knows the support of the Adhvaryu finds support. He should 
call (on the Agnidhra) standing in the place without moving whence he is minded 
to sacrifice. This is t he support of the Adhvaryu; he who knows thus finds support. 
If he were to sacrifice moving about, he would lose his support; therefore he 
should sacrifice standing in the same place, for support. He who knows the 
possession of the Adhvaryu, becomes posses sed (of what he needs). His possession 
is the offering -spoon, his possession is the Vayu cup, his [3] possession is the 
beaker. If he were to call without holding the Vayu cup or the beaker, he would 
lose his own; therefore he must hold it when he calls; v erily he loses not his own. 
If he begins the litany without placing the Soma," the Soma is not supported, the 
Stoma is not supported, the hymns are not supported, the sacrificer is not 
supported, the Adhvaryu is not supported. The support of the Soma is th e Vayu 
cup, the support of it is the beaker, (the support) of the Stoma is Soma, (the 
support) of the hymns is the Stoma. He should grasp the cup or fill up the beaker, 
and then begin the litany; a support to the Soma he verily ( eva ) gives, to the 
Stoma, t o the hymns; the sacrificer finds support, the Adhvaryu finds support. 
 
iii. 1. 3.  
They gather together the sacrifice when (they gather the dust of) the foot -print of 
the Soma cow; the oblation -holders are the mouth of the sacrifice; when they move Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
803 
 forwar d the oblation -holders, then he should oil the axle with it; verily he extends 
the sacrifice in the mouth of the sacrifice. They lead Agni forward, they take the 
wife forward, and they make the carts follow after. Now the altar of him (Agni) is 
deserted; h e broods on it, and is liable to become terrible ( rudrá ) [1], and lay to 
rest the offspring and cattle of the sacrificer. When they are leading northward the 
sacrificial animal over which the Apris have been said, he should take (from the 
altar the fire) f or cooking it; verily he makes him share in it. The Ahavaniya is the 
sacrificer; if they take (the fire) for cooking the victim from the Ahavaniya, they 
tear the sacrificer asunder; the fire should therefore be thus, or he should make it 
by friction, so th at the sacrificer's body may remain together. If a portion of the 
victim be lost, he should cut off an equivalent portion of the butter; that is then the 
atonement. If men disturb his victim and he wish of them, 'May they come to ruin', 
he should make an o ffering in the Agnidh's altar with the Rc containing the word 
'paying of homage' (and beginning), 'What then?' Verily he appropriates their 
paying of homage and speedily do they go to ruin. 
 
iii. 1. 4.  
a The offspring, being born of Prajapati  
And those th at have been born,  
To him declare them;  
Lot the wise one reflect thereon.  
b This victim, O lord of cattle, for thee to -day, 
I bind, O Agni, in the midst of righteous action;  
Approve it, and let us sacrifice with a good offering  
May this offering be welcome  to the gods.  
c The ancient wise ones grasp  
The breath as it speedeth from the limbs;  
Go to heaven by the paths which lead to the gods;  
Be among the plants with thy members.  
d What cattle the lord of cattle ruleth [1],  
Both the four -footed and the two -footed, 
May he, bought off, go to his sacrificial share;  
May abundances of wealth fall to the sacrificer.  
e Those, who being bound, contemplated  Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
804 
 With mind and with eye him who was being bound  
Let the god Agni first release them,  
Lord of offspring, in harmony w ith offspring.  
f The cattle of the forest, of all forms,  
Of various forms, many of one form.  
Let the god Vayu first release them,  
Lord of offspring, in harmony with offspring.  
g Releasing [2] the seed of being,  
Do ye further the sacrificer, O gods;  
May tha t which hath stood ready and strenuous,  
Go alive to the place of the gods.  
h The breath of the sacrificer is apart from the victim;  
The sacrifice goeth to the gods with the gods;  
Let it go alive to the place of the gods;  
Fulfilled may the desires of the sa crificer be.  
i If the victim has uttered a cry,  
Or striketh its breast with its feet,  
May Agni release me from that sin,  
From all misfortune.  
 
k O ye slayers, come  
To the sacrifice [3] sped by the gods;  
Free the victim from the noose,  
The lord of the sacri fice from the bond.  
I May Aditi loosen this noose;  
Homage to the cattle, to the lord of cattle, I pay;  
I cast down the enemy;  
On him whom we hate I fasten the noose.  
m Thee they keep to carry the offering,  
To cook (the victim) and as worthy of sacrifice;  
0 Agni, with thy strength and thy body, be present  
And accept our offerings, O Jatavedas.  
n O Jatavedas, go with the caul to the gods,  
For thou art the first Hotr;  
With ghee do thou strengthen their bodies;  
May the gods eat the offering made with the cry of  'hail!  Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
805 
  
o Hail to the gods; to the gods hail! 
 
iii. 1. 5.  
Cattle belong to Prajapati; their overlord is Rudra. In that he prepares (them) with 
these two (verses), verily by addressing him with them he secures him, so that his 
self is not injured. He prep ares (them) with two; the sacrificer has two feet; (verily 
it serves) for support. Having prepared them, he offers five libations; cattle are 
fivefold; I verily he wins cattle. Now the victim is led to death, and if he should lay 
hold on it, the sacrificer  would be likely to die. ' The breath of the sacrifice is apart 
from the victim', he says, for distinction [1]. 'If the victim has uttered a cry' --(with 
these words) he offers a libation, for calming. 'O ye slayers, come to the sacrifices', 
he says; that i s according to the text. When the omentum. is being taken, the 
strength goes away from Agni. 'Thee they keep to carry the offering' --(with these 
words) he pours a libation over the omentum; verily he wins the strength of Agni; 
(it serves) also for making ( the victim) ready. In the case of some gods the cry of 
'hail!' is uttered before (an offering), in the case of others the cry of 'hail!' is uttered 
after. 'Hail to the gods, to the gods hail!' --(with these words) he pours a libation on 
either side of the o mentum; verily he delights both (sets of gods). 
 
iii. 1. 6.  
a 'He who performs the sacrifice not according to the deities falls a victim to the 
deities, he becomes worse. He who (performs) in accordance with the deities does 
not fall a victim to the deiti es, he becomes better. He should rub the Agnidh's place 
with a verse addressed to Agni, the oblation -holder with one addressed to Visnu, 
the offering -spoons with one addressed to Agni, the Vayu cups with one addressed 
to Vayu, the Sadas with one addressed to Indra. Thus he forms the sacrifice in 
accordance with the deities, he does not fall a victim to the deities, he becomes 
better. b I yoke earth for thee with light, I yoke wind for thee with the atmosphere 
[1], I yoke speech for thee with the sun, I yoke  the three spaces of the sun for thee. 
c Agni is the deity, Gayatri the metre, thou art the vessel of the silent offering. 
Soma is the deity, Tristubh the metre, thou art the vessel of the restrained offering. Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
806 
 Indra is the deity, Jagati the metre, thou art  the vessel of Indra and Vayu. Brhaspati 
is the deity, Anustubh the metre, thou art the vessel of Mitra and Varuna. The 
Açvins are the deity, Pañkti the metre, thou art the vessel of the Açvins. Surya is 
the deity, Brhati the metre [2], thou art the vessel  of the pure (Soma). Candramas is 
the deity, Satobrhati the metre, thou art the vessel of the mixed (Soma). The All -
gods are the deity, Usnih the metre, thou art the vessel of the opening offering. 
Indra is the deity, Kakubh the metre, thou art the vessel of the hymns. Earth is the 
deity, Viraj the metre, thou art the vessel of the reserved (offering). 
 
iii. 1. 7.  
The Adhvaryu is he that brings trouble on the sacrificer, and he that brings trouble 
himself is ruined before the trouble. 'From the formula spo ken, guard me, from 
every execration' --(with these words) he should pour a libation before the morning 
litany (of the Hotr). So the Adhvaryu girds himself in front with a protection, to 
avert trouble.  
For entry thee, for rest thee, for the overcoming of t he Gayatri, of the Tristubh, of 
the Jagati, hail! O expiration and inspiration, protect me from death, O expiration 
and inspiration forsake me not.  
They contend as to the deities and to expiration and inspiration [1], whose Soma 
(offerings) compete. 'For entry thee, for rest thee', he says; entry and rest are the 
metres; verily by the metres he appropriates his metres. The Ajya (Stotras) have 
the word 'forward' in them, for conquest. The beginning verses are addressed to the 
Maruts, for victory. Both the B rhat and the Rathantara (Samans) are used. The 
Rathantara is this (earth), the What yonder (sky); verily he cuts him off from these 
two. The Rathantara is to -day, the Brhat to -morrow; verily he cuts him off from to -
day and to -morrow. The Rathantara is the past [2], the Brhat the future; verily he 
cuts him off from the past and the future. The Rathantara is the measured, the 
Brhat the unmeasured; verily he cuts him off from the measured and the 
unmeasured. Viçvamitra and Jamadagni had a quarrel with Vasistha . Jamadagni 
saw this Vihavya (hymn), and by means of it he appropriated the power and 
strength of Vasistha. In that the Vihavya is recited, the sacrificer appropriates the 
power and strength of his enemy. 'He who performs more rites of sacrifice', they Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
807 
 say, 'appropriates the gods.' If the Soma (sacrifice) on the other side is an 
Agnistoma, he should perform an Ukthya; if it is an Ukthya, he should perform an 
Atiratra; verily by means of rites of sacrifice he appropriates his deities; he 
becomes better. 
 
iii. 1. 8.  
a Ye are the Nigrabhyas, heard by the gods. Delight my life, delight my expiration, 
delight my inspiration, delight my cross -breathing, delight my eye, delight my ear, 
delight my mind, delight my speech, delight my trunk, delight my limbs, delight  
my offspring, delight my cattle, delight my house, delight my troops, delight me 
with all my troops, delight me [1]; may my troops not go thirsty.  
b The plants are the subjects of Soma; the subjects indeed are able to give up the 
king; Soma is connected with Indra. 'I have made you grow in my mind, O ye well 
born; O ye born of right, may we enjoy your favour; may the divine plants in 
accord with Indra grant us the Soma for the pressing', he says verily having begged 
him from the plants, his subjects, and his deity he presses him. c When the Soma is 
pressed [2] the first drop which falls has potency to destroy the power, strength, 
offspring, and cattle of the sacrificer; he should pronounce over it the formula, 
'Thou hast fallen to me with offspring, with a bundance of wealth; destroy not my 
power and strength'; verily he invokes this blessing to prevent the destruction of his 
power, strength, offering, and cattle.  
d The drop hath fallen on the earth, the sky, On this seat and on the one which was 
aforetime The drop that wandereth over the third seat I offer in the seven Hotras.' 
 
iii. 1. 9.  
a He who bestows upon the gods the glory of the gods, and on men the glory of 
men, has the divine glory among the gods, the human glory among men. The 
libations which he  draws off before the Agrayana libation, he should draw off 
silently; those after with noise; verily he bestows upon the gods the glory of the 
gods, and on men the glory of men; verily he has the divine glory among the gods, Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
808 
 the human glory among men.  
b May Agni protect us at the morning pressing, He that belongeth to all men, all -
wealful in his might;  
May he, the purifier, grant us wealth [1];  
May we that share the draught be long -lived  
c May the All -gods, the Maruts, Indra,  
Not leave us at the second pr essing;  
Long -lived, speaking what is pleasing to them,  
May we enjoy the favour of the gods.  
d This third libation belongeth to the sages  
Who righteously set the beaker in motion;  
May these Saudhanvanas, who have attained heaven,  
Bear our good offering to w hat is better  
 
e Some libations have bases, some have not. Those which have a sprinkling have 
bases, those [2] of Soma have not bases. Taking (the cup) for Indra and Vayu he 
should sprinkle it (saying), 'May the sacrifice be harmless for plants, for our c attle, 
for our folk; for all creatures harmless thou art; swell like ghee, O god Soma.' 
Verily so he makes the libations of Soma to have a base. He becomes possessed of 
a base who knows thus. Verily also he wets with ghee the sky and earth: they being 
wet are to be lived upon; he is to be lived upon [3] who knows thus.  
f This is thy share, O Rudra, for which thou didst ask; rejoice in it, find (for us) the 
lordship of cows, abundance of wealth, with good heroes and a year's prosperity.'  
g Manu divided his  property among his sons. He deprived Nabhanedistha, who 
was a student, of any portion. He went to him, and said, 'How hast thou deprived 
me of a portion?' He replied, 'I have not deprived you of a portion; the Angirases 
here are performing a Sattra; they [4] cannot discern the world of heaven; declare 
this Brahmana to them; when they go to the, world of heaven they will give thee 
their cattle.' He told them it, and they when going to the world of heaven gave him 
their cattle. Rudra approached him as he wen t about with his cattle in the place of 
sacrifice, and said, 'These are my cattle.' He replied, 'They have given them [5] to Yajur Veda English Translation – AB Keith  
 
809 
 me.' They have not the power to do that', he replied, (whatever is left on the place 
of sacrifice is mine.' Then one should not res ort to a place of sacrifice. He said, 
'Give me a share in the sacrifice, and I will not have designs against your cattle. He 
poured out for him the remnants of the mixed (Soma). Then indeed had Rudra no 
designs against his cattle. When one who knows thus o ffers the remnants of the 
mixed (Soma), Rudra has no designs against his cattle. 
 
iii. 1. 10.  
a May I be pleasing to speech; pleasing to the lord of speech, O divine  
speech. The sweetness of speech place in me; hail to Sarasvati.  
b By the Rc make the Som a to prosper,  
By the Gayatra the Rathantara,  
The Brhat with the Gayatri for its metre.  
c The drop that falleth of them, that shoot,  
Shaken by the arms, from the womb of the pressing -planks,  
Or from the filter of the Adhvaryu,  
Over it I say Hail! and offer it to Indra.  
d The drop, the shoot, that hath fallen on the ground,  
From the rice grains [1], the cake, the mush,  
From the Soma with grain, from the mixed, O Indra, from the pure,  
Over it I say Hail! and offer it to Indra.  
e Thy sweet drop, powerful,  
Over which Hail! is said and which goeth back to the gods  
From the sky, the earth, the atmosphere  
Over it I say Hail! and offer it to Indra.  
 
f The Adhvaryu is the first of the priests to start work, verily they say the Stoma 
should be started by him. g 'May sp eech that goes in front go in front, going 
straight to the gods, placing glory in me, breath in cattle, offspring in me [2] and in 
the sacrificer', he says; verily he yokes speech at the beginning of the sacrifice. The 
place of the sacrifice is made when h aving drawn off the libations they creep to the 
Bahispavamana; for they go away, and they praise with verses which go away; he 
returns, and with a verse addressed to Visnu reverences (the Soma); Visnu is the 
sacrifice; verily he makes the sacrifice. 'O Vis nu, as our nearest, O mighty one, 