Rig Veda – English Translation  
 
3 Your  chariot  with a hundred  aids, O Asvins,  beareth  you swift  as thought  across  the regions,   
Speeding  to us, O ye whose  wealth  is Surya.   
4 What  time this stone  of yours,  the Gods'  adorer,  upraised,  sounds  forth  for you as Soma−presser,   
Let the priest  bring  you, Fair Ones,  through  oblations.   
5 The nourishment  ye have  is, truly,  wondrous:  ye gave thereof  a quickening  store  to Atri,  
Who  being  dear to you, receives  your favour.   
6 That gift, which  all may gain,  ye gave Cyava na, when  he grew  old, who offered  you oblations,   
When  ye bestowed  on him enduring  beauty.   
7 What  time his wicked  friends  abandoned  Bhujyu,  O Asvins,  in the middle  of the ocean,   
Your  horse  delivered  him, your faithful  servant.   
8 Ye lent your aid to Vrka  when  exhausted,  and listened  when  invoked  to Sayu's  calling.   
Ye made  the cow pour forth  her milk like water,  and, Asvins,  strengthened  with your strength  the barren.   
9 With  his fair hymns  this singer,  too, extols  you, waking  with glad thoughts  at the break of morning.   
May the cow nourish  him with milk to feed llim. Preserve  us evermore,  ye Gods,  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  LXIX.  Asvins.  
1. MAY  your gold chariot,  drawn  by vigorous  horses,  come  to us, blocking  up the earth   
and heaven,   
Bright  with its fellies while  its way drops  fatness,  food−laden,  rich in coursers,  man's  protector.   
2 Let it approach,  yoked  by thewill,  three−seated,  extending  far and wide  o'er fivefold  beings,   
Whereon  ye visit God−adoring  races,  bending  your course  whither  ye will, O Asvins.  
3 Renowned,  with noble  horses,  come  ye hither:  drink,  Wondrous  Pair, the cup that holds  sweet  juices.   
Your  car whereon  your Spouse  is wont  to travel  marks  with its track  the farthest  ends of heaven.   
4 When  night  was turning  to the grey of morning  the Maiden,  Surya's  Daughter,  chose  your splendour.   
When  with your power  and might  ye aid the pious  he comes  through  heat to life by your assistance.   
5 O Chariot−borne,  this car of yours  invested  with rays of light comes  harnessed  to our dwelling.   
Herewit h, O Asvins,  while  the dawn  is breaking,  to this our sacrifice  bring  peace  and blessing.   
6 Like the wild cattle  thirsty  for the lightning,  Heroes,  come  nigh this day to our libations.   
Men call on you with hymns  in many  places,  but let not other  worshippe rs detain  you.  
7 Bhujyu,  abandoned  in the midst  of ocean,  ye raised  from  out the water  with your horses,   
Uninjured,  winged,  flagging  not, undaunted,  with deeds  of wonder  saving  him, O Asvins.   
8 Now  hear,  O Youthful  Twain,  mine  invocation:  come,  Asvins,  to the home  where  food aboundeth.   
Vouchsafe  us wealth,  do honour  to our nobles.  Preserve  us evermore,  ye Gods,  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  LXX.  Asvins.  
1. RICH  in all blessings,  Asvins  come  ye hither:  this place  on earth  is called  your own possession,   
Like a strong  horse  with a fair back  it standeth,  whereon,  as in a lap, ye seat you firmly.   
2 This most  delightful  eulogy  awaits  you in the man's  house  drink−offering  hath been  heated,   
Which  bringeth  you over the seas and rivers,  yoking  as'twere  two well−matc hed shining  horses.   
3 Whatever  dwellings  ye possess,  O Asvins,  in fields  of men or in the streams  of heaven,   
Resting  upon  the summit  of the mountain,  or bringing  food to him who gives  oblation,   
4 Delight  yourselves,  ye Gods,  in plants  and waters  when  Rsis give them  and ye find they suit You.   
Enriching  us with treasures  in abundance  ye have  looked  back  to former  generations.   
5 Asvins,  though  ye have  heard  them  oft aforetime,  regard  the many  prayers  which  Rsis offer.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Come  to the man even  as his heart  desireth:  may we enjoy  your most  delightful  favour.   
6 Come  to the sacrifice  offered  you, Nasatyas,  with men,  oblations,  and prayer  duly uttered.   
 
Come  to Vasistha  as his heart  desireth,  for unto you these  holy hymns  are chanted.   
7 This is the thought,  this is the song,  O Asvins:  accept  this hymn  of ours,  ye Steers,  with favour.   
May these  our prayers  addressed  to you come  nigh you. Preserve  us evermore,  ye Gods,  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  LXXI.  Asvins.  
1. THE  Night  retireth  from  the Dawn  her Sister;  the Dark  one yieldeth  to the Red her pathway.   
Let us invoke  you rich in steeds  and cattle  − by day and night  keep  far from  us the arrow.   
2 Bearing  rich treasure  in your car, O Asvins,  come  to the mortal  who presents  oblation.   
Keep  at a distance  penury  and sickn ess; Lovers  of Sweetness,  day and night  preserve  us.  
3 May your strong  horses,  seeking  bliss,  bring  hither  your chariot  at the earliest  flush  of morning.   
With  coursers  yoked  by Law drive  hither,  Asvins,  your car whose  reins  are light,  laden  with treasure .  
4 The chariot,  Princes,  that conveys  you, moving  at daylight,  triple−seated,  fraught  with riches,   
Even  with this come  unto us, Nasatyas,  that laden  with all food it may approach  us.  
5 Ye freed  Cyavana  from  old age and weakness:  ye brought  the courser  fleet of food to Pedu.   
Ye rescued  Atri from  distress  and darkness,  and loosed  for Jahusa  the bonds  that bound  him.  
6 This is the thought,  this is the song,  O Asvins:  accept  this hymn  of ours,  ye Steers,  With  favour.   
May these  our prayers  addressed  to you come  nigh you. Preserve  us evermore,  ye Gods,  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  LXXII.  Asvins.  
1. COME,  O Nasatyas,  on your car resplendent,  rich in abundant  wealth  of kine and horses.   
As harnessed  steeds,  all our laudations  follow  you whose  forms  shine  with most delightful  beauty.   
2 Come  with the Gods  associate,  come  ye hither  to us, Nasatyas,  with your car accordant.   
'Twixt  you and us there  is ancestral  friendship  and common  kin: remember  and regard  it.  
3 Awakened  are the songs  that praise  the Asvins,  the kindred  prayers  and the Celestial  Mornings.   
Inviting  those  we long for, Earth  and Heaven,  the singer  calleth  these  Nasatyas  hither.   
4 What  time the Dawns  break  forth  in light,  O Asvins,  to you the poets  offer  their devotions.   
God Savitar  hath sent aloft his splendour,  and fires sing praises  with the kindled  fuel.  
5 Come  from  the west,  come  from  the cast, Nasatyas,  come,  Asvins,  from  below  and from  above  us.  
Bring  wealth  from  all sides  for the Fivefold  People.  Preserve  us evermore,  ye Gods,  with blessings .  
 
HYMN  LXXIII.  Asvins.  
1. WE have  o'erpassed  the limit  of this darkness  while,  worshipping  the Gods,  we sang their praises.   
The song  invoketh  both Immortal  Asvins  far−reaching,  born of old, great  WonderWorkers.   
2 And,  O Nasatyas,  man's  dear Priest  is seated,  who brings  to sacrifice and offers  worship,   
Be near and taste the pleasant  juice,  O Asvins:  with food,  I call you to the sacrifices.   
3 We choosing  you, have  let our worship  follow  its course:  ye Steers,  accept  this hymn  with favour.   
Obeying  you as your appointed  servant,  Vasistha  singing  hath with lauds  aroused  you.  
4 And these  Two Priests  come  nigh unto our people,  united,  demon−slayers,  mighty−handed.   
The juices  that exhilarate  are mingled.  Injure  us not, but come  with happy  fortune.   
5 Come  from  the west,  come  from  the cast, Nasatyas,  come,  Asvins,  from  below  and from  above  us.  Rig Veda – English Translation  
Bring  wealth  from  all sides  for the Fivefold  People.  Preserve  us evermore,  ye Gods,  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  I.XXIV.  Asvins.  
1. THESE  morning  sacrifices  call you, Asvins,  at the break  of day. For help have  I invoked  you rich in po
wer and might:  for, house  by house  ye visit all.  
2 O Heroes,  ye bestow  wonderful  nourishment.  send it to him whose  songs  are sweet   
Accordant,  both of you, drive  your car down  to us, and drink  the savoury  Soma  juice.   
3 Approach  ye and be near to us. drink,  O ye Asvins,  of the meath.   
Draw  forth  the milk,  ye Mighty,  rich in genuine  wealth:  injure  us not, and come  to us.  
4 The horses  that convey  you in their rapid  flight  down  to the worshipper's  abode,   
With  these  your speedy  coursers,  Heroes,  Asvins,  come,  ye Gods,  come  well−inclined  to us.  
5 Yea, verily,  our princes  seek the Asvins  in pursuit  of food.   
These  shall  give lasting  glory  to our liberal  lords,  and, both Nasatyas,  shelter  us.  
6 Those  who have  led the way,  like cars, offending  none,  those  who are guardians  of the men−   
Also  through  their own might  the heroes  have  grown  strong,  and dwell  in safe and happy  homes.   
 
HYMN  LXXV.  Dawn.  
1. BORN  in the heavens  the Dawn  hath flushed,  and showing  her majesty  is come  as Law ordaineth.   
She hath uncovered  fiends  and hateful  darkness;  best of Angirases,  hath waked  the pathways.   
2 Rouse  us this day to high and happy  fortune:  to great  felicity,  O Dawn,  promote  us.  
Vouchsafe  us manifold  and splendid  riches,  famed  among  mortals,  man−befriending  Goddess!   
3 See, lovely  Morning's  everlasting  splendours,  bright  with their varied  colours,  have approached  us.  
Filling  the region  of mid−air,  producing  the rites of holy worship,  they have  mounted.   
4 She yokes  her chariot  far away, and swiftly  visits  the lands  where  the Five Tribes  are settled,   
Looking  upon  the works  and ways  of mortals,  Daughter  of Heaven,  the world's  Imperial  Lady.   
5 She who is rich in spoil,  the Spouse  of Surya,  wondrously  opulent,  rules  all wealth  and treasu res.  
Consumer  of our youth,  the seers  extol  her: lauded  by priests  rich Dawn  shines  out refulgent.   
6 Apparent  are the steeds  of varied  colour,  the red steeds  carrying  resplendent  Morning.   
On her all−lovely  car she comes,  the Fair One,  and brings  rich treasure  for her faithful  servant.   
7 True  with the True  and Mighty  with the Mighty,  with Gods  a Goddess,  Holy  with the Holy,   
She brake  strong  fences  down  and gave the cattle:  the kine were  lowing  as they greeted  Morning.   
8 O Dawn,  now give us wealth  in kine and heroes,  and horses,  fraught  with manifold  enjoyment.   
Protect  our sacred  grass  from  man's  reproaches.  Preserve  us evermore,  ye Gods,  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  LXXVI.  Dawn.  
1. SAV ITAR  God of all men hath sent upward  his light,  designed  for all mankind,  immortal.  Through  the 
Gods'  power  that Eye was first created.  Dawn  hath made  all the universe  apparent.  2 I see the paths  which
 Gods  are wont  to travel,  innocuous  paths  made  ready  by the Vasus.  Eastward  the flag of Dawn  hath been  
uplifted;  she hath come  hither  o'er the tops of houses.  3 Great  is, in truth,  the number  of the Mornings  whi
ch were  aforetime  at the Sun's  uprising.  Since  thou,  O Dawn,  hast been  beheld  repairing  as to thy love, as 
one no more  to leave  him. 4 They  were  the Gods'  companions  at the banquet,  the ancient  sages  true to La
w Eternal.  The Fathers  found  the light that lay in darkness,  and with effectual  words  begat  the Morning.  5 
Meeting  together  in the same  enclosure,  they strive  not, ofone  mind,  one with another.  They  never  break  tRig Veda – English Translation  
he Gods'  eternal  statutes,  and injure  none,  in rivalry  with Vasus.  6 Extolling  thee,  Blest  Goddess,  the Vasi
sthas,  awake  at early  mom,  with lauds  implore  thee.  Leader  of kine and Queen  of all that strengthens,  shin
e, come  as first to us, O high−born  Morning.   
7 She bringeth  bounty  and sweet  charm  of voices.  The flushing  Dawn  is sung  by the Vasist
has, Giving  us riches  famed  to distant  places.  Preserve  us evermore,  ye Gods,  with blessing
s. 
 
HYMN LXXVIT.  Dawn.  
1. SHE  hath shone  brightly  like a youthful  woman,  stirring  to motion  every  living  creature.   
Agni  hath come  to feed on mortal?  fuel. She hath made  light and chased  away  the darkness.   
2 Turned  to this All, far−spreading,  she hath risen  and shone  in brightness  with white  robes  about  her.  
She hath beamed  forth  lovely  with golden  colours,  Mother  of kine,  Guide  of the days she bringeth.   
3 Bearing  the Gods'  own Eye, auspicious  Lady,  leading  her Courser  white  and fair to look on,  
Distinguishe d by her bean−is  Dawn  shines  apparent,  come  forth  to all the world  with wondrous  treasure.   
4 Draw  nigh with wealth  and dawn  away  the foeman:  prepare  for us wide  pasture  free from  danger.   
Drive  away  those  who hate us, bring  us riches:  pour bounty,  opulent  Lady,  on the singer.   
5 Send  thy most  excellent  beams  to shine  and light us, giving  us lengthened  days,  O Dawn,  O Goddess,   
Granting  us food,  thou who hast all things  precious,  and bounty  rich in chariots,  kine,  and horses.   
6 O Usas,  nobly−born,  Daughter  of Heaven,  whom  the Vasisthas  with their hymns  make  mighty,   
Bestow  thou on us vast and glorious  riches.  Preserve  us evermore,  ye Gods,  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  LXXVIII.  Dawn.  
1. WE have  beheld  her earliest  lights  approaching:  her many  glories  part, on high, asunder.   
On car sublime,  refulgent,  wending  hither,  O Usas,  bring  the Wealth  that makes  us happy.   
2 The fire well−kindIed  sings  aloud  to greet  her, and with their hymns  the priests  are chaming  welcome.   
Usas  approaches  in her splendour,  driving  all evil darkness  far away,  the Goddess.   
3 Apparent  eastward  are those  lights  of Morning,  sending  out lustre,  as they rise, around  them.   
She hath brought  forth  Sun, sacrifice,  and Agni,  and far away  hath fled detested  darkness.   
4 Rich  Daughter  of the Sky, we all behold  her, yea, all men look on Dawn  as she is breaking.   
fler car that moves  self−harnessed  hath she mounted,  the car drawn  onward  by her well−yoked  horses.   
5 Inspired  with loving  thoughts  this day to greet  thee,  we and our wealthy  nobles  have  awak ened.   
Show  yourselves  fruitful,  Dawns,  as ye are rising.  Preserve  us evermore,  ye Gods,  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  LXXIX.  Dawn.  
1. ROUSING  the lands  where  men's  Five Tribes  are settled,  Dawn  hath disclosed  the pathways  of the peo
ple.  
She hath sent out her sheen  with beauteous  oxen.  The Sun with light hath opened  earth  and heaven.   
2 They  paint  their bright  rays on the sky's  far limits.  the Dawns  come  on like tribes  arrayed  for battle.   
Thy cattle,  closely  shutting  up the darkness,  as Savitar  spreads  his arms, give forth  their lustre.   
3 Wealthy,  most  like to Indra,  Dawn  hath risen,  and brought  forth  lauds  that shall  promote  our welfare.   
Daughter  of Heaven,  a Goddess,  she distributes,  best of Angirases,  treasures  to the pious.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
4 Bestow  on us, O Dawn,  that ample  bounty  which  thou didst  send to those  who sang thy praises;   
Thou  whom  with bellowings  of a bull they quickened:  thou didst  unbar  the firm−set  mountain's  portals.   
5 Impelling  every  God to grant  his bounty  sending  to us the charm  of pleasant  voices,   
Vouchsafe  us thoughts,  for profit,  as thou breakest.  Preserve  us evermore,  ye Gods,  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  LXXX.  Dawn.  
1 THE  priests,  Vasisthas,  are the first awakened  to welcome  Usas  with their songs  and praises,   
Who  makes  surrounding  regions  part asunder,and  shows  apparent  all existing  creatures.   
2 Giving  fresh  life when  she hath hid the darkness,  this Dawn  hath wakened  there  with new−born  lustre.   
Youthful  and unrestrained  she cometh  forward:  she hath turned  thoughts  to Sun and fire and worship.   
3 May blessed  Mornings  shine  on us for ever,  with wealth  of kine,  of horses,  and of heroes,   
Streaming  with all abundance,  pouring  fatness.  Preserve  us evermore,  ye Gods,  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  LXXXI.  Dawn.  
1. ADVANCING,  sending  forth  her rays,  the Daughter  of the Sky is seen.  Uncovering,  that we may see, t
he mighty  gloom,  the friendly  Lady  makes  the light.   
2 The Sun ascending,  the refulgent  Star, pours  down  his beams  together  with the Dawn.   
O Dawn,  at thine  arising,  and the Sun's,  may we attain  the share  allotted  us.  
3 Promptly  we woke  to welcome  thee,  O Usas,  Daughter  of the Sky,  
Thee,  Bounteous  One,  who bringest  all we long to have,  and to the offerer  health  and wealth.   
4 Thou,  dawning,  workest  fain to light the great  world,  yea, heaven,  Goddess!  that it may be seen.   
We yearn  to be thine  own,  Dealer  of Wealth:  may we be to this Mother  like her sons.   
5 Bring  us that wondrous  bounty,  Dawn,  that shall  be famed  most  far away.   
What,  Child  of Heaven,  thou hast of nourishment  for man,  bestow  thou on us to enjoy.   
6 Give  to our princes  opulence  and immortal  fame,  and strength  in herds  of kine to us.  
May she who prompts  the wealthy,  Lady  of sweet  strains,  may Usas  dawn  our foes away.   
 
HYMN  LXXXIT.  Indra−Varuna  
1. GRANT  us your strong  protection,  IndraVaru na, our people,  and our family,  for sacrifice.   
May we subdue  in fight  our evil−hearted  foes,  him who attacks  the man steadfast  in lengthened  rites.   
2 O Indra−Varuna,  mighty  and very rich One of you is called  Monarch  and One Autocrat.   
All Gods  in the most lofty  region  of the air have,  O ye Steers,  combined  all power  and might  in you.  
3 Ye with your strength  have pierced  the fountains  of the floods:  the Sun have  ye brought  forward  as the 
Lord  
in heaven.   
Cheered  by this magic  draught  ye, Indra−Varuna,  made the dry places  stream,  made  songs  of praise  flow 
forth.   
4 In battels  and in frays  we ministering  priests,  kneeling  upon  our knees  for furtherance  of our weal,   
Invoke  you, only you, the Lords  of twofold  wealth,  you prompt  to hear,  we bards,  O Indra−Varu na.  
5 O Indra−Varuna,  as ye created  all these  creatures  of the world  by your surpassing  might,   
In peace  and quiet  Mitra  waits  on Varuna,  the Other,  awful,  with the Maruis  seeks  renown.   
6 That Varuna's  high worth  may shine  preeminent,  these  Twain  have  measured  each his proper  power  and 
might.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
The One subdueth  the destructive  enemy;  the Other  with a few furthereth  many  a man.   
7 No trouble,  no misfortune,  Indra−Varuna,  no woe from  any side assails  the mortal  man  
Whose  sacrifice,  O Gods,  ye visit and enjoy: ne'er  doth the crafty  guile  of mortal  injure  him.  
8 With  your divine  protection,  Heroes,  come  to us: mine  invncation  hear,  if ye be pleased  therewith.   
Bestow  ye upon  us, O Indra−Varuna,  your friendship  and your kinship  and your favouring  grace.   
9 In battle  after battle,  Indra−Varuna,  be ye our Champions,  ye who are the peoples'  strength,   
When  both opposing  bands  invoke  you for the fight,  and men that they may gain offspring  and progeny.   
10 May Indra,  Varuna,  Mitra,  and Aryaman  vouchsafe  us glory  and great  shelter  spreading  far.  
 
We think  of the beneficent  light of Aditi,  and Savitar's  song  of praise,  the God who strengthens  Law.  
 
HYMN  LXXXIII.  Indra−Varuna.  
1. LOOKING  to you and your alliance,  O ye Men,  armed  with broad  axes they went  forward,  fain for spoi
l.  
Ye smote  and slew his Dasa  and his Aryan  enemies,  and helped  Sudas  with favour,  Indra−Varuna.   
2 Where  heroes  come  together  with their banners  raised,  in the encounter  where  is naught  for us to love,   
Where  all things  that behold  the light are terrified,  there  did ye comfort  us, O Indra−Varuna.   
3 The boundaries  of earth  were  seen all dark with dust:  O Indra−Varuna,  the shout  went  up to heaven.   
The enmities  of the people  compassed  me about.  Ye heard  my calling  and ye came  to me with help.   
4 With  your resistless  weapons,  Indra−Varuna,  ye conquered  Bheda  and ye gave Sudas  your aid.  
Ye heard  the prayers  of these  amid  the cries  of war: effectual  was the service  of the Trtsus'  priest.   
5 O Indra−Varuna,  the wickedness  of foes and mine  assailants'  hatred  sorely  trouble  me.  
Ye Twain  are Lords  of riches  both of earth  and heaven:  so grant  to us your aid on the decisive  day.  
6 The men of both the hosts  invoked  you in the fight,  Indra  and Varuna,  that they might  win the wealth,   
What  time ye helped  Sudas, with all the Trtsu  folk, when  the Ten Kings  had pressed  him down  in their att
ack.  
7 Ten Kings  who worshipped  not, O Indra−Varuna,  confederate,  in war prevailed  not o'er Sudas.   
True  was the boast  of heroes  sitting  at the feast:  so at their invocation s Gods  were  on their side.  
8 O Indra−Varuna,  ye gave Sudas  your aid when  the Ten Kings  in battle  compassed  him about,   
There  where  the white−robed  Trtsus  with their braided  hair, skilled  in song worshipped  you with homage  
and 
with hymn.   
9 One of you Twai n destroys  the Vrtras  in the fight,  the Other  evermore  maintains  his holy Laws.   
We call on you, ye Mighty,  with our hymns  of praise.  Vouchsafe  us your protection,  Indra−Varuna.   
10 May Indra,  Varuna,  Mitra,  and Aryaman  vouchsafe  us glory  and great  shelter  spreading  far.  
We think  of the beneficent  light of Aditi,  and Savitar's  song  of praise,  the God who strengthens  Law.   
 
HYMN  LXXXIV.  Indra−Varuna.  
1. KINGS,  Indra−Varuna,  I would  turn you hither  to this our sacrifice  with gifts and homage.   
Held  in both arms  the ladle,  dropping  fatness,  goes of itself  to you whose  forms  are varied.   
2 Dyaus  quickens  and promotes  your high dominion  who bind with bonds  not wrought  of rope or cordage
.  
Far from  us still be Varuna's  displeasure  may Indra  give us spacious  room to dwell  in.  Rig Veda – English Translation  
3 Make  ye our sacrifice  fair amid  the assemblies:  make  ye our prayers  approved  among  our princes.   
May God−sent  riches  come  for our possession:  further  ye us with your delightful  succours.   
4 O Indra−Varuna,  vouchsafe  us riches  with store  of treasure,  food,  and every  blessing;   
For the Aditya,  banisher  of falsehood,  the Hero,  dealeth  wealth  in boundless  plenty.   
5 May this my song  reach  Varuna  and Indra,  and, strongly  urging,  win me sons and offspring.   
To the Gods'  banquet  may we go with riches.  Preserve  us evermore,  ye Gods,  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  LXXXV.  Indra−Varuna.  
1. FOR  you I deck  a harmless  hymn,  presenting  the Soma  juice  to Varuna  and Indra−   
A hymn  that shines  like heavenly  Dawn  with fatness.  May they be near us on the march  and guard  us.  
2 Here  where  the arrows  fall amid  the banners  both hosts  invoke  the Gods  in emulation.   
O Indra−Varuna,  smite  back those−our  foemen,yea,  smite  them  withyour  shaft  to every  quarter.   
3 Self−lucid  in their seats,  e'en heavenly  Waters  endowed  with Godhead  Varuna  and Indra.   
One of these  holds  the folk distinct  and sundered,  the Other  smites  and slays  resistless  foemen.   
 
4 Wise  be the priest  and skilled  in Law Eternal,  who with his sacred  gifts and oration.  Brings
 you to aid us with your might,  Adityas:  let him have  viands  to promote  his welfare.  5 May t
his my song  reach  Varuna  and Indra,  and, strongly  urging,  win me sons and offspring.  To the
 Gods'  banquet  may we go with riches.  Preserve  us evermore,  ye Gods  with blessings.  
 
HYMN  LXXXVI.  Varuna.  
1. WISE,  verily,  are creatures  through  his greatness  who stayed  ever,  spacious  heaven  and earth  asunder;   
Who  urged  the high and mighty  sky to motion,  the Star of old, and spread  the earth  before  him.  
2 With  mine  own heart  I commune  on the question  how Varuna  and I may be united.   
What  gift of mine  will he accep t unangered?  When  may I calmly  look and find him gracious?   
3 Fain to know  this in in I question  others:  I seek the wise,  O Varuna,  and ask them.   
This one same  answer  even the sages  gave me, "Surely  this Varuna  is angry  with thee."   
4 What,  Varuna,  hath been my chief  transgression,  ihat thou wouldst  slay the friend  who sings  thy praises
?  
Tell me, Unconquerable  Lord,  and quickly  sinless  will I approach  thee with mine  homage.   
5 Free us from  sins committed  by our fathers,  from  those  wherein  we have  ourselve s offended.   
O King,  loose,  like a thief who feeds  the cattle,  as from  the cord a calf, set free Vasistha.   
6 Not our own will betrayed  us, but seduction,  thoughtlessness,  Varuna  wine,  dice,  or anger.   
The old is near to lead astray  the younger:  even  sleep  removeth  not all evil−doing.   
7 Slavelike  may I do service  to the Bounteous,  serve,  free from  sin, the God inclined  to anger.   
This gentle  Lord  gives  wisdom  to the simple:  the wiser  God leads  on the wise to riches.   
8 O Lord,  O Varuna,  may this laudation  come  close  to thed and lie within  thy spirit.   
May it be well with us in rest and labour.  Preserve  us ever−more,  ye Gods,  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  LXXXVII.  Varuna.  
1. VARUNA  cut a pathway  out for Surya,  and led the watery  floods  of rivers  onward.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
The Mare s, as in a race,  speed  on in order.  He made  great  channels  for the days to follow.   
2 The wind,  thy breath,  hath sounded  through  the region  like a wild beast  that seeks  his food in pastures.   
Within  these  two, exalted  Earth  and Heaven,  O Varuna,  are all the forms  thou lovest.   
3 Varuna's  spies,  sent forth  upon  their errand,  survey  the two world−halves  well formed  and fashioned.   
Wise  are they,  holy,  skilled  in sacrifices,  the furtherers  of the praise−songs  of the prudent.   
4 To me who understand  hath Varuna  spoken,  the names  borne  by the Cow  are three times  seven.   
The sapient  God,  knowing  the place's  secret,  shall  speak  as 'twere  to teach  the race that cometh.   
5 On him three  heavens  rest and are supported,  and the three  earths  are there  in sixfold  order.   
The wise King  Varuna  hath made  in heaven  that Golden  Swing  to cover  it with glory.   
6 Like Varuna  from  heaven  he sinks  in Sindhu,  like a white−shining  spark,  a strong  wild creature.   
Ruling  in depths  and meting  out the region,  great  saving  power  hath he, this world's  Controller.   
7 Before  this Varun a may we be sinless  him who shows  mercy  even  to the sinner−   
While  we are keeping  Aditi's  ordinances.  Preserve  us evermore,  ye Gods,  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  LXXXVIII.  Varuna.  
1. PRESENT  to Varuna  thine  hymn,  Vasistha,  bright,  most  delightful  to the Bounte ous Giver,   
Who  bringeth  on to us the Bull,  the lofty,  the Holy,  laden  with a thousand  treasures.   
2 And now,  as I am come  before  his presence,  I take the face of Varuna  for Agni's.   
So might  he bring−Lord  also of the darkness−the  light in heaven  that I may see its beauty!   
 
3 When  Varuna  and I embark  together  and urge our boat into the midst  of ocean,   
We, when  we ride o'er ridges  of the waters,  will swing  within  that swing  and there  be happy.   
4 Varuna  placed  Vasistha  in the vessel,  and deftly  with his niight made  him a Rsi.  
When  days shone  bright  the Sage  made  him a singer,  while  the heavens  broadened  and the Dawns  were  
lengthened.   
5 What  hath become  of those  our ancient  friendships,  when  without  enmity  we walked  together?   
I, Varuna,  thou glorious  Lord , have  entered  thy lofty  home,  thine  house  with thousand  portals.   
6 If he, thy true ally, hath sinned  against  thee,  still, Varuna,  he is the friend  thou lovedst.   
Let us not, Living  One,  as sinners  I know  thee:  give shelter,  as a Sage,  to him who lauds  thee.  
7 While  we abide  in these  fixed  habitations,  and from  the lap of Aditi  win favour,   
May Varuna  untie  the bond  that binds  us. Preserve  us evermore,  ye Gods,  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  LXXXIX  Varuna.  
1. LET me not yet, King  Varuna,  enter  into the house  of clay:  Have  mercy,  spare  me, Mighty  Lord.   
2 When,  Thunderer!  I move  along  tremulous  like a wind−blown  skin,   
Have  mercy,  spare  me, Mighty  Lord.   
3 O Bright  and Powerful  God,  through  want  of strength  I erred  and went  astray   
Have  mercy,  spare  me, Mighty  Lord.  
4 Thirst  found  thy worshipper  though  he stood  in the midst  of water−fijods:   
Have  mercy,  spare  me, Mighty  Lord.   
5 O Varuna,  whatever  the offence  may be which  we as men commit  against  the heavenly  host,   
When  through  our want  of thought  we violate  thy laws,  punish  us not, O God,  for that iniquity.   
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  XC. Vayu.  
1. To you pure juice,  rich in meath,  are offered  by priest:  through  longing  for the Pair of Heroes.   
Drive,  Vayu,  bring  thine  harnessed  horses  hither:  drink  the pressed  Soma  till it make  thee joyful.   
2 Whoso  to thee,  the Mighty,  brings  oblation,  pure Soma  unto thee,  pure−drinking  Vayu,   
That man thou makest  famous  among  mortals:  to him strong  sons are born in quick  succession.   
3 The God whom  both these  worlds  brought  forth  for riches,  whom  heavenly  Dhisana  for our wealth  
appointeth,   
His team  of harnessed  horses  waits  on Vayu,  and, foremost,  on the radiant  Treasure−bearer.   
4 The spotless  Dawns  with fair bright  days have  broken;  they found  the spacious  light when  they were  
shining.   
Eagerly  they disclosed  the stall of cattle:  floods  streamed  for them  as in the days aforetime.   
5 These  with their truthful  spirit,  shining  brightly,  move  on provided  with their natural  insight.   
Viands  attend  the car that beareth  Heroes,  your car, ye Sovran  Pair, Indra  and Vayu.   
6 May these  who give us heavenly  light,  these  rulers,  with gifts of kine and horses,  gold and treasures.   
These  princes,  through  full life, Indra  and Vayu!  o'ercome  in battle  with their steeds  and heroes.   
7 Like coursers  seeking  fame  will we Vasisthas,  O Indra−Vayu,  with our fair laudations.   
Exerting  all our power  call you to aid us. Preserve  us evermore,  ye Gods,  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  XCI. Vayu.  
1. WERE  not in sooth,  the Gods  aforetime  blameless,  whose  pleasure  was increased  by adoration?   
For Vayu  and for man in his affliction  they caused  the Morning  to arise  with Surya.   
2 Guardians  infallible,  eager  as envoys'  preserve  us safe through  many  months  and autumns.   
Addressed  to you, our fair praise,  Indra−Vayu,  implores  your favour  and renewed  well−being.   
3 Wise,  bright,  arranger  of his teams,  he. seeketh  men with rich food whose  treasures  are abundant.   
They  have  arranged  them  of one mind  with Vayu:  the men have  wrought  all noble  operations.   
4 So far as native  power  and strength  perm it you, so far as men behold  whose  eyes have  vision,   
O ye pure−drinkers,  drink  with us pure Soma:  sit on this sacred  grass,  Indra  and Vayu.   
5 Driving  down  teams  that bear the lovely  Heroes,  hitherward,  Indra−Vayu,  come  together.   
To you this prime  of savoury juice  is offered:  here loose  your horses  and be friendly−minded.   
6 Your  hundred  and your thousand  teams,  O Indra  and Vayu,  all−munificent,  which  attend  you,  
With  these  most  gracious−minded  come  ye hither,  and drink,  O Heroes  of the meath  we offer.   
7 Like coursers  seeking  fame  will we Vasisthas,  O Indra−Vayu,  with our fair laudations,   
Exerting  all our powe−,,  call you to aid us. Preserve  us evermore,  ye Gods,  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  XCII.  Vayu  
1. O VAYU,  drinker  of the pure,  be near us: a thousand  teams  are thine,  Allbounteous  Giver.  To thee the r
apture−bringing  juice  is offered,  whose  first draught,  God,  thou takest  as thy portion.  2 Prompt  at the holy
 rites forth  came  the presser  with Soma−draughts  for Indra  and for Vayu,  When  ministering  priests  with st
rong devotion  bring  to you Twain  the first taste of the Soma.  3 The teams  wherewith  thou seekest  him wh
o offers,  within  his home,  O Viyu,  to direct  him, Therewith  send wealth:  to us with full enjoyment,  a hero 
son and gifts of kine and horses.  4 Near to the Gods  and making  Indra  joyful,  devout  and ofFering  preciou
s gifts to Vayu,  Allied  with princes,  smiting  down  the hostile,  may we with heroes  conquer  foes in battle.  
5 With  thy yoked  teams  in hundreds  and in thousands  come  to our sacrifice  and solem n worship.  Come,  
Vayu,  make  thee glad at this libation.  Preserve  us evermore,  ye Gods,  with blessings.  Rig Veda – English Translation  
 
HYMN  XCIII.  Indra−Agni.  
1. SLAYERS  of enemies,  Indra  and Agni,  accept  this day our new−born  pure laudation.   
Again,  again  I call you prompt  to listen,  best to give quickly  strength  to him who craves  it.  
2 For ye were  strong  to gain,  exceeding  mighty,  growing  together,  waxing  in your vigour.   
Lords  of the pasture  filled  with ample  riches,  bestow  upon  us strength  both fresh  and lasting.   
3 Yea when  the strong  have  entered  our assembly,  and singers  seeking  with their hymns  your favour,   
They  are like steeds  who come  into the race−course,  those  men who call aloud  on Indra−Agni.   
4 The singer,  seeking  with his hymns  your favour,  begs splendid  riches  of their first possessor.   
Further  us with new bounties,  Indra−Agni,  armed  with strong  thunder,  slayers  of the foeman.   
5 When  two great  hosts,  arrayed  against  each other,  meet  clothed  with brightness,  in the fierce  encounter   
Stand  ye beside  the godly,  smite  the godless;  and still assist  the men who press  the Soma.   
6 To this our Soma−pressing,  Indra−Agni,  come  ye prepared  to show  your loving−kindness,   
For not at any time have  ye despised  us. So may I draw  you with all strengthenings  hither.   
7 So Agni,  kindled  mid this adoration,  invite  thou Mitra,  Varuna,  and Indra.   
Forgive  whatever  sin we have committed  may Aryaman  and Aditi  remove  it.  
8 While  we accelerate  these  our sacrifices,  may we win strength  from  both of you, O Agni:   
Ne'er  may the Maruts,  Indra,  Visnu  slight  us. Preserve  us evermore,  ye Gods,  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  XCIV.  Indra−Agni.  
1. As rain from  out the cloud,  for you, Indra  and Agni,  from  my soul This noblest  praise  hath been  produc
ed.  
2 Do ye, O Indra−Agni,  hear the singer's  call: accept  his songs.   
Ye Rulers,  grant  his heart's  desire.   
3 Give  us not up to poverty,  ye Heroes,  Indra−Agni,  nor  
To slander  and reproach  of men.   
4 To Indra  and to Agni  we bring  reverence,  high and holy hymn,   
And,  craving  help,  softwords  with prayer.   
5 For all these  holy singers  here implore  these  Twain  to succour  them,   
And priests  that they may win them  strength.   
6 Eager  to laudyou,  we with songs  invoke  you, bearing  sacred  food,   
Fain for success  in sacrifice.   
7 Indra  and Agni,  come  to us with favour,  ye who conquer  men:   
Let not the wicked  master  us.  
8 At no time let the injurious  blow  of hostile  mortal  fall on us:  
O Indra−Agni,  shelter  us.  
9 Whatever  wealth  we crave  of you, in gold,  in cattle,  or in steeds,   
That,  Indra−Agni,  let us gain;   
10 When  heroes  prompt  in worship  call Indra  and Agni,  Lords  of steeds,   
Beside  the Soma  juice  effused.   
11 Call hither  with the song and lauds  those  who best slay the foemen,  those   
Who  take delight  in hymns  of praise.   
12 Slay ye the wicked  man whose  thought  is evil of the demon  kind.   
Slay him who stays  the waters,  slay the Serpent  with your deadly  dart.  
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  XCV.  Sarasvat i.  
1. THIS  stream  Sarasvati  with fostering  current  comes  forth,  our sure defence,  our fort of iron.  
As on a car, the flood  flows  on, surpassing  in majesty  and might  all other  waters.   
2 Pure in her course  from  mountains  to the ocean,  alone  of streams  Sarasvati  hath listened.   
Thinking  of wealth  and the great  world  of creatures,  she poured  for Nahusa  her milk and fatness.   
3 Friendly  to man he grew  among  the women,  a strong  young  Steer  amid  the Holy  Ladies.   
He gives  the fleet steed  to our wealthy  princes,  and decks  their bodies  for success  in battle.   
4 May this Sarasvati  be pleased  and listen  at this our sacrifice,  auspicious  Lady,   
When  we with reverence,  on our knees,  implore  her close−knit  to wealth,  most  kind to those  she loveth.   
5 These  offerings  have ye made  with adoration:  say this, Sarasvati,  and accept  our praises;   
And,  placing  us under  thy dear protection,  may we approach  thee,  as a tree, for shelter.   
6 For thee,  O Blest  Sarasvati,  Vasistha  hath here unbarred  the doors  d sacred  Order.   
Wax,  Bright One,  and give strength  to him who lauds  thee.  Preserve  us evermore,  ye Gods,  with blessings
.  
 
HYMN  XCVI.  Sarasvati.  
1. I SING  a lofty  song,  for she is mightiest,  most  divine  of Streams.   
Sarasvati  will I exalt  with hymns  and lauds,  and, O Vasistha,  Heaven  and Earth.   
 
2 When  in the fulness  of their strength  the Purus  dwell,  Beauteous  One,  on thy two grassy  banks,   
Favour  us thou who hast the Maruts  for thy friends:  stir up the bounty  of our chiefs.   
3 So may Sarasvati  auspicious  send good  luck;  she, rich in spoil,  is never  niggardly  in thought,   
When  praised  in jamadagni's  way and lauded  as Vasistha  lauds.   
4 We call upon  Sarasvan,  as unmarried  men who long for wives,   
As liberal  men who yearn  for sons.   
5 Be thou our kind protector,  O Sarasvan,  with those  waves  of thine   
Laden  with sweets  and dropping  oil.  
6 May we enjoy  Sarasvan's  breast,  all−beautiful,  that swells  with streams,   
May we gain food and progeny.   
 
HYMN  XCVIL  Brhaspati.  
1. WHERE  Heaven  and Earth  combine  in men's  assembly,  and ttose  who love the Gods  delight  in worshi
p,  
Where  the libations  are effused  for Indra,  may he come  first to drink  and make  him stronger.   
2 We crave  the heavenly  grace  of Gods  to guard  us−so  may Brhaspati,  O friends,  exalt  us−  
That he, the Bounteous  God,  may find us sintess,  who giveth  from  a distance  like a father.   
3 That Brahmanaspati,  most  High  and Gracious,  I glorify  with offerings  and with homage.   
May the great  song of praise  divine,  reach  Indra  who is the King  of prayer  the Gods'  creation.   
4 May that Brhaspati  who brings  all blessings,  most  dearly  loved,  be seated  by our altar.   
Heroes  and wealth  we crave;  may he bestow  them,  and bear us safe beyond  the men who vex us.  
5 To us these  Deathless  Ones,  erst born,  have  granted  this laud of ours which  gives  the Immortal  pleasure.
  
Let us invoke  Brhaspati,  the foeless,  the clear−voiced  God,  the Holy  One of households   
6 Him,  this Brhaspati,  his red−hued  horses,  drawing  together,  full of strength,  bring  hither.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Robed  in red colour  like the cloud,  they carry  the Lord  of Might  whose  friendship  gives  a dwelling.   
7 For he is pure,  with hundred  wings,  refulgent,  with sword  of gold,  impetuous,  winning  sunlight.   
Sublime  Brhaspati,  easy of access  granteth  his friends  most  bountiful  refreshment.   
8 Both  Heaven  and Earth, divine,  the Deity's  Parents,  have made  Brhaspati  increase  in grandeur.   
Glorify  him, O friends,  who merits  glory:  may he give prayer  fair way and easy passage.   
9 This,  Brahmanaspati,  is your laudation  prayer  hath been  made  to thunderwielding  Indra.   
Favour our songs,  wake  up our thought  and spirit:  destroy  the godless  and our foemen's  malice.   
10 Ye Twain  are Lords  of wealth  in earth  and heaven,  thou,  O Brhaspati,  and thou,  O Indra.   
Mean  though  he be, give wealth  to him who lauds  you. Preserve  us everm ore, ye Gods,  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  XCVIII.  Indra.  
1. PRIESTS,  offer  to the Lord  of all the people  the milked−out  stalk of Soma,  radiant−coloured.   
No wild−bull  knows  his drinking−place  like Indra  who ever seeks  him who hath pressed  the Soma,   
2 Thou  dost desire  to drink,  each day that passes,  the pleasant  food which  thou hast had aforetime,   
O Indra,  gratified  in heart  and spirit,  drink  eagerly  the Soma  set before  thee.   
3 Thou,  newly−born,  for strength  didst  drink  the Soma;  the Mother  told thee of thy future  greatness.   
O Indra,  thou hast filled  mid−air's  wide  region,  and given  the Gods  by battle  room  and freedom.   
4 When  thou hast urged  the arrocrant  to combat,  proud  in their strength  of arm, we will subdue  them.   
Or, Indra,  when  thou fightest  girt by heroes,  we in the glorious  fray with thee will conquer .  
5 I will declare  the earliest  deeds  of Indra,  and recent  acts which  Maghavan  hath accomplished.   
When  he had conquered  godless  wiles  and magic,  Soma  became  his own entire  possession.   
6 Thine  is this world  of flocks  and herds  around  thee,  which  with the eye of Surya  thou beholdest.   
Thou,  Indra,  art alone  the Lord  of cattle;  may we enjoy  the treasure  which  thou givest.   
 
7 Ye Twain  are Lords  of wealth  in earth  and heaven,  thou,  O Brhaspati,  and thou,  O Indra.  Mean  though  h
e be, give wealth  to him who lauds you. Preserve  us evermore,  ye Gods,  with blessings.  
 
HYMN  XCIX.  Visnu.  
1. MEN  come  not nigh thy majesty  who growest  beyond  all bound  and measure  with thy body.   
Both  thy two regions  of the earth,  O Visnu,  we know:  thou God,  knowest  the highest  also.  
2 None  who is born or being  born,  God Visnu,  hath reached  the utmost  limit  of thy grandeur.   
The vast high vault  of heaven  hast thou supported,  and fixed  earth's  eastern  pinnacle  securely.   
3 Rich  in sweet  food be ye, and rich in milch−kine,  with fertile  pastures,  fain to do men service.   
Both  these  worlds,  Visnu,  hast thou stayed  asunder,  and firmly  fixed  the earth  with pegs around  it.  
4 Ye have  made  spacious  room  for sacrificing  by generating  Surya,  Dawn,  and Agni.   
O Heroes,  ye have  conquered  in your battles even  the bull−jawed  Dasa's  wiles  and magic.   
5 Ye have  destroyed,  thou,  Indra,  and thou Visnu,  Sambara's  nine−and−ninety  fenced  castles.   
Ye Twain  smote  down  a hundred  times  a thousand  resistless  heroes  of the royal  Varcin.   
6 This is the lofty  hymn  of praise,  exalting  the Lords  of Mighty  Stride,  the strong  and lofty.   
I laud you in the solemn  synods,  Visnu:  pour ye food on us in our camps,  O Indra.   
7 O Visnu,  unto thee my lips cry Vasat!  Let this mine  offering,  Sipivista,  please  thee.   
May these  my songs  of eulogy  exalt  thee.  Preserve  us evermore,  ye Gods,  with blessings.   
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  C. Visnu.  
1 NE'ER  doth the man repent,  who,  seeking  profit,  bringeth  his gift to the far−striding  Visnu.   
He who adoreth  him with all his spirit  winneth  himself  so great  a benefactor.   
2 Thou,  Visnu,  constant  in thy courses,  gavest  good−will  to all men,  and a hymn  that lasteth,   
That thou mightst  move  us to abundant  comfort  of very splendid  wealth  with store  of horses.   
3 Three  times  strode  forth  this God in all his grandeur  over this earth  bright  with a hundred  splendours.   
Foremost  be Visnu,  stronger  than the stron gest:  for glorious  is his name  who lives  for ever.   
4 Over  this earth  with mighty  step strode  Visnu,  ready  to give it for a home  to Manu.   
In him the humble  people  trust for safety:  he, nobly  born,  hath made  them  spacious  dwellings.   
5 To−day  I laud this name,  O gipivista,  I, skilled  in rules,  the name  of thee the Noble.   
Yea, I the poor and weak  praise  thee the Mighty  who dwellest  in the realm  beyond  this region.   
6 What  was there  to be blamed  in thee,  O Visnu,  when  thou declaredst,  I am Sipivista?   
Hide  not this form  from  us, nor keep  it secret,  since  thou didst  wear  another  shape  in battle.   
7 O Visnu,  unto thee my lips cry Vasat!  Let this mine  offering,  Sipivista,  please  thee.   
May these  my songs  of eulogy  exalt  thee.  Preserve  us evermore,  ye Gods,  with blessings.   
 
HYMN  CI. Parjanya.  
1 SPEAK  forth  three  words,  the words  which  light precedeth,  which  milk this udder  that produceth  nectar
.  
Quickly  made  manifest,  the Bull hath bellowed,  engendering  the germ  of plants,  the Infant.   
2 Giver  of growth  to plants, the God who ruleth  over the waters  and all moving  creatures,   
Vouchsafe  us triple  shelter  for our refuge,  and threefold  light to succour  and befriend  us.  
3 Now  he is sterile,  now begetteth  offspring,  even  as he willeth  doth he change  his figure.   
The Father's  genial  flow bedews  the Mother;  therewith  the Sire, therewith  the son is nourished.   
4 In him all living  creatures  have  their being,  and the three  heavens  with triplyflowing  waters.   
Three  reservoirs  that sprinkle  down  their treasure  shed their sweet streams  around  him with a murmur.   
 
5 May this my song  to Sovran  Lord  Parjanya  come  near unto his heart  and give him pleasure.  May we obt
ain the showers  that bring  enjoyment,  and God−protected  plants  with goodly  fruitage.  6 He is the Bull of 
all, and their impregner  lie holds  the life of all things  fixed  and moving.  May this rite save me till my hun
dredth  autumn.  Preserve  us evermore,  ye Gods,  with blessings.  
 
HYMN  CII Parjanya.  
1 SING  forth  and laud Parjanya,  son of Heaven,  who sends  the gift of rain  
May he provide  our pasturage.   
2 Parja nya is the God who forms  in kine,  in mares,  in plants  of earth,   
And womankind,  the germ  of life.  
3 Offer  and pour into his mouth  oblation  rich in savoury  juice:   
May he for ever give us food.   
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  CIII. Frogs.  
1. THEY  who lay quiet  for a year,  the Brahmans  who fulfil  their vows,  The Frogs  have  lifted  up their voic
e, the voice  Parjanya  hath inspired.   
2 What  time on these,  as on a dry skin lying  in the pool's  bed, the floods  of heaven  descended,   
The music  of the Frogs  comes  forth  in concert  like the cows lowing  with their calves  beside  them.   
3 When  at the coming  of the Rains  the water  has poured  upon  them  as they yearned  and thirsted,   
One seeks  another  as he talks and greets  him with cries of pleasure  as a son his father.   
4 Each  of these  twain  recei ves the other  kindly,  while  they are revelling  in the flow of waters,   
When  the Frog moistened  by the rain springs  forward,  and Green  and Spotty  both combine  their voices.   
5 When  one of these  repeats  the other's  language,  as he who learns  the lesson  of the teacher,   
Your  every  limb seems  to be growing  larger  as ye converse  with eloquence  on the waters.   
6 Onc is Cow−bellow  and Goat−bleat  the other,  one Frog is Green  and one of them  is Spotty.   
They  bear one common  name,  and yet they vary,  and, talking,  modulate  the voice  diversely.   
7 As Brahmans,  sitting  round  the brimful  vessel,  talk at the Soma−rite  of Atiratra,   
So, Frogs,  ye gather  round  the pool to honour  this day of all the year,  the first of Rain−time.   
8 These  Brahmans  with the Soma  juice,  performi ng their year−long  rite, have lifted  up their voices;   
And these  Adhvaryus,  sweating  with their kettles,  come  forth  and show  themselves,  and none  are hidden.   
9 They  keep  the twelve  month's  God−appointed  order,  and never  do the men neglect  the season.   
Soon as the Rain−time  in the year returneth,  these  who were  heated  kettles  gain their freedom.   
10 Cow−bellow  and Goat−bleat  have  granted  riches,  and Green  and Spotty  have  vouchsafed  us treasure.   
The Frogs  who give us cows  in hundreds  lengthen  our lives  in this most  fertilizing  season.   
 
HYMN  CIV. Indra−Soma.  
1. INDRA  and Soma,  burn,  destroy  the demon  foe, send downward,  O ye Bulls,  those  who add gloom  to 
gloom.   
Annihilate  the fools,  slay them  and burn them  up: chase  them  away  from  us, pierce  the voracious  ones.   
2 Indra  and Soma,  let sin round  the wicked  boil like as a caldron  set amid  the flames  of fire.  
Against  the foe of prayer,  devourer  of raw flesh,  the vile fiend  fierce  of eye, keep  ye perpetual  hate.   
3 Indra  and Soma,  plunge  the wicked  in the depth, yea, cast them  into darkness  that hath no support,   
So that not one of them  may ever thence  return:  so may your wrathful  might  prevail  and conquer  them.   
4 Indra  and Soma,  hurl your deadly  crushing  bolt down  on the wicked  fiend  from  heaven  and from  the ear
th.  
 
Yea, forge  out of the mountains  your celestial  dart wherewith  ye burn to death  the waxing  demon  race.   
5 Indra  and Soma,  cast ye downward  out of heaven  your deadly  darts  of stone  burning  with fiery  flame,   
Eternal,  scorching  darts;  plunge  the voracious  ones within  the depth,  and let them  sink without  a sound.   
6 Indra  and Soma,  let this hymn  control  you both,  even  as the girth  encompasses  two vigorous  steeds−   
The song  of praise  which  I with wisdom  offer  you: do ye, as Lords  of men,  animate  these  my prayers.   
7 In your impetuous  manner  think  ye both thereon:  destroy  these  evil beings,  slay the treacherous  fiends.   
Indra  and Soma,  let the wicked  have  no bliss who evermore  assails  us with malignity.   
8 Whoso  accuses  me with words  of falsehood  when  I pursue  my way with guileless  spirit,   
May he, the speaker  of untruth,  be, Indra,  like water  which  the hollowed  hand  compresses.   
9 Those  who destroy,  as is their wont,  the simple,  and with their evil natures  barm  the righteous,   
May Soma  give them  over to the serpent,  or to the lap of Nirrti  consign  them.   
10 The fiend,  O Agni,  who designs  to injure  the essence  of our food,  kine,  steeds,  or bodies,   
May he, the adversary,  thief,  and robber,  sink to destruction,  both himself  and offipring.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
11 May he be swept  away,  himself  and children:  may all the three  earths  press  him down  beneath  them.   
May his fair glory,  O ye Gods,  be blighted,  who in the day or night  would  fain destroy  us.  
12 The prudent  finds  it easy to distinguish  the true and false:  their words  oppo se each other.   
Of these  two that which  is the true and honest,  Soma  protects,  and brings  the false  to nothing.   
13 Never  doth Soma  aid and guide  the wicked  or him who falsely  claims  the Warrior's  title.  
He slays  the fiend  and him who speaks  untruly:  both lie entangled  in the noose  of Indra.   
14 As if I worshipped  deities  of falsehood,  or thought  vain thoughts  about  the Gods,  O Agni.   
Why  art thou angry  with us, Jatavedas?  Destruction  fall on those  who lie against  thee!   
15 So may I die this day if I have  harassed  any man's  life or if I be a demon.   
Yea, may he lose all his ten sons together  who with false  tongue  hath called  me Yatudhana.   
16 May Indra  slay him with a mi weapon,  and let the vilest  ofghty   
all creatures  perish,   
The fiend  who says that he is pure,  who calls me a demon  though  devoid  of demon  nature.   
17 She too who wanders  like an owl at night−time,  hiding  her body  in her guile  and malice,   
May she fall downward  into endless  caverns.  May press−stones  with loud ring destroy  the demons.   
18 Spread out, ye Maruts,  search  among  the people:  seize  ye and grind  the Raksasas  to pieces,   
Who  fly abroad,  transformed  to birds,  at night−time,  or sully  and pollute  our holy worship.   
19 Hurl down  from  heaven  thy bolt of stone,  O Indra:  sharpen  it, Maghavan,  made  keen  by Soma.   
Forward,  behind,  and from  above  and under,  smite  down  the demons  with thy rocky  weapon.   
20 They  fly, the demon  dogs,  and, bent on mischief,  fain would  they harm  indomitable  Indra.   
Sakra  makes  sharp  his weapon  for the wicked:  now,  let him cast his bolt at fiendish  wizards.   
21 Indra  hath ever been  the fiends'  destroyer  who spoil  oblations  of the Gods'  invokers:   
Yea, Sakra,  like an axe that spilts  the timber,  attacks  and smashes  them  like earthen  vessels.   
22 Destroy  the fiend  shaped  like an owl or owlet,  destroy  him in the form  of dog or cuckoo.   
Destroy  him shaped  as eagle  or as vulture  as with a stone,  O Indra,  crush  the demon.   
23 Let not the fiend  of witchcraft−workers  reach  us: may Dawn  drive  off the couples  of Kimidins.   
Earth  keep us safe from  earthly  woe and trouble:  from  grief  that comes  from  heaven  mid−air  preserve  us.  
24 Slay the male  demon,  Indra!  slay the female,  joying  and triumphing  in arts of magic.   
Let the fools'  gods  with bent necks  fall and perish,  and see no more  the Sun when  he arises.   
25 Look  each one hither,  look around  Indra  and Soma,  watch  ye well.   
Cast forth  your weapon  at the fiends  against  the sorcerers  hurt your bolt.  
 
RIG VEDA  − BOOK  THE EIGHTH
 
HYMN  I. Indra.  
1. GLORIFY  naught  besides,  O friends;  so shall no sorrow  trouble  you. Praise  only mighty  Indra  when  th
e juice  is shed,  and say your lauds  repeatedly:   
2 Even  him, eternal,  like a bull who rushes  down,  men's  Conqueror,  bounteous  like a cow;   
Him who is cause  of both,  of enmity  and peace,  to both sides most  munificent.   
3 Although  these  men in sundry  ways  invoke  thee to obtain  thine  aid,  
Be this our prayer,  addressed,  O Indra,  unto thee,  thine  exaltation  every  day.  
4 Those  skilled  in song,  O Maghavan  among  these  men o'ercome  with might  the foeman's  songs.   
Come  hither,  bring  us strength  in many  a varied  form  most  near that it may succour  us.  
5 O Caster  of the Stone,  I would  not sell thee for a mighty  price,   
Not for a thousand,  Thunderer!  nor ten thousand,  nor a hundred,  Lord  of countless  wealth!   Rig Veda – English Translation  
6 O Indra,  thou art more  to me than sire or niggard  brother  is.  
Thou  and my mother,  O Good  Lord,  appear  alike,  to give me wealth  abundantly.   
7 Where  art thou?  Whither  art thou gone?  For many  a place  attracts  thy mind.  
Haste,  Warrior,  Fort−destroyer,  Lord  of battle's  din, haste,  holy songs  have  sounded  forth.   
8 Sing out the psalm  to him who breaks  down  castles  for his faithful  friend,   
Verses  to bring  the Thunderer  to destroy  the forts and sit on Kanva's  sacred  grass.  
9 The Horses  which  are thine  in tens, in hundreds,  yea, in thousands  thine,   
Even  those  vigorous  Steeds,  fleet−footed  in the course,  with those  come  quickly  near to us.  
10 This day I call Sabardugiha  who animates  the holy song,   
Indra  the richly−yield ing Milch−cow  who provides  unfailing  food in ample  stream.   
11 When  Sura wounded  Etasa,  with Vata's  rolling  winged  car.  
Indra  bore Kutsa  Arjuneya  off, and mocked  Gandharva.  the unconquered  One.   
12 He without  ligature,  before  making  incision  in the neck,   
Closed  up the wound  again,  most  wealthy  Maghavan,  who maketh  whole  the injured  part.  
13 May we be never  cast aside,  and strangers,  as it were,  to thee.   
We, Thunder−wielding  Indra,  count  ourselves  as trees  rejected  and unfit  to bum.   
14 O Vrtra−slayer,  we were  thought  slow  and unready  for the fray.  
Yet once  in thy great  bounty  may we have  delight,  O Hero,  after praising  thee.   
15 If he will listen  to my laud,  then may out Soma−drops  that flow  
Rapidly  through  the strainer  gladden  Indra,  drops  due to the Tugryas'  Strengthener.   
16 Come  now unto the common  laud of thee and of thy faithful  friend.   
So may our wealthy  nobles'  praise  give joy to thee.  Fain would  I sing thine  eulogy.   
17 Press  out the Soma  with the stones,  and in the waters  wash  it clean.   
The men investing  it with raiment  made  of milk shall  milk it forth  from  out the stems.   
18 Whether  thou come  from  earth  or from  the lustre  of the lofty  heaven,   
Wax  stronger  in thy body  through  my song  of praise:  fill full all creatures,  O most  Wise.   
19 For India press  the Soma  out, most  gladdening  and most  excellent.   
May Sakra  make  it swell  sent forth  with every  prayer  and asking,  as it were,  for strength.   
20 Let me not, still beseeching  thee with earnest  song at Soma  rites,   
Anger  thee like soma  wild beast . Who  would  not beseech  him who hath power  to grant  his prayer?   
21 The draught  made  swift  with rapturous  joy, effectual  with its mighty  strength,   
All−conquering,  distilling  transport,  let him drink:  for he in ecstasy  gives  us gifts.   
22 Where  bliss is not, may he, All−praised,  God whom  the pious  glorify,   
Bestow  great  wealth  upon  the mortal  worshipper  who sheds  the juice  and praises  him.  
23 Come,  Indra,  and rejoice  thyself,  O God,  in manifold  affluence.   
Thou  fillest  like a lake thy vast capacious  bulk with Soma  and with draughts  besides.   
24 A thousand  and a hundred  Steeds  are harnessed  to thy golden  car.  
So may the long−mancd  Bays,  yoked  by devotion,  bring  Indra  to drink  the Soma  juice.   
 
25 Yoked  to thy chariot  wrought  of gold,  may thy two Bays  with peacock  tails,   
Convey  thee hither,  Steeds  with their white  backs,  to quaff  sweet  juice  that makes  us eloquent.   
26 So drink,  thou Lover  of the Song,  as the first drinker,  of this juice.   
This the outpouring  of the savoury  sap prepared  is good  and meet  to gladden  thee.   
27 He who alone  by wondrous  deed  is Mighty,  Strong  by holy works,   
May he come,  fair of cheek;  may he not stay afar, but come  and turn not from  our call.  
28 Susna's  quick  moving  castle  thou hast crushed  to pieces  with thy bolts.   
Thou,  Indra , from  of old, hast followed  after light,  since  we have  had thee to invoke.   
29 My praises  when  the Sun hath risen,  my praises  at the time of noon,   Rig Veda – English Translation  
My praises  at the coming  of the gloom  of night,  O Vasu,  have  gone  forth  to thee.   
30 Praise  yea, praise  him. Of princes  these  are the most  liberal  of their gifts,   
These,  Paramajya,  Ninditasva,  Prapathi,  most  bounteous,  O Medhyatithi.   
31 When  to the car, by faith,  I yoked  the horses  longing  for the way−   
For skilled  is Yadu's  son in dealing  precious  wealth,  he who is rich in herds  of kine.   
32 May he who gave me two brown  steeds  together  with their cloths  of gold,   
May he, Asanga's  son Svanadratha,  obtain  all joy and high felicities.   
33 Playoga's  son Asanga,  by ten thousand,  O Agni,  hath surpassed  the rest in giving.   
For me ten bright−hued  oxen  have  come  forward  like lotus−stalks  from  out a lake upstanding.   
34 What  time her husband's  perfect  restoration  to his lost strength  and manhood  was apparent,   
His consort  Sasvati  with joy addressed  him, Now  art thou well, my lord, and shalt  be happy.   
 
HYMN  II. Indra.  
1. HERE  is the Soma  juice  expressed;  O Vasu,  drink  till thou art full: Undaunted  God,  we give it thee.   
2 Washed  by the men,  pressed  out with stones,  strained  through  the filter  made  of wool,   
'Tis like a courser  bathed  in stream.   
3 This juice  have we made  sweet  for thee like barley,  blending  it with milk.   
Indra,  I call thee to our feast.   
4 Beloved  of all, Indra  alone  drinks  up the flowing  Soma  juice   
Among  the Gods  andmortal  men.   
5 The Friend,  whom  not the brilliant−hued,  the badly−mixt  or bitter  draught,   
Repels,  the far−extending  God;   
6 While  other  men than we with milk chase  him as hunters  chase  a deer,   
And with their kine inveigle  him.  
7 For him, for Indra,  for the God,  be pressed  three  draught s of Soma  juice   
In the juice−drinker's  own abode.   
8 Three  reservoirs  exude  their drops,  filled  are three  beakers  to the brim,   
All for one offering  to the God.   
9 Pure art thou,  set in many  a place,  and blended  in the midst  with milk  
And curd,  to cheer  the Hero  best.  
10 Here,  Indra,  are thy Soma−draughts  pressed  out by us, the strong,  the pure:   
They  crave  admixture  of the milk.   
11 O Indra,  pour in milk,  prepare  the cake,  and mix the Soma−draught.   
I hear them  say that thou art rich.  
12 Quaffed  juices  fight  within  the breast.  The drunken  praise  not by their wine,   
The naked  praise  not when  it rains.   
13 Rich  be the praiser  of one rich, munificent  and famed  like thee:   
High  rank be his, O Lord  of Bays.   
14 Foe of the man who adds no milk,  he heeds  not any chanted  hymn   
 
Or holy psalm  that may he sung.   
15 Give  us not, Indra,  as a prey unto the scornful  or the proud:   
Help,  Mighty  One,  with power  and might.   
16 This,  even  this, O Indra,  we implore.  as thy devoted  friends,   
The Kanvas  praise  thee with their hymns.   
17 Naught  else, O Thunderer,  have  I praised  in the skilled  singer's  eulogy:   Rig Veda – English Translation  
On thy land only have  I thought.   
18 The Gods  seek him who presses  out the Soma;  they desire  not sleep   
They  punish  sloth  unweariedly.   
19 Come  hither  swift  with gifts of wealth  − be not thou angry  with us−like   
A great  man with a youthful  bride.   
20 Let him not, wrathful  with us, spend  the evening  far from  us to−day,   
Like some  unpleasant  son−in−law.   
21 For well we know  this Hero's  love,  most  liberal  of the boons  he gives,  
His plans  whom  the three  worlds  display.   
22 Pour  forth  the gift which  Kanvas  bring,  for none  more  glorious  do we know   
Than  the Strong  Lord  with countless  aids.  
23 O presser,  offer  Soma  first to Indra,  Hero,  Sakra,  him  
The Friend  of man,  that he may drink;   
24 Who,  in untroubled  ways,  is best provider,  for his worshippers.   
Of strength  in horses  and in kine.   
25 Pressers,  for him blend  Soma  juice,  each draught  most  excellent,  for him  
The Brave,  the Hero,  for his joy.  
26 The Vrtra−slayer  drinks  the juice.  May he who gives  a hundred  aids  
Approach,  nor stay afar from  us.  
27 May the strong  Bay Steeds,  yoked  by prayer,  bring  hither  unto us our Friend,   
Lover  of Song,  renowned  by songs.   
28 Sweet  are the Soma  juices,  come!  Blent  are the Soma  juices,  come!  
Rsi−like,  mighty,  fair of cheek,  come  hither  quickly  to the feast.   
29 And lauds  which  strengthen  thee for great  bounty  and valour,  and exalt   
Indra  who doeth  glorious  deeds,   
30 And songs  to thee who lovest  song,  and all those  hymns  addressed  to thee−  
These  evermore  confirm  thy might.   
31 Thus  he, sole doer of great  deeds  whose  hand  holds  thunder,  gives  us strength,   
He who hath never  been  subdued.   
32 Vrtra  he slays  with his right hand,  even  Indra,  great  with mighty  power,   
And much−invoked  in many  a place.   
33 He upon  whom  all men depend,  all regions,  all achievements,  he  
Takes  pleasure  in our wealthy  chiefs.   
34 All this hath he accomplished,  yea, Indra,  most  gloriously  renowned,   
Who  gives  our wealthy  princes  strength.   
35 Who  drives  his chariot  seeking  spoil,  from  afar, to him he loves:   
For swift  is he to bring  men wealth.   
36 The Sage  who,  winning  spoil  with steeds,  slays  Vrtra,  Hero  with the men,   
His servant's  faithful  succourer.   
37 O Priyamedhas,  worship  with collected  mind  this Indra  whom   
The Soma  hath full well inspired.   
38 Ye Kanvas,  sing the Mighty  One,  Lord  of the Brave,  who loves  renown,   
All−present,  glorified  by song.   
39 Strong  Friend,  who,  with no trace  of feet, restores  the cattle  to the men,   
Who  rest their wish  and hope  on him.  
 
40 Shaped  as a Ram,  Stone−hurler  I once  thou camest  hither  to the son  
Of Kanva,  wise Medhyatithi.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
41 Vibhindu,  thou hast helped  this man,  giving  him thousands  four times  ten,  
And afterward  eight  thousand  more.   
42 And these  twain  pouring  streams  of milk,  creative,  daughters  of delight,   
For wedlock  sake I glorify.   
 
HYMN  III. Indra.  
1. DRINK,  Indra,  of the savoury  juice,  and cheer  thee with our milky  draught.   
Be, for our weal,  our Friend  and sharer  of the feast,  and let thy wisdom  guard  us well.   
2 In thy kind grace  and favour  may we still be strong:  expose  us not to foe's attack.   
With  manifold  assistance  guard  and succour  us, and bring  us to felicity.   
3 May these  my songs  of praise  exalt  thee,  Lord,  who hast abundant  wealth.   
Men skilled  in holy hymns,  pure,  with the hues of fire, have  sung  them  with their lauds  to thee.   
4 He, with his might  enhanced  by Rsis thousandfold,  hath like an ocean  spread  himself.   
His majesty  is praised  as true at solemn  rites,  his power  where  holy singers  rule.  
5 Indra for worship  of the Gods,  Indra  while  sacrifice  proceeds,   
Indra,  as worshippers  in battle−shock,  we call, Indra  that we may win the spoil.   
6 With  might  hath Indra  spread  out heaven  and earth,  with power  hath Indra  lighted  up the Sun.  
In Indra  are all creatures  closely  held;  in him meet  the distilling  Soma−drops.   
7 Men with their lauds  are urging  thee,  Indra,  to drink  the Soma  first.  
The Rbhus  in accord  have  lifted  up their voice,  and Rudras  sung  thee as the first.  
8 Indra  increased  his manly  strengt h at sacrifice,  in the wild rapture  of this juice.   
And living  men to−day,  even  as of old, sing forth  their praises  to his majesty.   
9 I crave  of thee that hero strength,  that thou mayst  first regard  this prayer,   
Wherewith  thou holpest  Bhrgu  and the Yatis  and Praskanva  when  the prize  was staked.   
10 Wherewith  thou sentest  mighty  waters  to the sea, that, Indra,  is thy manly  strength.   
For ever unattainable  is this power  of him to whom  the worlds  have  cried  aloud.   
11 Help  us, O Indra,  when  we pray to thee for wealth  and hero might.   
First help thou on to strength  the man who strives  to win, and aid our laud,  O Ancient  One.   
12 Help  for us, Indra,  as thou holpest  Paura  once,  this man's  devotions  bent on gain.   
Help,  as thou gavest  Rugama  and Syavaka  and Svarn ara and Krpa  aid.  
13 What  newest  of imploring  prayers  shall,  then,  the zealous  mortal  sing?   
For have  not they who laud his might,  and Indra−power  won for themselves  the light of heaven?   
14 When  shall  they keep  the Law and praise  thee mid the Gods?  Who  counts  as Rsi and as sage?   
When  ever wilt thou,  Indra  Maghavan,  come  nigh to presser's  or to praiser's  call?   
15 These  songs  of ours exceeding  sweet,  these  hymns  of praise  ascend  to thee,   
Like ever−conquering  chariots  that display  their strength,  gain wealth, and give unfailing  aid.  
16 The Bhrgus  are like Suns,  like Kanvas,  and have gained  all that their thoughts  were  bent upon.   
The living  men of Priyamedha's  race have  sung exalting  Indra  with their lauds.   
17 Best slayer  of the Vrtras,  yoke  thy Bay Steeds, Indra,  from  afar.  
Come  with the High  Ones  hither,  Maghavan,  to us, Mighty,  to drink  the Soma  juice.   
18 For these,  the bards  and singers,  have  cried  out to thee with prayer,  to gain the sacrifice.   
As such,  O Maghavan,  Indra,  who lovest  song,  even  as a lover  bear my call.  
19 Thou  from  the lofty plains  above,  O Indra,  hurledst  Vrtra  down.   
Thou  dravest  forth  the kine of guileful  Mrgaya  and Arbuda  from  the mountain's  hold.   
20 Bright  were  the flaming  fires,  the Sun gave forth  his shine,  and Soma,  Indra' s juice,  shone  clear.   
Indra,  thou blewest  the great  Dragon  from  the air −. men must  regard  that valorous  deed.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
21 The fairest  courser  of them  all, who runneth  on as 'twere  to heaven.   
 
Which  Indra  and the Maruts  gave,  and Pakasthaman  Kaurayan.   
22 To me hath Pakasthaman  given,  a ruddy  horse,good  at the pole,   
Filling  is girth  and rousing  wealth;   
23 Compared  with whom  no other  ten strong  coursers,  harnessed  to the pole,   
Bear  Tugrya  to his dwelling  place.   
24 Raiment  is body,  food is life, and healing  ointment  giveth  strength.   
As the free−handed  giver  of the ruddy  steed,  I have  named  Pakasthaman  fourth.   
 
HYMN  IV. Indra.  
1. THOUGH,  Indra,  thou art called  by men eastward  and westward,  north  and south,   
Thou  chiefly  art with Anava  and Turvasa,  brave  Champ ion I urged  by men to Come.   
2 Or, Indra,  when  with Ruma,  Rusama,  Syavaka,  and Krpa  thou rejoicest  thee,   
Still do the Kanvas,  bringing  praises,  with their prayers,  O Indra,  draw  thee hither:  come.   
3 Even  as the wild−bull,  when  he thirsts,  goes to the desert's watery  pool,   
Come  hither  quickly  both at morning  and at eve, and with the Kanvas  drink  thy fill.  
4 May the drops  gladden  thee,  rich Indra,  and obtain  bounty  for him who pours  the juice.   
Soma  pressed  in the mortar  didst  thou take and drink,  and hence hast won surpassing  might.   
5 With  mightier  strength  he conquered  strength,  with energy  he crushed  their wrath.   
O Indra,  Strong  in youth,  all those  who sought  the fray bent and bowed  down  to thee like trees.   
6 He who wins  promise  of thine  aid goes girt as with a thousand  mighty  men of war.  
He makes  his son preeminent  in hero might  − he serves  with reverential  prayer.   
7 With  thee,  the Mighty,  for our Friend,  we will riot fear or feel fatigue.   
May we see Turvasa  and Yadu:  thy great  deed,  O Hero,  must  be glorified.   
8 On his left hip the Hero  hath reclined  himself:  the proffered  feast  offends  him not.  
The milk is blended  with the honey  of the bee: quickly  come  hither,  baste,  and drink.   
9 Indra,  thy friend  is fair of form  and rich in horses,  cars, and kine.   
He evermore  hath food accompanied  by wealth,  and radiant  joins  the company.   
10 Come  like a thirsty  antelope  to the drinking−place:  drink  Soma  to thy heart's  desire.   
Raining  it down,  O Maghavan,  day after day, thou gainest  thy surpassing  might.   
11 Priest,  let the Soma  juice  flow forth,  for Indra  longs  to drink  thereof.   
He even  now hath yoked  his vigorous  Bay Steeds:  the Vrtra−slayer  hath come  near.   
12 The man with whom  thou fillcst  thee with Soma  deems  himself  a pious  worshipper.   
This thine  appropriate  food is here poured  out for thee:  come,  hasten  forward.  drink  of it,  
13 Press  out the Soma  juice,  ye priests,  for Indra  borne  upon  his car.  
The pressing−stones  speak  loud of Indra,  while  they shed the juice  which,  offered,  honours  him.  
14 To the brown  juice  may his dear vigorous  Bay Steeds  bring  Indra,  to our holy task.  
Hither  let thy Car−steeds  who seek the sacrifice  bring  thee to our drink−offerings.   
15 Pusan,  the Lord  of ample  wealth,  for firm alliance  we elect.   
May he with wisdom,  Sakra!  Looser!  Much−invoked!  aid us to riches  and to seed.   
16 Sharpen  us like a razor  in the barber's  hands:  send riches  thou who settest  free.  
Easy  to find with thee are treasures  of the Dawn  for mortal  man whom  thou dost speed.   
17 Pusan,  I long to win thy love, I long to praise  thee,  Radiant  God.   
Excellent  Lord,  'tis strange  tome,  no wish  have I to sing the psalm  that Pajra  sings.   
18 My kine,  O Radiant  God,  seek pasture  where  they will, my during  wealth,  Immortal  One.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Be our protector,  Pusan!  be, most  liberal Lord,  propitious  to our gathering  strength.   
19 Rich  was the gift Kurunga  gave,  a hundred  steeds  at morning  rites.   
Among  the gifts of Turvasas  we thought  of him, the opulent,  the splendid  King.   
20 What  by his morning  songs  Kanva,  the powerful,  hath,  with the Priyamedhas,  gained−   
71 The herds  of sixty  thousand  pure and spotless  kine,  have  I, the Rsi, driven  away.   
 
21 The very trees  were  joyful  at my coming:  kine they obtained  in plenty,  steeds  in plenty.  
 
HYMN  V. Asvins.  
1. WHEN,  even  as she were  present  here,  red Dawn  hath shone  from  far away,   
She spreadeth  light on every  side.  
2 Like Heroes  on your will−yoked  car farshining,  Wonder−Workers!  ye  
Attend,  O Asvins,  on the Dawn.   
3 By you, O Lords  of ample  wealth  our songs  of praise  have  been  observe d:  
As envoy  have  I brought  the prayer.   
4 Kanvas  must  praise  the Asvins  dear to many,  making  many  glad,   
Most  rich, that they may succour  us.  
5 Most  liberal,  best at winning  strength,  inciters,  Lords  of splendour  who  
Visit  the worshipper's  abode.   
6 So for devout  Sudeva  dew with fatness  his unfailing  mead,   
And make  it rich for sacrifice.   
7 Hitherward  running  speedily  with horses,  as with rapid  hawks,   
Come,  Asvins,  to our song  of praise   
8 Wherewith  the three  wide  distances,  and all the lights  that are in heaven.   
Ye traverse,  and three  times  of night.   
9 O Finders  of the Day,  that we may win us food of kine and wealth,   
Open  the paths  for us to tread.   
10 O Asvins,  bring  us wealth  in kine,  in noble  heroes,  and in cars:   
Bring  us the strength  that horse s give.   
11 Ye Lords  of splendour,  glorified,  ye Wonder−Workers  borne  on paths   
Of gold,  drink  sweets  with Somajuice.   
12 To us, ye Lords  of ample  wealth,  and to our wealth  chiefs  extend   
Wide  shelter,  ne'er  to be assailed.   
13 Come  quickly  downward  to the prayer  of people  whom  ye favour  most:   
Approach  not unto other  folk.  
14 Ye Asvins  whom  our minds  perceive,  drink  of this lovely  gladdening  draught,   
The mcath  which  we present  to you.  
15 Bring  riches  hither  unto us in hundreds  and in thousands,  source   
Of plenteous  food,  sustaining  all.  
16 Verily  sages  call on you, ye Heroes,  in full many  a place.   
Moved  by the priests,  O Asvins,  conic.   
17 Men who have  trimmed  the sacred  grass,  bringing  oblations  and prepared,   
O Asvins,  are invoking  you.  
18 May this our hymn  of praise  to−day,  most  powerful  to bring  you, be,  
O Asvins,  nearest  to your hearts.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
19 The skin filled  full of savoury  meath,  laid in the pathway  of your car−  
O Asvins,  drink  ye both therefrom.   
20 For this, ye Lords  of ample  wealth,  bring  blessing for our herd,  our kine,   
Our progeny,  and plenteous  food.   
21 Ye too unclose  to us like doors  the strengthening  waters  of the sky,  
And rivers,  ye who find the day.  
22 When  did the son of' Tugra  serve  you, Men?  Abandoned  in the sea,  
That with winged  steeds  your car might  fly.  
23 Ye, O Nasatyas,  ministered  to Kanva  with repeated  aid,  
When  cast into the heated  pit.  
 
24 Come  near with those  most  recent  aids of yours  which  merit  eulogy,   
When  I invoke  you, Wealthy  Gods.   
25 As ye protected  Kanva  erst, Priyamedha  and Upastuta,   
Atri, Sinjara,  Asvins  Twain   
26 And Amsu  in decisive  fight,  Agastya  in the fray for kine.   
And,  in his battles,  Sobhari.   
27 For so much  bliss,  or even  more,  O Asvins,  Wealthy  Gods,  than this,  
We pray white  singing  hymns  to you.  
28 Ascend  your car with golden  seat, O Asvins,  and with reins  of gold,   
That reaches  even  to the sky.  
29 Golden  is its supporting  shaft,  the axle also is of gold,   
And both the wheels  are made  of gold.   
30 Thereon,  ye Lords  of ample  wealth,  come  to us even from  afar,  
Come  ye to this mine  eulogy.   
31 From  far away  ye come  to us, Asvins,  enjoying  plenteous  food  
Of Dasas,  O Immortal  Ones.   
32 With  splendour,  riches,  and renown,  O Asvins,  hither  come  to us,  
Nasatyas,  shining  brilliantly.   
33 May dappled  horses,  steeds  who fly with pinions,  bring  you hitherward   
To people  skilled  in sacrifice.   
34 The whcel  delayeth  not that car of yours  accompanied  by song,   
That cometh  with a store  of food.   
35 Borne  on that chariot  wrought  of gold,  with coursers  very fleet of foot,  
Come,  O Nasatyas,  swift  as thought.   
36 O Wealthy  Gods,  ye taste and find the brisk  and watchful  wild beast  good.   
Associate  wealth  with food for us.  
37 As such,  O Asvins,  find for me my share  of new−presented  gifts,   
As Kasu,  Cedi's  son, gave me a hundred  head  of buffaloes,  and ten thousand  kine.   
38 He who hath given  me for mine  own ten Kings  like gold to look upon.   
At Caidya's  feet are all the people  round  about,  all those  who think  upon  the shield.   
39 No man,  not any, goes upon  the path on which  the Cedis  walk.   
No other  prince,  no folk is held more  liberal  of gifts than they.   
 
HYMN  VI Indra  
1. INDRA,  great  in his power  and might,  and like Parjanya  rich in rain, Is magnified  by Vatsa's  lauds.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
2 When  the priests,  strengthening  the Son of Holy  Law,  present  their gifts,   
Singers  with Order's  hymn  of praiser.   
3 Since  Kanvas  with their lauds  have made  Indra  complete  the sacrifice.   
Words  are their own appropriate  arms.   
4 Before  his hot displeasure  all the peoples,  all the men,  bow down,   
As rivers  bow them  to the sea.  
5 This power  of his shone  brightly  forth  when  Indra  brought  together,  like  
A skin,  the worlds  of heaven  and earth.   
6 The fiercely−moving  Vrtra's  head  he severed  with his thunderbolt,   
His mighty  hundred−knotted  bolt.  
7 Here are−we  sing them  loudly  forth−our  thoughts  among−the  best of songs.   
Even  lightnings  like the blaze  of fire.  
8 When  bidden  thoughts,  spontaneously  advancing,  glow,  and with the stream   
 
Of sacrifice  the Kanvas  shine.   
9 Indra,  may we obtain  that wealth  in horses  and in herds  of cows,   
And prayer  that may be noticed  first.  
10 I from  my Father  have  received  deep  knowledge  of the Holy  Law  
I was born like unto the Sun.  
11 After  the lore of ancient  time I make,  like Kanva,  beauteous  songs,   
And Indra's  selfgains  strength  thereby.   
12 Whatever  Rsis have  not praised  thee,  Indra,  or have lauded  thee,   
By me exalted  wax thou strong.   
13 When  his wrath  thundered,  when  he rent Vrtra  to pieces,  limb by limb,   
He sent the waters  to the sea.  
14 Against  the Dasyu  gusna thou,  Indra,  didst  hurl thy during  bolt:  
Thou,  Dread  one, hast a hero's  fame.   
15 Neither  the heavens  nor firmaments  nor regions  of the earth  contain   
Indra,  the Thunderer  with his might.   
16 O Indra  him who lay at length  staying  thy copious  waters  thou,  
In his own footsteps,  smotest  down   
17 Thou  hiddest  deep  in darkness  itim, O Indra,  who had set his grasp   
On spacious  heaven  and earth  conjoined.   
18 Indra,  whatever  Yatis  and Bhrgus  have  offered  praise  to thee,   
Listen,  thou Mighty,  to my call.  
19 Indra,  these  spotted  cows  yield  thee their butter  and the milky  draught;   
Aiders,  thereby,  of sacrifice;   
20 Which,  teeming,  have  received  thee as a life−germ,  Indra,  with their mouth,   
Like Surya  who sustaineth  all.  
21 O Lord  of Might,  with hymns  of praise the Kanvas  have  increased  thy power,   
The drops  poured  forth  have strengthened  thee.   
22 Under  thy guidance,  Indra,  mid thy praises,  Lord  of Thunder,  shall   
The sacrifice  be soon  performed.   
23 Indra,  disclose  much  food for us, like a stronghold  with store of kine:   
Give  progeny  and heroic  strength.   
24 And,  Indra,  grant  us all that wealth  of fleet steeds  which  shone  bright  of old  
Among  the tribes  of Nahusas.   
25 Hither  thou seemest  to attract  heaven's  fold which  shines  before  our eyes,   Rig Veda – English Translation  
When,  Indra,  thou art kind to us.  
26 Yea, when  thou puttest  forth  thy power,  Indra,  thou governest  the folk.  
Mighty,  unlimited  in strength.   
27 The tribes  who bring  oblations  call to thee,  to thee to give them  help,   
With  drops  to thee who spreadest  far.  
28 There  where the mountains  downward  slope,  there  by the meeting  of the streams   
The Sage  was manifest  with song.   
29 Thence,  marking,  from  his lofty  place  downward  he looks  upon  the sea,  
And thence  with rapid  stir he moves.   
30 Then,  verify,  they see the light refulgent  of primeval  seed,   
Kindled  on yonder  side of heaven.   
31 Indra,  the Kanvas  all exalt  thy wisdom  and thy manly  power,   
And,  Mightiest!  thine  heroic  strength.   
32 Accept  this eulogy  of mine,  Indra,  and guard  me carefully:   
Strengthen  my thought  and prosper it.  
33 For thee,  O Mighty,  Thunder−armed,  we singers  through  devotionhave   
Fashioned  the hymn  that we may live.  
 
34 To Indra  have  the Kanvas  sung,  like waters  speeding  down  a slope:   
The song  is fain to go to him.  
35 As rivers  swell  the ocean,  so our hymns  of praise  make  Indra  strong,   
Eternal,  of resistIess  wrath.   
36 Come  with thy lovely  Bay Steeds,  come  to us from  regions  far away   
O Indra,  drink  this Soma  juice.   
37 Best slayer  of Vrtras,  men whose  sacred  grass  is ready  trimmed   
Invoke  thee for the gain of spoil.   
38 The heavens  and earth  come  after thee as the wheel  follows  Etasa:   
To thee flow Sorna−drops  effused.   
39 Rejoice,  O Indra,  in the light,  rejoice  in Saryandyan,  be Glad  in the sacrificer's  hymn.   
40 Grown  strong  in heaven,  the Thunder −armed  hath bellowed,  Vrtra−slayer,  Bull,   
Chief  drinker  of the Soma  juice.   
41 Thou  art a Rsi born of old, sole Ruler  over all by might:   
Thou,  Indra,  guardest  well our wealth.   
42 May thy Bay Steeds  with beauteous  backs,  a hundred,  bring  thee to the feast,  
Bring  thee to these  our Soma−draughts.   
43 The Kanvas  with their hymns  of praise  have magnified  this ancient  thought   
That swells  with streams  of meath  and oil.  
44 Mid mightiest  Gods  let mortal  man choose  Indra  at the sacrifice,   
Indra,  whoe'er  would  win, for help.   
45 Thy steeds,  by Priyamedhas  praised,  shall  bring  thee,  God whom  all invoke,   
Hither  to drink  the Somajuice.   
46 A hundred  thousand  have I gained  from  Parsu,  from  Tirindira,   
And presents  of the Yadavas.   
47 Ten thousand  head  of kine,  and steeds  three  times  a hundred  they bestowed   
On Pajra  for the Sama−song.   
48 Kakuha  hath reached  up to heaven,  bestowing  buffaloes  yoked  in fours,   
And matched  in fame  the Yadavas.   
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  VII. Maruts.  
1. O MARUTS,  when  the sage hath poured  the Trstup  forth as food for you,  
Ye shine  amid  the mountain−clouds.   
2 When,  Bright  Ones,  fain to show  your might  ye have  determined  on your course,   
The mountain−clouds  have bent them  down.   
3 Loud  roaring  with the winds  the Sons  of Prsni  have  upraised  themselves:   
They have  poured  out the streaming  food.   
4 The Maruts  spread  the mist abroad  and make  mountains  rock and reel,  
When  with the winds  they go their way  
5 What  time the rivers  and the hills before  your coming  bowed  them  down,   
So to sustain  your mighty  force.   
6 We call on you for aid by night,  on you for succour  in the day,  
On you while  sacrifice  proceeds.   
7 These,  verily,  wondrous,  red of hue, speed  on their courses  with a roar  
Over  the ridges  of the sky.  
8 With  might  they drop the loosened  rein so that the Sun may run his course,   
And spread  themselves  with beams  of light.   
9 Accept,  ye Maruts,  this my song,  accept  ye this mine  hymn  of praise,   
Accept,  Rbhuksans,  this my call.  
 
10 The dappled  Cows  have poured  three  lakes,  meath  for the Thunder−wielding  God,   
From  the great  cask,  the watery  cloud.   
11 O Maruts,  quickly  come  to us when,  longing  for felicity,   
We call you hither  from  the sky.  
12 For, Rudras  and Rbhuksans,  ye, Most  Bountiful,  are in the house,   
Wise  when  the gladdening  draught  is drunk.   
13 O Maruts,  send us down  from  heaven  riches  distilling  rapturous  joy,  
With  plenteous  food,  sustaining  all.  
14 When,  Bright  Ones,  hither  from  the hills ye have  resolved  to take your way,   
Ye revel  in the drops  effused.   
15 Man should  solicit  with his lauds  happiness  which  belongs  to them,   
So great  a band  invincible.   
16 They  who like fiery sparks  with showers  of rain blow  through  the heaven  and earth,   
Milking  the spring  that never  fails.   
17 With  chariots  and tumultuous  roar, with tempests  and with hymns  of praise   
The Sons  of Prsni  hurry  forth.   
18 For wealth,  we think  of that whereby  ye aided  Yadu,  Turvasa,   
And KanVa  who obtained  the spoil.   
19 May these  our viands  Bounteous  Ones  I that flow in streams  like holy oil,  
With  Kanva's  hymns,  increase  your might.  
20 Where,  Bounteous  Lords  for whom  the grass  is trimmed,  are ye rejoicing  now?   
What  Brahman  is adoring  you?   
21 Is it not there  where  ye of old, supplied  with sacred  grass,  for lauds   
Inspired  the strong  in sacrifice?   
22 They  brought  together  both the worlds,  the mighty  waters,  and the Sun,  
And,  joint by joint,  the thunderbolt.   
23 They  sundered  Vrtra  limb from  limb and split the gloomy  mountain−clouds,   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Performing  a heroic  deed.   
24 They  reinforced  the power  and strength  of Trita  as he fought,  and helped   
Indra  in battle  with the foe.  
25 They  deck  themselves  for glory,  bright,  celestial,  lightning  in their hands,   
And helms  of gold upon  their heads.   
26 When  eagerly  ye from  far away  came  to the cavern  of the Bull,   
He bellowed  in his fear like Heaven.   
27 Borne  by your golden−footed  steeds,  O Gods,  come  hither  to receive   
The sacrifice  we offer  you.  
28 When  the red leader  draws  along  their spotted  deer yoked  to the car.  
The Bright  Ones  come,  and shed the rain.  
29 Susoma,  Saryakiavan,  and Arjika  full of homes,  have they.   
These  Heroes,  sought  with downward  car.  
30 When,  Maruts,  ye come  to him, the singer  who invokes  you thus,   
With  favours  to your suppliant?   
31 What  now?  where  have  ye still a friend  since  ye left Indra  all alone?   
Who  counteth  on your friendship  now?   
32 The Kanvas  sing forth  Agni's  praise  together  with our Maruts'  who  
Wield  thunder  and wear  swords  of gold.   
33 Hither  for new felicity  may I attract  the Impetuous  Ones,   
The Heroes  with their wondrous  strength   
34 Before  them  sink the very hills deerning  themseives  abysses:  yea,  
Even  the mountains  bend  them  down.   
35 Steeds  flying  on their tortuous  path through  mid−air  carry  them,  and give  
 
The man who lauds  them  strength  and life.  
36 Agni  was born the first of all, like Surya  lovely  with his light:   
With  lustre  these  have  spread  abroad.   
 
HYMN  VIII. Asvins.  
1. WITH  all the succours  that are yours,  O Asvins,  hither  come  to us: Wonderful,  borne  on paths  of gold,  
drink  ye the meath  with Soma  juice.   
2 Come  now,  ye Asvins,  on your car decked  with a sun−bright  canopy,   
Bountiful,  with your golden  forms,  Sages  with depth  of intellect.   
3 Come  hither  from  the Nahusas,  come,  drawn  by pure hymns,  from  mid−air.   
O Asvins,  drink  the savoury  juice  shed in the Kanvas'  sacrifice.   
4 Come  to us hither  from  the heavens,  come  from  mid−air,  well−loved  by us:  
Here  Kanva's  son hath pressed  for you the pleasant  meath  of Soma  juice.   
5 Come,  Asvins,  to give car to us, to drink  the Soma,  Asvins,  come.   
Hail,  Strengtheners  of the praise−song  speed  onward,  ye Heroes,  with your thoughts.   
6 As, Heroes,  in the olden  time the Rsis called  you to their aid,  
So now,  O Asvins,  come  to us, come  near to this mine  eulogy.   
7 Even  from  the luminous  sphere  of heaven  come  to us, ye who find the light,   
Carers  for Vatsa,  through  our prayers  and lauds,  O yewho  hearour  call.  
8 Do others  more  than we adore  the Asvins  with their hymns  of praise?   
The Rsi Vatsa,  Kanva's  son, hath magnified  you with his songs.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
9 The holy singer  with his hymns  hath called  you, Asvins,  hither−ward;   
Best Vrtra−slayers,  free from  stain,  as such bring  us felicity.   
10 What  time,  ye Lords  of ample  wealth,  the Lady  mounted  on your car,  
Then,  O ye Asvins,  ye attained  all wishes  that your hearts  desired.   
11 Come  thence,  O Asvins,  on your car that hath a thousand  ornaments:   
Vatsa  the sage,  the sage's  son, hath sung  a song of sweets  to you.  
12 Cheerers  of many,  rich in goods,  discoverers  of opulence,   
The Asvins,  Riders  through  the sky, have  welcomed  this my song  of praise.   
13 O Asvins,  grant  us all rich gifts wherewith  no man mav interfere.   
Make  us observe  the stated  times:  give us not over to reproach.   
14 Whether,  Nasatyas,  ye be nigh,  or whether  ye be far away,   
Come  thence,  O Asvins,  on your car that hath a thousand  ornaments.   
15 Vatsa  the Rsi with his songs,  Nasatyas,  hath exalted  you:  
Grant  him rich food distilling  oil, graced  with a thousand  ornaments.   
16 Bestow  on him, O Asvins,  food that strengthens,  and that drops  with oil,  
On him who praises  you for bliss,  and, Lords  of bounty,  prays  for wealth.   
17 Come  to us, ye who slay the foe, Lords  of rich treasure,  to this hymn.   
O Heroes,  give us high renown  and these  good  things  of earth  for help.   
18 The Priyamedhas  have  invoked  you with all succours  that are yours,   
You,  Asvins,  Lords  of solemn  rites,  with calls entreating  you to come.   
19 Come  to us, Asvins,  ye Who  bring  felicity,  auspicious  Ones,   
To Vatsa  who with prayer  and hymn,  lovers  of song,  hath honoured  you.  
20 Aid us, O Heroes,  for those  hymns  for which  ye helped  GoSarya  erst,  
Gave  Vasa,  Dasavraja  aid, and Kanva  and Medhatithi:   
21 And favoured  Trasadasyu,  ye Heroes,  in spoil−deciding  fray:   
For these,  O Asvins,  graciously  assist  us in acquiring  strength.   
22 O Asvins,  may pure hymns  of ours,  and songs  and praises,  honour  you:  
Best slayers  everywhere  of foes,  as such we fondly  yearn  for you.  
 
23 Three  places  of the Asvins,  erst concealed,  are made  apparent  now.  Both  
Sages,  with the flight  of Law come  hither  unto those  who live. 
 
HYMN  IX. Asvins.  
1. To help and favour  Vatsa now,  O Asvins,  come  ye hitherward.  Bestow  on him a dwelling  spacious  and 
secure,  and keep  malignities  away.   
2 All manliness  that is in heaven,  with the Five Tribes,  or in mid−air,   
Bestow,  ye Asvins,  upon  us.  
3 Remember  Kanva  first of all among  the singers,  Asvins,  who  
Have  thought  upon  your wondrous  deeds.   
4 Asvins,  for you with song  of praise  this hot oblation  is effused,   
This your sweet  Soma  juice,  ye Lords  of ample  wealth,  through  which  ye think  upon  the foe.  
5 Whatever  ye have  done  in floods,  in the tree, Wonder−Workers,  and in growing  plants,   
Therewith,  O Asvins,  succour  me.  
6 What  force,  Nasatyas,  ye exert,  whatever,  Gods,  ye tend and heal,   
This your own Vatsa  gains  not by his hymns  alone:  ye visit him who offers  gifts.   Rig Veda – English Translation  
7 Now  hath the Rsi splendidly  thought  out the Asvins'  hymn  of praise.   
Let the Atharvan  pour the warm  oblation  forth,  and Soma  very rich in sweets.   
8 Ye Asvins,  now ascend  your car that lightly  rolls upon  its way.   
May these  my praises  make  you speed  hitherward  like a cloud  of heaven.   
9 When,  O Nasatyas,  we this day make  you speed  hither  with our hymns,   
Or, Asvins,  with our songs  of praise,  remember  Kanya  specially.   
10 As erst Kaksivan  and the Rsi Vyasva,  as erst Dirghatamas  invoked  your presence,   
Or, in the sacrificial  chambers,  Vainya  Prthi,  so be ye mindful  of us here,  O Asvins.   
11 Come  as home−guardians,  saving  us from  foemen,  guarding  our living  creatures  and our bodies,   
Come  to the house  to give us seed and offspring,   
12 Whether  with Indra  ye be faring,  Asvins,  or resting  in one dwelling−place  with Vayu,   
In concord  with the Rbhus  or Adityas,  or standing  still in Visnu's  striding−places.   
13 When  I, O Asvins,  call on you to−day  that I may gather  strength,   
Or as all−conquering  might  in war, be that the Asvins'  noblest grace.   
14 Now  come,  ye Asvins,  hitherward:  here are oblations  set for you;  
These  Soma−draughts  to aid Yadu  and  
Turvasa,  these  offered  you mid Kaniva's  Sons.   
15 Whatever  healing  balm  is yours,  Nisatyas,  near or far away,   
Therewith,  great  Sages,  grant a home  to Vatsa  and to Vimada.   
16 Together  with the Goddess,  with the Asvins'  Speech  have  I awoke.   
Thou,  Goddess,  hast disclosed  the hymn,  and holy gift from  mortal  men.   
17 Awake  the Asvins,  Goddess  Dawn!  Up Mighty  Lady  of sweet  strains!   
Rise,  straightway,  priest  of sacrifice!  High  glory  to the gladdening  draught!   
18 Thou,  Dawn,  approaching  with thy light shinest  together  with the Sun,  
And to this man−protecting  home  the chariot  ofthe  Asvins  comes.   
19 When  yellow  stalks  give forth  the juice,  as cows from  udders  pour their milk,   
And voices  sound  the song  of praise,  the Asvins'  worshippers  show  first.  
20 Forward  for glory  and for strength,  protection  that shall  conquer  men,   
And power  and skill,  most  sapient  Ones!   
21 When  Asvins,  worthy  of our lauds, ye seat you in the father's  house.   
With  wisdom  or the bliss ye bring.   
 
HYMN  X. Asvins.  
1. WHETHER  ye travel  far away  or dwell  in yonder  light of heaven,  Or in a mansion  that is built above  th
e sea, come  thence,  ye Asvins,  hitherward.   
2 Or if for Manu.ye  prepared  the sacrifice,  remember  also Kanva's  son.  
I call Brhaspati,  Indra,  Visnu,  all the gods,  the Asvins  borne  by rapid  steeds.   
3 Those  Asvins  I invoke  who work  marvels,  brought  hither  to receive,   
With  whom  our friendship  is most  famed,  and kinship  passing  that of Gods.   
4 On whom  the solemn  rites depend,  whose  worshippers  rise without  the Sun:  
These  who foreknow  the holy work  of sacrifice,  and by their Godhead  drink  the sweets  of Soma  juice.   
5 Whether  ye, Lords  of ample  wealth,  now linger  in the cast or west,   
With  Druhyu,  or with Anu,  Yadu,  Turvaga,  I call you hither;  come  to me.  
6 Lords  of great  riches,  whether  through  the firmament  ye fly or speed  through  heaven  and earth,   
Or with your Godlike  natures  stand  upon  your cars, come  thence,  O Asvins,  hitherward.   
 Rig Veda – English Translation  
HYMN  XI. Agni.  
1. THOU  Agni,  God mid mortal  men,  art guard  of sacred  rites,  thou art To be adored  at sacrifice.   
2 O Mighty  Agni,  thou must  be glorified  at our festivals,   
Bearing  our offerings  to the Gods.   
3 O Jatavedas  Agni,  fight and drive  our foes afar from  us,  
Themand  their godless  enmities.   
4 Thou,  Jatavedas,  seekest  not the worship  of a hostile  man,   
However  nigh itbe to thee.   
5 We sages,  mortals  as we are, adore  the mighty  name  oof thee,   
Immortal  Jatavedas'  name.   
6 Sages, we call the Sage  to help,  mortals,  we call the God to aid:  
We call on Agni  with our songs.   
7 May Vatsa  draw−  thy mind  away  even  from  thy loftiest  dwelling−place,   
Agni,  with song that yearns  for thee.   
8 Thou  art the same  in many  a place:  mid all the people  thou art Lord.   
In fray and fightt  we call on thee.   
9 When  we are seeking  strength  we call Agni  to help us in the strife,   
The giver  of rich gifts in war.  
10 Ancient,  adorablie  at sacrifices,  Priest  from  of old, meet  for our praise,  thou sittest .  
Fill full and satisfy  thy body,  Agni,  and win us happiness  by offering  worship.   
 
HYMN  XII. Indra.  
1. JOY,  Mightiest  Indra,  known  and marked,  sprung  most  from  Soma−draughts,  wherewith   
Thou  smitest  down  the greedy  fiend,  for that we long.   
2 Wherewith  thou bolpest  Adhrigu,  the great  Dasagva,  and the God  
Who  stirs the sunlight,  and the sea, for that we long.   
3 Wherewith  thou dravest  forth  like cars Sindhu  and all the mighty  floods   
To go the way ordained  by Law,  for that we long.   
4 Accept  this laud for aid, made  pure like oil, thou Caster  of the Stone,   
Whereby  even  in a moment  thou hast waxen  great.   
5 Be pleased,  Song−lover,  with this song  it flows  abundant  like the sea.  
Indra,  with all thy succours  thou hast waxen  great.   
 
6 The God who from  afar hath sent gifts to maintain  our friendship's  bond,   
Thou.  spreading  them  like rain from  heaven,  hast waxen great.   
7 The beams  that mark  him have  grown  strong,  the thunder  rests between  his arms,   
When,  like the Sun, he hath increased  both Heaven  and Earth.   
8 When,  Mighty  Lord  of Heroes,  thou didst  cat a thousand  buffaloes,   
Then  grew  and waxed  exceeding  great thine  Indra−power.   
9 Indra  consumeth  with the rays of Surya  the malicious  man:   
Like Agni  conquering  the woods,  he hath grown  strong.   
10 This newest  thought  of ours that suits the time approaches  unto thee:   
Serving,  beloved  in many  a place  it metes  and marks.   
11 The pious  germ  of sacrifice  directly  purifies  the soul.   
By Indra's  lauds  it waxes  great,  it metes  and marks.   
12 Indra  who wins  the friend  hath spread  himself  to drink  the Soma−draught:   Rig Veda – English Translation  
Like worshipper's  dilating  praise;  it metes  and marks .  
13 He whom  the sages,  living  men,  have  gladdened,  offering  up their hymns,   
Hath  swelled  like oil of sacrifice  in Agni's  mouth.   
14 Aditi  also hath brought  forth  a hymn  for Indra,  Sovran  Lord:   
The work  of sacrifice  for help is glorified.   
15 The minist ering  priests  have  sung  their songs  for aid and eulogy:   
God,  thy Bays  turn not from  the rite which  Law ordains.   
16 If, Indra,  thou drink  Soma  by Visnu's  or Trta Aptya's  side,  
Or with the Maruts  take delight  in flowing  drops;   
17 Or, Sakra,  if thou gladd en thee afar or in the sea of air,  
Rejoice  thee in this juice  of ours,  in flowing  drops.   
18 Or, Lord  of Heroes  if thou aid the worshipper  who shed;  the, juice,   
Or him whose  laud delights  thee,  and his flowing  drops.   
19 To magnify  the God,  the God,  Indra, yea, Indra  for your help,   
And promptly  end the sacrifice−this  have  they gained.   
20 With  worship,  him whom  men adore,  with Soma,  him who drinks  it most,   
Indra  with lauds  have they increasedthis  have  they gained.   
21 His leadings  are with power  and might and his instructions  manifold:   
He gives  the worshipper  all wealth:  this have  they gained.   
22 For slaying  Vrtra  have the Gods  set Indra  in the foremost  place.   
Indra  the choral  bands  have sung,  for vigorous  strength.   
23 We to the Mighty  with our might , with lauds  to him who hears  our call,  
With  holy hymns  have  sung  aloud,  for vigorous  strength.   
24 Not earth,  nor heaven,  nor firmaments  contain  the Thunder−wielding  God:   
They  shake  before  his violent  rush and vigorous  strength.   
25 What  time the Gods,  O Indra,  get thee foremost  in the furious  fight,   
Then  thy two beautiful  Bay Steeds  carried  thee on.  
26 When  Vrtra,  stayer  of the floods,  thou si"est,  Thundeicr  with might,   
Then  thy two beautiful  Bay Steeds  carried  thee on.  
27 When  Visnu,  through  thine  energy,  strode  wide  those  three  great  steps  of his,  
Then  thy two beautiful  Bay Steeds  carried  thee on.  
28 When  thy two beautiful  Bay Steeds  grew  great  and greater  day by day,  
Even  then all creatures  that had life bowed  down  to thee.   
29 When,  Indra,  all the Marut  folk humbly  submitted  them  to thee,   
Even  then all creatures  that had life bowed  down  to thee.   
30 When  yonder  Sun, that brilliant  light,  thou settest  in the heaven  above,   
Even  then all creatures  that had life bowed  down  to thee.   
31 To thee,  O Indra,  with this thought  the sage lifts up this eulogy,   
 
Akin  and leading  as on foot to sacrifice.   
32 When  in thine  own dear dwelling  all gathered  have lifted  up the voice   
Milk−streams  at worship's  central  spot,  for sacrifice,   
33 As Priest,  O Indra,  give us wealth  in brave  men and good  steeds  ana kine  
That we may first remember  thee for sacrifice.   
 