Vidya Vahini
Chapter 1. Higher Learning
That which has no origin knows no beginning. It was before everything or anything was. There was nothing 
prior to It. For that very reason, It has no end. It expands as far as It wills, progresses as diverse as It feels, 
and, through Its fullness, fills the universe. Knowledge of this supreme principle is known as “that which illu -
mines ( vidya )” —spiritual knowledge, wisdom, awareness.
Many seers with manifold experiences of this unique awareness have visualised in their illumined hearts the 
sovereign secret underlying the captivating beauty of the cosmos. Compassion toward humanity has prompted 
them to communicate the vision through human language to arouse the innate thirst in the soul for immersion in 
that bliss. Spiritual learning ( vidya ) causes this urge in the hearts of the seers.
Vedic literature
Sound is the very core of the Veda . Sound is associated with harmony and melody, so the Veda  has to be 
heard and ecstasy derived therefrom. It is not to be analysed, commented upon, and judged. This is why the Veda  
is called “that which is heard ( sruthi )”. Only through listening to its recital can the awareness of the Atma  and of 
the bliss it confers be earned. The bliss thus acquired manifests in words and deeds that confer bliss on all around.
The term Vedanta  is generally used by many to indicate a school of philosophical thought. But Vedanta  is 
only a special section of Vedic  literature. All the Upanishadic  texts form part of Vedanta . Vedanta  is the consum -
mation of Vedic  thought. The Vedas  themselves are invaluable guides toward the Highest.
The hymns ( riks) of the Rig-veda  are ecstatic effusions from the spirit of humanity extolling the delight 
derived while contemplating the orderliness and beauty of nature outside them. The Sama-veda  is the precious 
verbal treasure that enables humanity to praise the Creator and His creation in song. The mystery of this world and 
of the worlds beyond is elaborated in the texts that are comprehensively called Atharvana-veda . The formulae for 
rites and ceremonials —beneficial or merit-yielding or sacrificial— have been collated as the Yajur-veda .
The Vedic  literature grouped into these four collections —each under a different name— has four more 
branches: the Mantras , the Brahmanas , the Aranyakas , and the Upanishads . The mantra  texts ( mantra-sastra ) are 
also called collections ( samhithas ), and all sacred formulae are grouped together in them.
The texts that describe the means and methods of utilising them and benefiting by their proper recital are 
known as Brahmanas . The word Brahma  has many meanings. In the expression Brahmanas , it means mantra . 
The Brahmanas  deal mostly with ceremonials and kindred external activities. The Aranyakas  deal with the inner 
significances and internal disciplines, like withdrawal of senses and elimination of attachments. The Upanishads  
attempt, by philosophical analysis, to harmonise the two paths. They form the final phase of Vedic  studies and are 
called Vedanta . They can even be considered to be the essence of Vedic  teachings. They are the cream of the entire 
Vedic  scriptures. When the Vedas  are assimilated by scholarship, the Upanishads  emerge as butter does when milk 
is churned.
All forms of Vedic  literature mentioned thus far form the most ancient body of knowledge, Vidya Upanishad 
—the word is formed by the root shad  getting the two syllables upa and ni as prefixes. Shad  means sitting, but it 
has also another meaning: destroying. Ni means steady, disciplined. Upa means near. The pupil has to sit near the Vidya VahiniChapter 1. Higher Learning 9guru  or preceptor, paying steady attention to what is being communicated. Only then can the pupil learn the fund 
of knowledge and the skill of discrimination.
The Upanishads , the Brahma Sutra , and the Bhagavad Gita  —these are the basic roots of Indian philosophi -
cal thought. Together, they are known as  the Authentic Triad  (Prasthana Thraya ).
The material and non-material worlds
This material objective world becomes visible to our eyes, pleases our senses, fascinates our minds, and 
informs our brain. But in and through this very world, there is one reachable non-material subjective world. 
When the non-material world is known, both worlds reveal themselves as partial expressions of the same indivis -
ible consciousness ( chaithanya ). The two supplement each other into the one Fullness ( purnam ). From the Full 
(Parabrahma ), the individual ( jiva) that is its complement arises. When the individual sheds the material corpus 
in which it is encased, the eternal Universal Consciousness is again the one Fullness, the Parabrahma  principle.
That is full; this is full; from the Full arose the Full;  when the Full is taken from the 
Full, only the Full  remains.
Purnam adah; purnam idam; puurnaath purnam udachyathe; purnasya purnam aadaaya 
purnam eva avasishyathe.
Spiritual education
The education process ( vidya ) teaches that the cosmos is a manifestation of the Lord’s sport and nothing else. 
The Upanishads  declare this truth thus: 
This world is the residence of the Lord:
Isaavaasyam idam jagath .
Therefore, no one can entertain a sense of personal possession or even a trace of egotism. Renounce the feeling 
of attachment and feel the presence of the Lord everywhere. Welcome the spiritual bliss ( ananda ) that the Lord, 
as the embodiment of spiritual bliss, confers on you and experience it with thankfulness and without being bound 
by desire. This is the message of the sages and seers ( rishis ).
Give up the feelings “I” and “you”; only then can you understand the glory of that which is neither “I” nor 
“mine”. This does not involve your renouncing everything. The real teaching ( vidya ) directs that the world be 
dealt with as duty demands, but in a spirit of detachment, avoiding entanglement. The acid test by which an activ -
ity can be confirmed as holy or sacred is to examine whether it promotes attachment or avoids bondage. The acid 
test to decide whether an activity is unholy or sinful is to examine whether it arises from or promotes greed. This 
is the teaching, the lesson from spiritual knowledge ( vidya ). Intent on fulfilling your legitimate duties, you can 
pray to God to keep you alive for a hundred years. You will not incur blame. So, spiritual knowledge advises you 
to engage in activities with full understanding of their nature and consequence.
Beasts kill only other beasts. But the blind person —one who has not acquired the vision of the Atma  that 
one is— kills oneself. And, spiritual knowledge ( vidya ) warns that one who commits this crime goes into fearful 
realms sunk in thickest night.
The supreme wisdom attempts to describe the “characteristics” of Atma . Atma  has no movement, but It is Vidya VahiniChapter 1. Higher Learning 10present everywhere. Even the gods cannot keep pace with it, however quick they are. It reveals Its presence long 
before we anticipate Its presence. The Atma  is immutable and omnipresent. Spiritual learning ( vidya ) announces 
that it is an impossible task to determine It.
When one attains the supreme wisdom (the highest level of vidya ), the distinction between “opposites” 
—Atma  and not- Atma , spiritual knowledge and ignorance ( vidya  and a-vidya ), growth and decay ( vikasa  and 
vinasa )— fade away. Mystics and sages attained that state of higher unity, and the history of their struggles and 
successes is enshrined in literature through the prompting of spiritual learning ( vidya ). For such sages, from that 
transcendental level, mere ritual or textbook knowledge is as dangerous as ignorance or negative knowledge. 
Such sages are aware of the mysterious origins and consequences of both. They are capable of overcoming death 
through lower knowledge and achieving immortality through higher or spiritual knowledge. Vidya VahiniChapter 2. Knowledge of Self  11Chapter 2. Knowledge of Self  
Spiritual knowledge provides illumination
The sublime significance of higher learning ( vidya ) can be grasped by one or communicated to another only 
when the pure mind sheds its revealing light. Inside a room kept scrupulously clean, no snake, no scorpion, 
no poison-bearing insect can enter. They will be at home only in dark, dirty places. For the same reason, the sa -
cred wisdom cannot enter dark and dirty hearts. Instead, poisonous breeds like anger will find those hearts to be 
congenial resorts.
Washing a lump of coal with soap and water won’t rid the coal of its colour. Nor will washing it in milk help. 
The only way is to put it in a fire. That will turn it into a heap of white ash. Similarly, only gaining awareness of 
the Atma  (Atmajnana ) —in other words, knowledge of Brahman ( Brahma-vidya )— will destroy the darkness of 
ignorance and the dirt of desire.
Darkness can be ended only with the help of light. Darkness cannot be overwhelmed by attacking it with 
more darkness. Spiritual knowledge ( vidya ) is the light that one needs to destroy the inner darkness. Spiritual 
learning provides the inner illumination. Spiritual wisdom is the authentic yoga  of the Supreme Person ( Purusho -
thama  Yoga ) defined in the Gita; it is the knowledge of the Supreme, the higher learning ( vidya ). This yoga  cannot 
be bought for money or acquired from friends or ordered from concerns or companies. It has to be assimilated and 
won by each one for oneself, through steady faith and ardent devotion.
The expression “God is nowhere” can remain unchanged; there is no need to confront or contradict it. The 
only thing necessary is to read the “w” in “where” in conjunction with the previous “no”, so that the expression 
becomes “God is now here”! The negative suddenly becomes positive. Similarly, merely by unifying the multidi -
rectional vision that is now directed on the universe into one direction, the distinctions and the differences disap -
pear and the many becomes One.
Holy people versus today’s scholars
Ramakrishna Paramahamsa, Jayadeva, Gauranga, Tukaram, Tulsidas, Ramdas, Kabirdas, Saradadevi, Meera, 
Sakkubai, Mallamma —they hadn’t mastered the objective commentaries and elucidations of the many sciences 
and scriptural texts. Yet, to this day they are adored by followers of all faiths, adherents of all creeds, and natives 
of all lands. The reason obviously lies in their unshaken faith in the Atma , won through purification of the mind. 
Spiritual knowledge alone conferred on them the purity and the clarity. These holy people spoke what they had in 
their hearts, exactly as they felt or experienced it.
Consider, however, the present-day claimants of spiritual learning ( vidya ). Isn’t it a fact that not even one 
in a million among them speaks exactly what is in their heart? They perform ritual worship to Sathyanarayana  
—Narayana  or God in the form of truth ( sathya )— one day a year; the rest of the year, every day, they worship 
Narayana  in the form of untruth ( asathya-narayana ). The urge for objective scholarship is derived from this type 
of worship. Can this knowledge deserve to be called the higher learning ( vidya )? No, never.Vidya VahiniChapter 2. Knowledge of Self  12Heeding advice and correcting behaviour
Food on the plate, when not consumed by us or given to a hungry person, but kept unused, becomes foul. So 
too, when our faults and failings are not corrected, either by our own efforts or by heeding the advice of sympa -
thetic souls who have succeeded in the cleansing process, imagine what the fate of our lives will be. Like the plate 
of boiled lentils ( dhal) kept for too long, life will stink.
A father once praised his son’s accomplishments and said in conclusion, “He has only two little faults. They 
are: (1) He doesn’t know what his faults are, and (2) He will not listen if others point them out to him.” This hap -
pened in the past. But today, not one son but each and every one is in the same predicament. It has become quite 
natural for every father to complain thus. Is this the value of the spiritual learning ( vidya ) they claim to have?
Children are by nature very good; the fault lies in the system that confers education ( vidya ) on them. Of 
course, this fact is known to all, but everyone shrinks from the task of reforming it. This is the major weakness. It 
is easy to advise in a million ways, but not even one thing is practised. “The system has to be transformed from the 
primary school right up to the universities” —this is declared and announced in newspapers— but no one can be 
seen who transforms it or even points out specifically what changes are to be effected and how. No one highlights 
the defects of the system.
People don’t recognise the truth that spiritual, moral, and behavioural values are the very crown of human 
achievement. When not in office, people write articles and essays on education or indulge in parrot-talks from 
platforms. When the same people achieve positions of authority, they legislate measures quite contrary to what 
they proclaimed earlier. Of course, speeches from platforms are good, but their practice is paralysed. Unless this 
illness of speech without practice is cured, education and real scholarship cannot manifest its worth. 
The magnet can draw iron toward itself, but it can’t attract pieces of iron covered with dust and rust. The dust 
and rust on the pieces of iron have to be washed away, so that the magnet can attract. Similarly, when the mind is 
polished clean, the effect will be, as the poet says, “A great soul ( mahatma ) whose sign is one thought, one word, 
one deed.” The harmony of these three is the best proof of the worth of humanity. This unique worth is now being 
disclaimed by people through their own volition, through unawareness of the genuine spiritual knowledge ( Atma-
vidya ) that ought to be learned.
Sugar water versus plain water
Many scholars, pundits and experts flourished as contemporaries of Ramakrishna Paramahamsa. But aware -
ness of the Atma  failed to illuminate them to any extent. As a result, the names of the scholars, pundits, and experts 
are not heard today. Only the name of Ramakrishna, who could not claim scholarship in any material or objective 
field of knowledge, has spread all over the world. Why? Sugar water and plain water look the same. Drink! Then 
you distinguish the one as sherbet and the other as just water. Paramahamsa’s words, which are full of supreme 
wisdom, are the sherbet; the words of scholars, which are soaked in textual scholarship, are the plain water. Pre -
tentious pundits who have only perused the pages go after monetary gains; they don’t rush toward the Divine.
Match sticks that have fallen into water cannot yield fire when struck, however vigorously you try. Besides, 
they spoil even the box that holds them. So, too, hearts soaked in worldly desires and designs may pour out parrot-
exhortations but they can have at best only listeners, not practitioners. The listeners might receive advice, but they 
would not accept it or act accordingly.Vidya VahiniChapter 2. Knowledge of Self  13Real and apparent knowledge
Every event in the world has a special cause that brought it about, namely, knowledge. Of course, without 
things to be known, there can be no knowledge. Knowledge itself is of two kinds: inner and outer, direct and in -
direct ( pratyaksha  and paroksha ), real and apparent. Outer knowledge ( paroksha ) is gained through the ear and 
other sense organs and through the words of others. Inner knowledge ( a-paroksha ), the true knowledge, knows 
no plurality; it analyses and understands the attractions and objects that haunt the mind. It purifies the mind and 
widens the vision of the heart.Vidya VahiniChapter 3. Modern Education 14Chapter 3. Modern Education
Problems of the educational system
Today, the educational system, though very expensive and elaborate, has ignored instruction in morals. In the 
spiritual teacher’s homes ( gurukulas ) of the past, instruction was provided for right living, spiritual advance -
ment, and moral conduct and behaviour. Students were trained to lead lives marked by humility, sense control, 
virtue, and discipline. Now, these qualities are not recognisable among students. Students are not aware of the 
means or meaning of sense-control. From childhood, they revel in following every whim and fancy; they find 
pleasure in the free play of the senses and believe only in materialism.
As a result, the situation in the colleges fills one with alarm. The head of the department of health in Calcutta 
found that 80 out of 100 students in the Calcutta University are afflicted with poor health. In the Bombay region, 
the condition is even worse, with 90 out of 100 affected. The reason is to be found in the fact that the students are 
engaged in sensual living, the uncontrolled pursuit of sensory pleasure and evil habits. Can these be counted as 
gains from education? Or are they to be called “riches” accumulated through perverse ignorance?    
Teachers have to identify their role and their responsibility. They have to bear a major share in fostering and 
preserving the mental and physical health of their tender, innocent wards.
To each their own world
Every living being looks at the world around, but each one looks uniquely in their own special way. The same 
object is looked at by ten persons with ten different feelings. The son looks at one individual with the feeling that 
he is the father. The wife looks on him as the husband. His father looks upon him as a son. His companion has 
the feeling that he is a dear friend. Since he is the same individual, why doesn’t he evoke the same reaction in all? 
Those who visualise him differently are affected differently. That is the truth.
Once, a guru  residing in Brahman Mutth (a hermitage), while in a happy mood, chewing betel with great rel -
ish, asked his disciple, “Dear fellow! How is the world?” The disciple answered, “Dear guru ! For each one, their 
own world.” Alhough all are in one world, each one lives in their own world, shaped by their own actions and 
reactions. This is why Sankaracharya declared “fill your vision with wisdom; then, all that you see will be God.” 
When the vision ( drishti ) is filled with wisdom ( jnana ), creation ( srishti ) is filled with Brahman.
Story of Narayana and Lakshmi
In the vocabulary of education today, riches ( dhana ) is dharma  (merit). The pursuit of riches is the “right” 
path. Every activity ( karma ) has the acquisition of riches as the goal. Possessing wealth ( dhanam ) confers the 
highest status. There is no ideal more desirable than getting rich. Here is a short story as illustration: Narayana 
(God) has sixteen manifest aspects; yet, He is the latent immanent reality. So, too, the material Narayana, the ru -
pee, also has also sixteen “pennies” ( annas ) as parts. When men worship the rupee as the visible god, Narayana 
becomes unreachable to them. Few try to estimate the vastness of the loss they sustain therefrom.
One day, in the midst of conversation, Lakshmi, the divine consort and the goddess of wealth, teased Na -Vidya VahiniChapter 3. Modern Education 15rayana, “Lord! The entire world adores Me; not even one in a hundred, why, not even one in a million, worships 
you.” She put forward a plan to test people’s sincerity. She said, “Lord! Let’s discover the facts for ourselves. 
Come, we’ll go forth into the world and find out.”
Narayana agreed. He changed into a great pundit, wearing golden bracelets on his wrists as evidence of the 
appreciation and admiration of famous academic bodies. He had a garland of beads (from the rudraksha  bush) 
around his neck and thick streaks of holy ash on his forehead. He manifested on earth as a redoubtable scholar. He 
moved from village to village and began enchanting the people through his enrapturing discourses. His splendid 
personality and deep scholarship attracted the people. Thousands gathered to hear him and followed him from 
place to place. Brahmins  invited him to their settlements and honoured him. His arrival was celebrated as a festi -
val, with rich feasting.
While Narayana was being feted thus, Lakshmi appeared on earth as a great female ascetic. She too pro -
ceeded from village to village, enlightening the people on the Atma  through her discourses. Women assembled to 
hear her fascinating speeches in wave after wave, in massive numbers. They prayed for her to honour their homes 
with a visit and partake of the feast they were most eager to offer. In reply, she informed them that she was bound 
by some vows that made it difficult for her to accept their request. She would not eat out of plates already in use in 
the homes. She said that she must be allowed to bring her own cups and plates. The women yearned so deeply to 
host her that they accepted the condition. Whatever her vow, they were ready to respect it. Invitations came from 
every woman, from everywhere.
The female yogi reached the house where she was to take food the first day and took from her bag a gold 
plate, a few gold cups, and a gold tumbler for drinking water. She spread them before herself, for the various 
items of the meal. When the meal was over, she left, leaving the precious golden articles for the host. She had a 
new set for each day, she said.
The news spread. The villages where Narayana was holding his delightful discourses also heard the wonder -
ful happenings of the female ascetic’s gifts. The brahmins  who were staunch admirers of the far-famed scholar 
also rushed to invite the female yogi to their homes for lunch! She told them that they should drive the pundit out 
before she could enter their settlement. She would not set foot there as long as he continued to stay there! She was 
adamant. Their greed for gold was so strong that they forced the pundit, whom they had adored for so long and so 
pompously, to leave their village.
Thereafter, the female yogi entered the brahmin  settlement, gave discourses, partook of feasts arranged in 
her honour, and presented the golden plates and cups to each of her hosts. Thus, she managed to get the pundit 
driven out of every place where he sought recognition and attention. Instead, she secured the worship of people 
everywhere. Unable to bear the universal insult, the pundit cast off the role, and Narayana disappeared from the 
earth. The female ascetic came to know of this. She also gave up her role and resumed her real form. She joined 
Lord Narayana. While they were conversing, she told the Lord, “Now, tell me! What did you discover? Who 
between us is honoured and worshiped more on earth?” Narayana smiled at her question. He replied, “Yes. What 
you said is true.”
Yes. Today, education and the knowledge gained are being marketed. Money is all in all. Educated people 
desert their motherland like mendicants in search of money. Is this the sign of a proper education? Vidya VahiniChapter 4. Removal of Primal Ignorance 16Chapter 4. Removal of Primal Ignorance
The highest goal of Bharath
For generations, Bharath (India) has been conferring lasting peace and happiness on peoples of all lands 
through the impact of the spiritual principles it has cherished. The ideal for which this land has striven has 
been, “May all the worlds be happy and prosperous ( loka-samasthaah sukhino bhavanthu ).”
This has been the highest goal of the people of Bharath. In order to foster and accomplish this holy ideal, the 
rulers of past ages, sages ( rishis ), founders of creeds, scholars, the learned, matrons and mothers, have suffered 
and sacrificed much. They have discarded honour and fame and struggled to uphold their conviction and to shape 
their lives in accordance with this universal vision.
Eliminating pride and egotism
Rare and costly articles might attract by their external beauty, but, to the eye illumined by spiritual light, they 
would appear trivial in value. Physical charm and force can never overpower the charm or force of the spirit. The 
quality of passion ( rajas ) breeds egotism, and it can be identified wherever selfishness and pride are displayed. 
Until this mode of thought and action is suppressed, the quality of purity ( sathwa ) cannot become evident. And, in 
the absence of the pure quality, the divine, the Siva, the supreme power, cannot be propitiated, pleased, and won.
Parvathi, the daughter of the monarch of the Himalayas, was the very acme of physical beauty. In spite of 
this, she had to acquire the quality of purity ( sathwa ) by destroying pride in personal beauty and her native ego -
tism through intense asceticism. She had to shine in the beauty of the spirit! The legend relates that Manmatha, 
the God of love, who planned to project only Parvathi’s youthful charm to attract Siva, was burned to ashes when 
her pride in her beauty was destroyed. This incident symbolises the fact that divine knowledge ( vidya ) cannot be 
gained as long as one is caught up in the coils of the ego. When one equips oneself with spiritual knowledge, pride 
disappears. But these days, conceit and pride are taken as adding charm to the knowledge required.
The attraction conferred on a person by scholarship in matters relating to the objective world has to be given 
up; only thereafter can the genuine innate divinity manifest itself. Only then can the personality of the individual, 
which is the self, accept the divine. The ego in us is the Manmatha, the “agitator of the mind”, and it has to be 
turned into ashes through the impact of divine vision. The divine, the Iswara (Siva), will not yield Himself to 
physical charm, worldly authority, muscular or intellectual or financial power. This is the inner meaning of the 
Manmatha episode.
Parvathi underwent extreme austerities and subjected herself (i.e. her ego-consciousness) to sun, rain, cold, 
and hunger, and thus transformed herself. Finally, Iswara accepted her as half of Himself! This is the stage in 
spiritual advance called mergence ( sayujya ). It is the same as liberation and release ( moksha  and mukthi ). In fact, 
spiritual learning ( vidya ) involves humility, tolerance, and discipline. It destroys arrogance, envy, and all related 
vices. Such knowledge is the real Atmic  knowledge.
Develop detachment and eliminate desireVidya VahiniChapter 4. Removal of Primal Ignorance 17Moksha  means liberation. All embodied beings long for liberation from the limitation that the embodiment 
connotes. Every living being is perforce an aspirant ( mumukshu ) for liberation, a practitioner of renunciation. Ev -
eryone has to be a renunciate ( thyagi ), versed in detachment. This is the final truth, the indisputable truth. When 
we give up our body and leave, we don’t take even a handful of earth with us. When we don’t learn to give up, 
upon death nature teaches us this great truth about the need and value of detachment and renunciation. So, it is 
good to learn the lesson even before this happens. The person who learns and practises this truth is indeed blessed.
Detachment is the second valuable virtue that spiritual learning ( vidya ) imparts (the first being the absence 
of pride and egotism). Empty a pot of the water that filled it, and the sky that one could see within the pot as an 
image or shadow gets lost along with the water. But the genuine sky enters the pot. So too, when that which is not 
Atma  is discarded, Atma  remains and liberation is attained.
But what has to be discarded is not an objective impediment; the renunciation has to be subjective. Many 
people interpret renunciation ( thyaga ) to mean either giving away money and land as charity or performing ritu -
als or sacrifices ( yajna  or yaga ), or giving up hearth, home, wife, and children and proceeding to the forest. But 
renunciation does not mean such gestures of weak mindedness. These are not as difficult to give up as they are 
believed to be. If so minded, one can go through these acts easily and give up what the acts prescribe. The real 
renunciation is the giving up of desire.
The giving up of desire is the real goal of a person’s existence, the purpose of all his efforts. It involves giv -
ing up lust, anger, greed, hatred, etc. The fundamental renunciation should be that of desire. The other feelings and 
emotions are its attendant reactions. We say  “He who has the bow in his hand ( kodanda pani )”; but this implies 
that he also has the arrow in his hand. The bow implies the arrow. In the same manner, desire implies the presence 
of lust, anger, greed, etc. These latter are veritable gateways to hell. Envy is the bolt, and pride is the key. Unlock 
and lift the bolt, and you can enter in.
Humanity and animal
Anger will pollute the earned wisdom. Unbridled desire will foul all actions. Greed will destroy devotion and 
dedication. Anger, desire, and greed will undermine the actions, spiritual wisdom, and devotion and make one a 
boor. But the root cause of anger is desire, and desire is the consequence of ignorance ( a-jnana ). So, what has to 
be got rid of is this basic ignorance.
Ignorance is the characteristic of the animal ( pasu ). What is an animal? “That which sees is the animal ( pasy-
athi ithi pasuh ).” That is to say, the animal is that which has outward vision and accepts what the external vision 
conveys. The inward vision will lead a person to Pasupathi , the Lord of all living beings, the master of animals. 
One who has not mastered the senses is the animal. The animal has harmful qualities born along with it, qualities 
that cannot be eliminated so easily. The animal cannot get free of them, for it has no capacity to understand the 
meaning of the advice given. For example, we may bring up a tiger cub with affectionate care and train it to be 
gentle and obedient. But when it is hungry, it will relish only raw meat; it won’t eat puri and potato!
But people can be educated into better ways. Hence, the statement in the scriptures, “For all animate beings, 
birth as a human is a rare achievement.” Humans are indeed the most fortunate and most holy among animals, for 
their inborn qualities can be sublimated. A human born with animal qualities can elevate itself through self-effort 
and training into a master of the animal qualities ( pasupathi ). The beast is born “cruel” and dies “cruel”.Vidya VahiniChapter 4. Removal of Primal Ignorance 18A life lived without mastering the senses doesn’t deserve the name. A human is endowed with many capabili -
ties, and years are wasted if the senses are not controlled and directed properly. Valid education ( vidya ) helps one 
achieve success in this process of mastery.  Education promotes humility ( vidya  confers vinaya ). Through humil -
ity, one acquires the right to engage in professions. That authority confers prosperity. A prosperous person has the 
capacity for charity and right living. Right living can confer happiness here and hereafter. Vidya VahiniChapter 5. Spiritual Discipline 19Chapter 5. Spiritual Discipline
Education must determine and delve into the nature and characteristics of spiritual search for the Absolute or 
the Overself —the Highest Atma  (Paramatma ). It must prove its true character by manifesting as a spring of 
morality, laying down axioms of virtue. Spiritual education ( vidya ) is its own visible proof. It is the root of faith 
in every faith. It prepares the mind of man to appreciate and adhere to the faith and to direct man’s living along 
that course. This has been named philosophy.
Philosophy means love of knowledge. Knowledge is a treasure of incalculable richness. Education is the 
relentless pursuit of knowledge, urged by love for its value and undeterred by difficulties. Spiritual education tries 
to probe behind the forms assumed by things and the appearances they put on and discover the reality that alone 
can explain them. The truth has to be known and lived by; it has to be visualised; this is the function of spiritual 
learning.
Spiritual learning ( vidya ) is the effulgence that permeates a full life. In the West, education deals more with 
concepts and conjectures; in the East, education deals more with truth and totality. The principle sought by spiri -
tual education is beyond the field of the senses.
The human body
Man is a triune composite of body, mind, and spirit ( Atma ). As a consequence, man has three natures in his 
make up: (1) a low, animal nature, (2) a human nature, replete with worldly knowledge and skill, and (3) the genu -
ine nature of man, namely, the divine, Atmic  nature. Becoming aware of this third nature and establishing oneself 
in it —this is spiritual education ( vidya ).
The body is a machine with the five elements as its components: space, air, fire, water, and earth. God is 
playing with it, Himself unseen.
The body is a tree; love of Self is the root; desires are the branches it sends forth; qualities, attributes, and 
modes of behaviour based on basic nature are the flowers issuing therefrom; joy and grief are the fruits it of fers.
The human body is a world in itself. The blood flows through and animates every part of the body. God flows 
in and through and activates every spot in the world.
Education reveals the good and bad
Only one law guides and guards this world: the law of love. The joy or grief, good life or bad, of each na -
tion or community is decided by and derived from its activities. The “bad” is in fact “good” in reverse. It serves 
to teach what has to be avoided. It would not be “bad” for all time; it is ever short lived. Neither “bad” nor 
“good” can be pronounced as “absolutely unrelieved” states. Spiritual learning ( vidya ) reveals and makes clear 
that “good” and “bad” are only reactions caused by the failings and feelings of the mind.
One must be able to judge the difference between one “good thing” and another that seems to us to be “bet -
ter”. If one cannot do so, one will hold on to the first thing that seems good and discard the rest. But it must be un -
derstood that the “better” is not harmful to the good. Just as “unrighteousness” prods one to cultivate “righteous -
ness”, troubles induce one to manifest compassion and charity. Suffering is the inevitable seed of compassion. If Vidya VahiniChapter 5. Spiritual Discipline 20there were no wrong and no suffering, one would have become either stock or stone. One who has no capacity to 
weigh and to respond to the call of agony and pain is like a blind person who cannot distinguish between what is 
good and what is bad. People without discrimination behave in this blind manner.
Desires and thoughts cause birth and death
Desire breeds wishes. Wishes cause birth and death. When one is devoid of desire, one need not go through 
birth and death. The next birth is the result of unfulfilled desires in this life and is determined by them. Those who 
have no trace of desire for material objects can achieve the awareness of the Atmic  reality.
In fact, the desire to know God, to love God, and to be loved by God does not bind. When awareness of 
God dawns in all its splendour, every worldly, sensual desire is reduced to ashes in the flames of that awareness. 
The individual Self will turn toward the Universal Self as soon as desire comes to an end and the Self delights in 
supreme peace ( paramasanthi ). The Self must break off all contact with non-self, so that it can earn immortality.    
You are a heap of thoughts. Your thoughts play a vital role in shaping your life. That is why you are advised 
to watch your thoughts and to welcome only good ones.  Spiritual learning ( vidya ) stabilises good thoughts in the 
mind and thus rises to the status of knowledge of the supreme Reality ( Atma-vidya ). For example, a chair evokes 
an idea in your mind of a certain form and name. The word wood doesn’t produce the same idea and name-form. 
The value of that name-form depends on the usefulness you attribute to the wood. The relationship between you 
and the material world must be such as to make desires flee from you, not to make desires more intensive and 
extensive.
Really speaking, no one loves or desires any article or thing, appreciating it as itself. One loves it at all times 
only for selfish reasons, for one’s own sake. No move is indulged in without a specific purpose.
But the learning derived from spiritual education will reveal that the individual is not entirely responsible 
for even the motive that prompts him. The activity ( karma ) is not fully one’s own! Nevertheless, it is one’s karma  
that elevates or degrades one’s status.
Death involves certain developments that weaken and extinguish life. It does not affect the Atma ; which has 
no death and cannot be destroyed. Therefore one should not fear death. Death is but another stage of life. However 
long one suffers from illness or however severe the injury, death can happen only when time signals the right mo -
ment. When the yearning for living ends, there can be no more birth.
The Atma activates all
One single energy ( sakthi ) activates all hands, sees through all eyes, and hears through all ears. In fact, all 
mankind is made of one divine substance. The human body, whether in America, China, Africa, or India, has the 
same components of flesh, blood, and bone. The instinctive urges and awareness are common to all living beings. 
When investigation is done through scientific means, the truth that there are signs of awareness of life in stone and 
tree and metals can be demonstrated.
The Atma  is a spark of the Divine. Its latent existence can be known by inquirers. God is ONE. Whatever 
one’s nationality, whatever religion one professes, one can realise the Universal Absolute (Brahman) if one mas -
ters the science of spiritual advancement ( Atma-vidya ). Faith in the ONE God is the crux, the central point. Other 
beliefs, concepts, and conjectures revolve as the rim, on the periphery. Vidya VahiniChapter 6. Spiritual Preceptors 21Chapter 6. Spiritual Preceptors
Learning without culture of the spirit is barren
The inescapable destiny of every living being is the attainment of Fullness. It can’t be avoided or denied. Our 
present condition of incompleteness is the consequence of thoughts, feelings, passions, and acts of past lives. 
So too, our future condition is being built on the basis of our present deeds, thoughts, and feelings. Thus, we are 
the cause of our own fortunes and misfortunes. This doesn’t mean that we shouldn’t seek and secure assistance 
from others to promote our good fortune and avoid misfortune. Such assistance is essential for all, except perhaps 
a small minority. When we get this help, our consciousness is purified and sublimated and our spiritual progress 
is accelerated. In the end, we achieve perfection and fullness.
This vivifying inspiration can’t be obtained through the perusal of books. It can be gained only when one 
mind element contacts another mind element. Spending an entire life pouring over books and thereby becomes in -
tellectually very talented can’t advance to the slightest extent the cultivation of the spirit. It would be unwarranted 
to claim that a person who has reached the acme of intelligence has thereby progressed and succeeded in reaching 
the acme of spiritual wisdom. Scholarship and culture are not related as cause and effect. However learned one is 
in worldly knowledge, unless one’s mind is cultured, the learning is mere junk. The best and most fruitful system 
of education teaches culture and helps the culture permeate and purify the learning that is gathered.
As a result of the study of books, or, in other words, as a result of worldly education, one’s intelligence may 
be sharpened and expanded. One can even deliver wonderful discourses on spiritual subjects. But, one’s spiritual 
life cannot be taken to have advanced in proportion. The teaching imparted to us by another person might not en -
ter the heart and transform one’s nature. This is why learning without intensive culture of the spirit proves barren.
Pupils, gurus, and Avatars
Only the great one who has the Atmic  truth imprinted on the heart is to be accepted as guru . And only the 
individual who can welcome this truth and is eager to know it is to be accepted as pupil. The seed must have the 
life principle latent in it, and the field must be ploughed and made fit for sowing. The spiritual harvest will be 
plentiful if both these conditions are fulfilled. The listener has to possess a clear receptive intellect, or else the 
philosophical principles that form the basis of spiritual wisdom ( jnana ) will not be comprehended. The guru  and 
the pupil both have to be of this stature. Others who have no such qualification or authority can only dabble and 
play about purposelessly in the spiritual field.
Some gurus  have far higher stature and far deeper capabilities than these learned and cultural masters: the 
Avatars , the human incarnations of God. By mere willing, they confer the blessing of spiritual strength. They 
command and, by the very force of that command, the lowest of the low rises to the status of one who has at -
tained.. Such people are the gurus  of all gurus . They are the highest manifestations of God in human form.
Visualising God
A human can visualise God only as a human. God appears in human form in answer to human prayer, since Vidya VahiniChapter 6. Spiritual Preceptors 22humans can experience only that vision as real. Try to visualise God in another form, and you have to contemplate 
some crooked ugly form and make great effort to believe that that form, which is lower than the real one, is He.
One ignorant person agreed to mould an idol of Siva and spent many days preparing it. As a result of his 
labour, he produced an image of a monkey! Humans are unable to picture, through imagination, any form of God 
beyond the human. So, we have to wait for the chance of perceiving the reality of the Person by ourselves reaching 
a stage above and beyond the human level.
As at present created, humans are encased by nature, so they can see God only as a human. There is no es -
cape. When buffalos yearn to worship God, limited as they are by the buffalo nature, they can imagine God as a 
Cosmic Buffalo. So too, a human imagines the divine Principle as a cosmic perfect person ( purusha ) with human 
limbs and human qualities.
Human, buffalo, fish —these can be compared to vessels or containers. Take it that these vessels proceed to 
the limitless ocean of Divinity to fill themselves with it. Each can have it only in its own shape and size, right? The 
human vessel will earn and accept God as having a human form; the buffalo vessel, a buffalo form; the fish ves -
sel, a fish form. All these vessel-forms contain the identical water of the ocean of divinity. When people visualise 
God, they see God as human. Each imposes on God its own form. If we try to imagine God to have some special 
peculiar form, it becomes highly distorted, as in the case of an ignorant man who labours to make an idol of Siva 
and ends up with a monkey form!
Spiritual education is experiencing the truth
The petty investigation done by ordinary reason, unfed by wisdom, can help to perceive only nothingness. 
A person who investigates thus can only deliver lectures condemning Avatars . If you happen to be present and 
listening, ask the speaker, “Venerable sir! Have you understood the meaning of the words omnilocation, omnipo -
tence, and omnipresence?” One is confined to the objective nature, which one contacts through his senses. So, 
one is helpless in understanding these ideas. The speaker doesn’t know any more about these concepts than does 
the common unlettered person. Though they are ignorant of these vast horizons of thought, speakers of this type 
create confusion and distress through their teachings.
Spiritual education is, in reality, experience of the truth, awareness of the truth. Pleasing oratory should not 
be mistaken as experiencing the Truth, which comes about only in the innermost tabernacle of the Self. Vidya VahiniChapter 7. Culture of Dharma 23Chapter 7. Culture of Dharma
The human being is like a seed. Just as the seed sprouts into a sapling and grows continuously into a tree, the 
human has to grow and attain fulfilment. This requires mastering two fields of knowledge. Knowledge of the 
world, that is to say, knowledge concerning the manifested universe. And knowledge of the other world. The first 
confers means the for living ( jivana-upadhi ); the second confers the goal of life ( jivana-paramavadhi ).
The means for living are the things that can satisfy one’s day-to-day needs. One has to acquire them and store 
them, or acquire the capacity to get them when required. The knowledge of the goal of life involves inquiry into 
problems like: “For what end should one live?” “Who is the Creator of all that we become aware of?” “What ex -
actly am I, this distinct individual I?” This enquiry ultimately reveals the goal. The scriptures of all religions and 
the many moral codes derived from them are concerned with problems that transcend the limits of this world like: 
“Why are we here?” “What do we really have to do to deserve this chance of life?” “What are we to become?”
Living a regulated and disciplined life
What is the most beneficial way for man to live in this world? The answer: live a regulated and disciplined 
life. Real education must train one to observe these limits and restrictions. We take great pains and suffer priva -
tions to master worldly knowledge. We follow some regimen with strict care in order to develop the physique. 
Whatever our objective, we obey an appropriate code of discipline.
What exactly are the gains of disciplined thought and conduct? The rules and regulations are elementary at 
first. Then, they enable one to be aware of regions beyond the reach of the senses. Later, one can journey beyond 
the reach of one’s mind, and beyond even the outermost walls of what is reachable by all powers enclosed in the 
human body. Finally, one realises and experiences the truth of Truth, namely, one is the One that is immanent in 
all, that is, in the entire cosmos. One is filled with bliss when fixed in this faith and in this awareness.
This process is the acquisition of real education ( vidya ), the culmination of the best educational process. 
During the process, real education also instructs incidentally about the ideal configuration of society, the most 
desirable affiliations between people, the most beneficial relations between peoples, races, nations, and communi -
ties, and the best mode and manner for day-to-day life. Real education implants these in the heart, as deep as is 
necessary for human progress.
Of all professions, the teacher’s profession has to adhere to the ideal of truth. When teachers stray from truth, 
society meets with disaster. Thousands of tender children, unacquainted with the ways of the world, pass through 
their hands. The impact of their teachings and their personality will be great and lasting. Therefore, the teacher 
has to be free from bad habits.
Children automatically adopt the habits and manners of elders —this is an ever-present danger. When evil in -
fluence is directed toward the thousands who receive the impact, society gets polluted. And, in time, the social evil 
also contaminates the teacher in some other way. “This is the lesson you taught me, O Lord!” runs the song. The 
teacher is laughed at and humiliated one day by his own pupils. So, the teacher must equip himself with virtues.
The king is honoured only inside his kingdom. He is adored only within its borders. But the virtuous man is 
honoured and adored in all countries.Vidya VahiniChapter 7. Culture of Dharma 24A person may have outstanding physical beauty, may have the sparkle of robust youth, may boast of a high 
noble lineage, and may be a famed scholar. But if the person lacks the virtues that spiritual discipline can ensure, 
the person is to be reckoned only as a beautiful flower, with no fragrance.
Following one’s dharma
When quite young, Mohandas Karamachand Gandhi witnessed along with his mother a drama on “Sravana 
and his devotion to his parents”, and he resolved that he must also become Sravana. He witnessed a play on Hari -
schandra, and it impressed him so deeply that he resolved to become as heroically devoted to virtue as Harischan -
dra himself. These transformed him so much that he became a great soul ( mahatma ). Gandhi had a teacher who 
taught him wrong paths. But Gandhi did not adopt his advice. As a consequence, he was able to bring freedom 
to the country. In this land of India (Bharath), there are thousands and thousands of prospective great souls. The 
examples we have to hold before them are the men and women who have learned and practised spiritual education 
(Atma-vidya ).
The ancient culture of India (the Sanathana Dharma ) is acclaimed as of supreme value, not merely by Indi -
ans ( Bharathiyas ) but by people of all lands. The reason for its universal renown is that it is based on the Vedas .  
“The Vedas  are the source of all principles of morality or dharma  (Vedhokhilo dharma moolam )”. Dharma  implies 
all the prescriptions for actions and attitudes that are needed to preserve the status one has gained as the highest 
among animals and living beings. The Vedas  are the treasure chests that contain all the duties and obligations, 
rights and responsibilities that one has to accept and abide by in life.
Advice for pupils
In the ancient hermitages, after a pupil had finished the studies, the guru  gave the pupil such exalted advice 
as no pupil in any other country received from a master. These were the commands:
Consider mother as God; consider father as God; consider preceptor as God. Speak 
the truth; act righteously; do not adopt other ways.
Mathru Devo bhava; pithru Devo bhava; acharya Devo bhava. Sathyam vadha; dharmam 
chara; no itharaani .
This was the advice: “Stop all acts that are unrighteous. Engage yourselves only in such activities as would pro -
mote your progress.” The Vedas  and the Upanishads  are referring only to these commands when they lay down 
that we should utter peace, peace, peace ( santhi , santhi , santhi ), praying for peace on earth.
The advice given to the pupils is, every bit of it, highly powerful. By his devoted service to his mother and 
father, Dharmavyadha won eternal fame. Through consistent adherence to truth, Rama and Harischandra made 
themselves immortal. By means of right conduct, mere men rose to the position of great sages ( maha-purushas ). 
Buddha desisted from harm to living beings. He spoke of nonviolence ( ahimsa ) as “the highest morality (paramo 
dharmah). So, he was revered as a world teacher.
The real penance in life is to observe disciplines and restrictions as prescribed above. The mind is the fore -
most of the three inner instruments in man ( thri-karanas ). We must protect the mind so that attachment, passion, 
and excitement do not enter. These extremes are natural to the mind. The waves that rise in fury in it are the six 
inner foes of man: lust, anger, greed, attachment, pride, and envy. The first two bring the remaining four in their Vidya VahiniChapter 7. Culture of Dharma 25trail. To release ourselves from the first two and thus proceed on the spiritual path, we have to practise spiritual 
discipline. We learn these practices through spiritual learning ( vidya ). Vidya VahiniChapter 8. Loving Service 26Chapter 8. Loving Service
Work done with no concern or desire for profit, purely out of love or from a sense of duty, is yoga . Such yoga  
destroys one’s animal nature and transforms one into a divine being. Serving others, visualising them as 
kindred Atmas , will help one to progress; it will save one from sliding down from the spiritual stage attained. Self -
less service ( seva) is far more salutary than even vows and worship ( puja). Service disintegrates the selfishness 
latent in you; it opens the heart wide; it makes the heart blossom.
So, work done with no desire is the supreme ideal; and when the mansion of life is built on that foundation, 
through the subtle influence of this basis of selfless service, virtues will gather unto him. Service must be the 
outer expression of inner goodness. And, as one undertakes selfless service more and more, one’s consciousness 
expands and deepens and one’s Atmic  reality is more clearly known.    
This ideal of selfless service ( seva) and the urge to practise it form the very heart of education. Pure love, 
its chief manifestation —that is education. Nothing else can be. God loves those who do good to mankind as His 
dear children. They are ideal brothers and sisters for their countrymen. They deserve and achieve the awareness 
of Atma .    
Whoever assigns their wealth, strength, intellect, and devotion toward the promotion of the progress of 
mankind is to be considered as a person to be revered. Those who observe the holy vow of service, unsullied by 
thoughts of self are born for a noble purpose.
Vow of loving selfless service
Prompted by the urge to advance the progress of others, a person who dedicates their wealth, skill, and intel -
ligence, their position and status, becomes truly great. Such a one is the purposeful seer for the world. Such a one 
fulfils unfailingly the vow of selfless service. One who is conscious of the basic duties and obligations and spends 
days in carrying them out in practice will be in supreme peace, wherever one may be. Through one’s influence, 
the neighbourhood will also share that peace.
Spiritual learning ( vidya ) impels one to pour one’s narrow ego into the sacrificial fire and foster in its place 
universal love, which is the foundational base for the super structure of spiritual victory. Love that knows no 
limits purifies and sanctifies the mind. Let the thoughts centre around God, let the feelings and emotions be holy, 
and let activities be the expression of selfless service. Let the mind, heart, and hand be thus saturated in good. 
Spiritual education has to take up this task of sublimation. It must first instil the secret of service. Service rendered 
to another has to confer full joy in all ways. Spiritual education must emphasise that in the name of service ( seva), 
no harm, pain, or grief should be inflicted on another.
While rendering service, the attitude of its being done for one’s own satisfaction should not tarnish it. Service 
has to be rendered as an essential part of the process of living itself. This is the real core of spiritual education 
(vidya ). As brick and mortar are to a house that is being built, the activity of service needs the spiritual illumina -
tion that can strengthen our resolve to purify our thought, word, and deed in order to carry out our duties. Spiritual 
education such as this is the key to the country’s progress.Vidya VahiniChapter 8. Loving Service 27Service as dedicated worship
What exactly is the secret of ensuring peace and prosperity for mankind? Rendering service to others without 
expecting service from them in return. Activity ( karma ) that binds is a huge fast growing tree. The axe that can 
cut its roots is this: Do every act as an act of worship to glorify the Lord. This is the real sacrifice ( yajna ), the 
most important ritual. This sacrifice promotes and confers knowledge of Brahman ( Brahma-vidya ). Note that the 
yearning to do selfless service must flow in every nerve of the body, penetrate every bone and activate every cell. 
Those who engage themselves in spiritual discipline ( sadhana ) must have mastered this attitude toward service.
Selfless service ( seva) is the blossom of love ( prema ), a flower that fills the mind with rapture. Harmlessness 
is the fragrance of that flower. Let even your little acts be redolent with compassion and reverence; be assured 
that your character would thereby shine greatly. The highest happiness is contentment. Where there is no harsh -
ness, holiness will thrive and virtue will flourish. Where greed exists, vice will breed thick. One must completely 
destroy the urge to live an isolated life, like a lone bull. Do not entertain such a wish even in dreams.
Spiritual learning ( vidya ) instructs you to remember yourself first. After transforming yourself, try to reform 
others: that is the advice offered by spiritual knowledge. The delusive attachment to the objective world can be 
uprooted by means of selfless service rendered as worship to the Lord. Devotion to the motherland, love of the 
motherland —these are to be reckoned as far less than love and devotion toward all mankind. Genuine spiritual 
devotion ( bhakthi ) is characterised by love for all, at all times, everywhere.
Your nature is revealed by your acts, your gestures, your looks, your speech, your feeding habits, your dress, 
your gait. Therefore, pay attention to ensure that your speech, your movements, your thoughts, your behaviour are 
all right —full of love, pure ( sathwic ), and devoid of wildness and waywardness.
Ignorance conquered by faith, devotion, and patience
You have to develop the humility to believe that you have much good to learn from others. Your enthusiasm, 
your strong ambition, your resolution, your capacity to work, your store of knowledge, your wisdom —these have 
to be related to all others and not utilised for you alone. Your heart should take all others in. Your thoughts too 
should be patterned on those broad lines. Treat each trouble you encounter as a fortunate opportunity to develop 
your strength of mind and to toughen you with greater hardihood.
Eating food is a holy ritual ( yajna ). It should not be performed during moments of anxiety or emotional ten -
sion. Food has to be considered as medicine for the illness of hunger and as the sustenance of life. 
The characteristic of nature is “to manifest as manifold”; the characteristic of the Divine is “to absorb into 
unity”. So, those who dislike or hate another or demean and denigrate another are indeed fools, for they thereby 
dislike, hate, demean, or denigrate only themselves! But they are unaware of this truth. Spiritual knowledge 
(vidya ) instructs one to become established in this truth and demonstrate the underlying divinity.
In the garden of the heart, one must plant and foster the rose of divinity, the jasmine of humility, and gener -
osity as the champak (a magnolia tree whose flowers are used to make perfume). In the medicine chest of each 
student must be kept in readiness tablets of discrimination, drops of self-control, and three powders: faith, devo -
tion, and patience. By the use of these drugs, one can escape the serious illness called ignorance ( a-jnana ).
There are many destructive forces in the world, but, luckily, there are also, constructive forces. Students of 
spiritual learning should not turn into worshipers of bombs and mechanical contrivances ( yantras ). They must Vidya VahiniChapter 8. Loving Service 28transform themselves into active persons worshiping God (Madhava) and mantras . Authority and power are pow -
erful intoxicants. They pollute and poison people until they are destroyed. They breed misfortune. But spiritual 
knowledge will confer wholeness and good fortune on them. Vidya VahiniChapter 9. Purity of Thought, Word, Deed 29Chapter 9. Purity of Thought, Word, Deed
The benefit we can derive from anything is proportional to the faith we place in it. From adoration of gods, 
pilgrimages to holy places, uttering mantras , or resorting to doctors, we derive benefits only according to the 
measure of our faith. When someone gives a discourse, the more faith we have in them as a scholar and an expo -
nent, the more clearly and directly we can draw the subject into our hearts and understand the discourse deeper 
and deeper.
For the growth of faith and for the fostering of understanding, an essential requirement is purity of the heart, 
of the very base of thought (the kshetra ), of the levels of consciousness ( chittha ). Without this purity, the sudden 
effort of self-inquiry or investigation into the self-existent Atma , while in the midst of diverse worldly and mate -
rial entanglements, will be rendered fruitless, since it will not stem from an eager will.
The consciousness ( chittha ) must first be withdrawn from the objective world ( prapancha ) and turned in -
ward toward the awareness of the Atma . Seeds can sprout fast only when planted in a well-ploughed land. So too, 
the seed of Atmic  wisdom can sprout in the heart-field ( hridaya-kshetra ) only when it has undergone the necessary 
refining process.
Don’t just listen, practise and experience
Do not rest content with mere listening to advice. What you have listened to must later be reflected upon, 
and what has thus been imprinted on the mind has later to be experienced and expressed in thought, word, and 
deed. Only thus can the truth be a treasure in the heart; only then can it flow through the veins and manifest in full 
splendour through you.
These days, listening to lectures and discourses has become just an itch, a disease, a craze. After hearing 
them once, people imagine they have known all. But the real purpose of the search for truth is to liberate oneself. 
The yearning must be deep and persistent. The longing to know and experience the truth will then become a yoga , 
a process of union.
Faith is important
The union in yoga  is between dharma  and divinity. The more such evils as lust and anger breed in a person, 
the greater the diminution of the divinity. That is to say, faith in the Atma  will decline fast, as the evils develop.
Faith is all important, faith in one’s reality being the Atma  —that is the real spiritual knowledge ( vidya ). 
When lust, anger, etc., diminish and disappear, faith in the Atma  and in the rightness of spiritual inquiry will grow 
and get confirmed. Non-attachment is the very foundation for attaining awareness of Brahman ( Brahma-jnana ), 
the Universal Absolute. Even for a small structure, the foundation has to be stable and strong, or else it will 
pretty soon fall as a heap. When a garland has to be made, we want a string, a needle, and flowers, don’t we? So 
too, when spiritual wisdom has to be won, devotion (the string), non-attachment (the needle), and steady single-
pointedness (flowers) are essential.
Take refuge in God and gain victory
Everyone in the world desires victory; no one desires defeat. All crave wealth; no one craves poverty. But, Vidya VahiniChapter 9. Purity of Thought, Word, Deed 30how can victory or wealth be acquired? This has to be thought about and discovered. And we need not search long 
for the solution. Sanjaya, according to the Mahabharatha , revealed the secret to King Dhritharashtra, “Where 
there are both Krishna, the Lord of yoga , and Arjuna, the wielder of the bow, there victory is assured and wealth 
is won.” Why do we need more than this as advice? There is no need to undergo the three-fold struggle —physi -
cal, mental, intellectual— to achieve victory. Nor need one get perturbed or anxious. There is no need to pine 
for wealth and prosperity. Take refuge in God and wield the bow of courage, that is, hold the heart pure. That is 
enough. Victory and wealth are yours.
But when you pursue victory and wealth, remind yourself that they are shadows, not substantial things. You 
cannot attain your shadow with the sun behind you even if you pursue it for millions of years, for it flees faster 
and is always beyond reach. Instead, turn toward the sun and proceed. Then, watch what happens. The shadow 
falls behind and follows you, instead of leading you. It walks on your footsteps like a slave.
Consider the shadow as the symbol of worldly illusion ( maya .) As long as you follow worldly illusion, Mad -
hava is being ignored and is out of sight. You cannot win His vision. You will be caught up in the coils of birth 
and death and be ever in bondage. From this atmosphere of dependence, one must endeavour to release oneself. 
Or else, if all one’s efforts are directed to the acquisition of sensual pleasures, it is a sure sign of rank ignorance.
People are prisoners of the senses
Those who are in bondage must first use all their skill and energy to free themselves. This is crucial for 
achieving everything else; all the rest are subsidiary. But, people are now immersed in subsidiary pursuits, for -
getting the most basic. Every moment they must remind themselves that they are Atma  and not contraptions put 
together as bodies.
A king had a parrot as a pet in his palace. It lived in a golden cage. It had sweet fruits to feed upon and nec -
tarine drinks to quench its thirst. Every day, it was richly fed, lovingly petted, fondled, and spoken to by the queen 
herself. But did the parrot enjoy its life? Not at all. It was always sad. Why? It was not mindful of the golden cage, 
or of the sweet fruits and drinks; it had no pride in being nursed and nourished by the queen. It paid no attention 
to any of these. It was yearning for the day when it could sit on the branch of a green tree in the silent forest. Its 
body was having an excellent time in the palace cage, but its mind was in the thick of the forest from which it had 
been trapped and brought. It was born in the jungle and it lived on a tree. The parrot felt that it was far better to 
be free in its native habitat as an insignificant bird than to be in a cage, coddled and admired, feasted and flattered 
by kings and queens.
If only one had this awareness, one would assuredly long for home, which is the Supreme Self ( Paramatma ), 
and turn away from the objective world in which one is an alien.
For political or other reasons, some people are arrested and kept in detention in order to preserve law and 
order. They are confined in big bungalows, given special treatment as befits their status, and provided with meals, 
etc., commensurate with their grades in social and political life. They are also given articles of luxury. But around 
the bungalow and garden, policemen are always on guard. Whatever the standard of life and the regard showered 
on them, they are prisoners. They are not free. So too, people confined in the world and life therein shouldn’t feel 
elated when able to consume valuable, variegated dishes and have other rare luxuries. They should not exult over 
the sensual comforts that are enjoyed. They must not feel proud of friends and kinsmen. They must recognise and Vidya VahiniChapter 9. Purity of Thought, Word, Deed 31keep in mind the truth that they are in prison. Vidya VahiniChapter 10. Need for Spirituality 32Chapter 10. Need for Spirituality
The world situation
World problems are now assuming stranger forms and larger proportions. They are no longer individual or 
local. They are global, affecting all mankind. On one side, science and technology are advancing with 
cosmic developments. Through plastics, electronics, and computer technologies, the wonder has reached even 
greater heights. On the other side, mankind is afflicted with recurring political and economic crises; national, 
provincial, religious, racial, and caste rivalries; narrow loyalties and outbursts of disturbance in student campuses. 
These have spread indiscipline and licentiousness all over the world.
This is an unbalanced and mutually contradictory situation. What really is its cause? Does it lie in the fright -
ening decline that religion and morals have sustained in the human mind? Mankind has within its reach many 
means and methods through which it can earn wisdom and peace! It can secure invaluable guidance from the 
Vedas  and sacred texts (sastras), the Brahma Sutra , the Bible , the Koran , the Zend Avesta , the Granth Saheb , and 
other holy texts whose number exceeds thousand. There is no dearth in this land, Bharath (India), of heads of 
monasteries and religious orders, exponents of spiritual doctrines and disciplines, scholars and venerable elders. 
They too are propagating and publishing on a massive scale. Nevertheless, people’s minds are degenerating in 
the ethical, spiritual, and religious fields of life, continuously and with great speed. What is the reason for this 
downfall?
  People have now become more vicious than ever. Much more than in past ages, they utilise their intelli -
gence and skill to indulge in cruelty. People relish and revel in inflicting pain on others so much that, as history 
reveals, 15,000 wars have been waged during the last 5,500 years. There are still no signs that this horrid pastime 
will terminate! The impending atomic war threatens to destroy the entire human race. What exactly is the cause 
of all this anxiety and fear?
The remedy lies in holiness
It is clear that the beast in people is still predominant. It has not yet been overcome. Only when this is 
achieved can we, our country, and the world attain peace and joy.
Hatred, envy, greed, desire for pompous display and for comparison and competition with others —these 
evil traits have to be uprooted. These traits are vitiating not only the generality of men but even ascetics, monks, 
heads of religious institutions, and pundits. Among these, envy and greed have grown wild. When these masters 
and preceptors, who project themselves as embodiments of ideals, exhibit such low qualities, how can they set the 
world right? They can only intensify the pollution.
What the world needs today is neither a new order, a new education, a new system, a new society, nor a new 
religion. The remedy lies in a mind, in a heart filled with holiness. Holiness must take root and grow in the minds 
and hearts of youth everywhere, of boys and girls and of children. The good and godly must endeavour to promote 
this task as the one great spiritual discipline ( sadhana ) that they have to undertake.
Success in this task can be achieved only through knowledge of Brahman ( Brahma-vidya ). But today, people Vidya VahiniChapter 10. Need for Spirituality 33have deep faith only in acquisition and accumulation. They cannot give up or renounce. They have no faith in 
truth. They are attracted by falsehood; they find truth to be an obstacle. Therefore, they are unable to realise that 
death is the happy consummation of a glorious life. They die in anxiety and misery. People pronounce the words 
truth, nonviolence, righteousness, and love ceaselessly, parrot-like. They proclaim that there is no religion higher 
than truth. But the wonder is that the one thing they have no desire to possess is truth!
People yearn to know all things, but they don’t yearn to know the truth. Above all, they don’t evince the least 
desire to know the truth of their own self. They don’t turn attention in that direction. Even if they do, it is only to 
justify fears and prejudices. Therefore, the primary task of people is to discard weakness and tendency to hurt.
The truth is not in the material world
That which is not found at the beginning or at the end, but is manifest only in the interval, the middle period, 
cannot be really real. It is apparent truth ( mithya ), not eternal truth ( sathya ). The cosmos did not exist before it 
emerged, nor can it exist after it is submerged ( pralaya ). What is evident in between can only be apparent truth, 
temporary and limited truth. It cannot be the unchanging truth.
People have to explore the value and validity of every object in the universe along these lines. The body, for 
example, was not there before birth, and it is not here after death. Like a pot made of clay, it exists as pot with 
that form and name for some time and later resumes its clay nature. The pot is but clay, with a form and a name 
added to it by artificial means. Whatever the objects, everything in the universe is inexorably subject to the impact 
of time, and it has to face death and destruction. The tree and the soil, the house and the body, the king and the 
kingdom —each has to suffer the same consummation.
People ignore the means of becoming aware of the immortal in them. They are enamoured of the knowledge 
that is concerned with the phenomenal world. Those who yield to this facile temptation are like the ones who des -
ert the garden of heaven and rush into the jungle of poisonous vegetation. They turn away from the original (the 
bimba ), the Atma . They are fascinated by the image (the prathi-bimba ), the visible, the observable phenomena 
(the drisya ). By this attitude, they proclaim themselves to be only ignoramuses, not knowers or seekers of truth.
Knowledge of Atma can give happiness
One should know that not even an iota of genuine happiness is derivable from the “three worlds”, the three 
“divisions of time”, and the “three levels of consciousness in daily life” (wakefulness, dream, sleep). Only the 
foolish seek to satisfy themselves from the limited counterfeit happiness through worldly activities. The wise 
know better. Those who bypass the luscious bunches of sweet grapes and run toward bushes of thorns are “cam -
els”. They cannot be classified under other species.
Mountain peaks are charming from a distance, but when approached, they confront us with terror-striking 
jungles. So too, the world ( samsara ) appears charming when people have not delved into its meaning and value. 
When discrimination is employed to explore its value, the truth is revealed that the family jungle or the world 
jungle cannot give genuine happiness. Only the Atma  can give that blessing. Can the lake that strikes us as invit -
ingly charming as long as the mirage is on quench our thirst? Those who delude themselves with the belief that 
it can and run toward the non-existent sheet of water can only get thirstier . No other benefit can accrue to them.
Therefore, one should learn the process by which one becomes aware of one’s Atmic  reality, spiritual learn -Vidya VahiniChapter 10. Need for Spirituality 34ing (Atma-vidya ) By learning and living it, you can quench your thirst and help to quench the thirst of all mankind.Vidya VahiniChapter 11. Pathway to Peace 35Chapter 11. Pathway to Peace
One has to achieve many objects during life. The highest and the most valuable of these is winning the mercy 
of God, the love of God. The love of God will give the great wisdom one needs to attain unshakeable inner 
peace ( santhi ). Everyone should endeavour to have an understanding of the true nature of Godhead.
Of course, one cannot, at the very beginning, grasp the unmanifest absolute phenomenon. At first, one has to 
impose a form and some attributes to bring it within reach. Then, step by step, one must try to enshrine it in one -
self, as the descent of divine energy ( sakthi-path ). One engaged in the pursuit of success in this effort is not a mere 
individual seeker entitled to pursue the goal. One has to cultivate also the spirit of service and be engaged in good 
deeds that earn people’s gratitude. Only thus can one accomplish the task of cleansing the levels of consciousness 
(chittha ) and become a fit candidate for spiritual victory.
The duty of the renunciant
Monkhood ( sanyasa ) does not mean the mere acceptance of the fourth stage of life and its rights and ob -
ligations, retirement into the forest after breaking off contacts with the world, and leading the austere life of an 
ascetic. Instead, the renunciant ( sanyasin ) must move among people, become aware of their sorrows and joys, and 
impart the instruction and inspiration they direly need. Monks should fulfil this duty .
The renunciant can be likened to a species of fish. The fish moves around in the depth of the lake; it is not 
stationary at one spot. And, while moving around, the fish eats up worms and the eggs of pests, thus cleansing 
the water. So, too, the renunciant should always be on the move, journeying to the far corners of the land. The 
renunciant’s duty is to cleanse society of evil by example and precept. The renunciant’s teachings must transform 
it into a society free from vice and wickedness.
Promoting devotion and dedication
The tree can spread its branches wide. But the branches can put forth blossoms that yield fruit only when the 
roots are fed with water. Instead, if the water is poured on the branches, fruits, and flowers, how can the tree grow 
and spread? Society has the qualities of devotion and dedication as its roots of prosperity and peace. Hence, the 
educational system must pay attention to the promotion and strengthening of these qualities among the people. 
People who occupy positions of authority are named officials ( adikaris ). That word can also mean the worst en -
emy ( adhika-ari )! True officials should carefully avoid that course and use their positions to serve people under 
their care.
In olden times, when people of any region were sunk in fear or anxiety, or when the sources of joy and con -
tentment ran dry, they traced the cause of the calamity to some fault or failure in the worship offered to God in the 
temples of that area. They sought to identify the mistakes and correct them, so they could have inner peace. They 
believed that the crisis could be controlled through these means. Such acts are now bundled together and labeled 
“superstitions”, to be cast aside. But this is not superstition! Modern scientists are in such a pathetically poor state 
of understanding that they don’t recognise these important problems. This is the preliminary stage of confusion 
caused by the progress of modern types of education.Vidya VahiniChapter 11. Pathway to Peace 36The ancients grasped the supreme truth only after personally experiencing its validity. The moderns, how -
ever, dismiss their discoveries. This is the reason for the growth of barbarism in the so-called civilised countries. 
Many have not recognised this fact.
Three kinds of happiness
Every living being craves happiness; it doesn’t long for misery. Some desire riches, some believe that gold 
can make them happy, some amass articles of luxury, some collect vehicles. But everyone is set upon obtaining 
the things believed to give them joy. Those who know wherefrom one can get happiness are very few in number.
Happiness is of three kinds. One type is of the nature of poison in the beginning but turns into nectar later. 
This is pure ( sathwic ) happiness, which is secured through the awareness of the Atma . That is to say, the prelimi -
nary discipline ( sadhana ) of equanimity, control of inner and outer senses, etc., which has to be gone through, 
appears hard and unpleasant and involves struggle and effort. So, the reaction may be bitter.
In the Yoga-vasishta , Sage Vasishta says, “O! Rama! The boundless ocean can be drunk dry with great ease. 
The enormous Sumeru mountain can be plucked from the face of the earth with great ease. The flames of a huge 
conflagration can be swallowed with great ease. Controlling the mind is far more difficult than these.” Therefore, 
when one succeeds in overwhelming the mind, one achieves the awareness of the Atma . This success can result 
only when one undergoes many ordeals and denials. The bliss that one earns afterward is the highest kind of 
happiness. As the fruition of all spiritual discipline ( sadhana ), one is established in the perfect equanimity of un -
ruffled consciousness ( nirvikalpa-samadhi ) and the bliss ( ananda ) that fills one is indescribable. It is ambrosial, 
equal to the nectar of immortality.
Undifferentiated ( nir-vikalpa ) means the state of consciousness in which one is devoid of thought. This state 
can be reached through appropriate discipline. It is of two natures: Non-dual in full experience and the state of 
non-duality when dual thought ends. The first takes one beyond the triune of knower, the known, and knowledge; 
and one is aware only of the cosmic intelligence of Brahman. This is the non-dual state ( adwaitha-bhavana ). The 
second stage is reached when all the attributes ascribed to God and humanity merge in the ONE that embraces the 
cosmos and all its contents. (This second stage is adwaitha-sthayi  or adwaitha-avastha .)
There is a second type of happiness: On account of the impact of external objects on the senses of perception, 
pleasure mistaken as nectarine is aroused. But, in time, the pleasure turns into bitter and unpleasant poison. This is 
passionate ( rajasic ) happiness. When one welcomes this passionate sensory pleasure, one’s strength, awareness, 
intelligence, and enthusiasm to reach the four goals of human endeavour — dharma , wealth ( artha ), righteous 
desire ( kama ), and liberation ( moksha )— become weak, because one’s interest declines.
The third type of happiness arises from ignorance ( thamas ). It dulls the intellect from beginning to the end. It 
finds satisfaction in sleep, slothfulness, and faults, and it derives happiness therefrom. The dull ( thamasic ) person 
ignores the path that leads to the awareness of the Atma  and pays no attention to it throughout life.
True education directs and counsels the mind and intellect toward earning pure ( sathwic ) happiness. Of 
course, it can be secured only by untiring effort. The scriptures declare, “Happiness cannot be acquired through 
happiness ( Na sukhaath labhyathe sukham ).” Only by undergoing unhappiness can happiness be won. This truth 
has to be instilled through spiritual education ( vidya ). When one knows of the bliss ( ananda ) that pure happiness 
can confer, spiritual education will be found easy and palatable.Vidya VahiniChapter 11. Pathway to Peace 37Acquire education for immortality
Having been born as humans, all efforts must be directed to acquiring this education for immortality along 
with earth-bound material-centred education, for it is only education for immortality that can reveal the Atma  and 
enable people to experience the immortal Atmic  bliss ( Atma-ananda ). Vidya VahiniChapter 12. Instruments of Learning  38Chapter 12. Instruments of Learning  
The term vidya  is derived by adding ya to the root vidh. Ya means ‘what’; vidh, ‘light’. So, “that which gives 
light” is vidya . This is the basic meaning of the word. Therefore, it is evident that only knowledge of Brah -
man ( Brahma-vidya ) deserves to be known as real knowledge. The ancients considered knowledge as light and 
ignorance ( a-vidya ) as darkness. Just as light and darkness cannot coexist at the same time in the same place, 
knowledge and ignorance cannot be together. So, all who journey along the path of progress have to purify their 
consciousness and illumine themselves through knowledge of Brahman. 
The two aspects of education
In the section on manifestation of power ( Vibhuthi Yoga ), the Gita says that God declares, “Among all 
knowledge systems, I am the knowledge of the highest Atma !” All other knowledge systems are rivers; knowl -
edge of the highest Atma  is the ocean.
Just as all rivers find fulfilment merging in the ocean, all knowledge systems join the ocean of knowledge 
of the supreme Atma  as their ultimate goal. This is not all. When rivers meet and mix with the ocean, they lose 
their separate names and forms and assume the name and form of the ocean itself. So too, the varied systems of 
knowledge concerned with the objective external world renounce their individual names and forms when they 
arrive at the confluence with the vast ocean of knowledge of Brahman.
Education can be considered as having two aspects: worldly education and knowledge of Brahman. Worldly 
education provides the wherewithal for human livelihood. One can study many subjects, earn valuable degrees, 
acquire higher and higher jobs, and manage to spend life withiout worry ot fear. This type of education helps, 
whatever the job. On the other hand, knowledge of Brahman endows all human beings with the strength that en -
ables them to discharge successfully the duty they owe to themselves. It lays down the path that leads both to joy 
in worldly relations and bliss in the life beyond.
 Therefore, knowledge of Brahman is far superior to all other systems of knowledge available on earth. 
Knowledge of Brahman has the divine potency to liberate everyone from bondage. Worldly education has no 
such potency. Knowledge of Brahman makes you aware of the Omniself, the Absolute, the highest Brahman 
(Parabrahman ).
Spiritual austerity and spiritual education
By means of spiritual learning and austerities (practices), one is transformed into a 
purified soul.
Vidya thapobhyaam puthatma .
Spiritual austerity ( tapas ) enables you to merge with That. Spiritual education is the process of acquiring 
knowledge; spiritual austerity is the known. The first is indirect, it is the means; the second is the goal, the end.
Soap and water are needed to wash accumulated dirt off one’s clothes. So too, both spiritual knowledge and 
spiritual penance are essential when one is anxious to remove the dirt that has stuck to the mind. Only when both Vidya VahiniChapter 12. Instruments of Learning  39are used can the levels of consciousness be thoroughly cleansed. No vehicle can move without two wheels, nor 
can a bird fly on one wing. So too, no one can be rendered holy or purified without spiritual learning and spiritual 
austerity.
Spiritual austerity ( tapas ) does not mean positioning oneself upside down, head on the ground and feet held 
up, like a bat. Nor is it the renunciation of possessions and properties, wife and children, or emaciating one’s body, 
or holding the nose to regulate breath. No. Physical actions, oral assertions, and mental resolves —all three have 
to be in unison. The thought, speech, and act all have to be pure. This is real spiritual austerity. Moreover, the three 
have to be coordinated not by the compulsion of duty but instead for the contentment of the self. The effort must 
be undertaken to satisfy one’s inner yearnings. This struggle is the essence of spiritual penance ( tapas ).
The guru and the pupil
Guru  means literally the “big” person, the “great” person. That is to say, the guru  must have mastered both 
spiritual knowledge ( vidya ) and spiritual austerity ( tapas ). 
The Gita depicts the ideal guru  and the ideal student ( sishya ) —the pupil is the person of authority and the 
preceptor is the manifestation of the Avatar . Arjuna had earned the right to learn; Krishna had come as a man to 
teach man. The pupil is the best of people; the preceptor is the best among physical embodiments ( purushothama ). 
The pupil wields the bow; the guru  wields the secret of all skills, yoga . Krishna is the Lord of yoga  (yogeswara ); 
Arjuna is the archer. When these two meet, education ( vidya ) is transformed into knowledge of Brahman ( Brah -
ma-vidya ).
The pupil, Arjuna, after imbibing the teachings of Krishna, said, “I will do as you command ( Karishye 
vachanam thava ).” He threw away not his bow, the Gandiva , but his great big ego itself, the egotism ( ahamkara ) 
that was deluding him.
The guru  was the director of the play. The pupil ( sishya ), Arjuna, was the character in the play. The pupil 
should not be proud to have been entrusted with a duty. As long as you are conceited, you cannot get a guru . When 
the guru  accepts you, your pride will disappear.
Pupils should not feel great, be proud, or boast of the sense of renunciation when giving their all. The real 
renunciation is to give oneself away. Then, the guru  will grant freedom to follow one’s own will, as Krishna did. 
“Beloved Arjuna! As you will, so you act ( Yathechchasi, thathaa kuru ). Think well. And do as you like,” Krishna 
told him. He meant that He had given him all the advice he needed and had also accepted the ego Arjuna had dis -
carded. So, Arjuna could now be granted freedom to act as he willed, for his will has become His.
The individual who has reached this level has to be given freedom. The guru  should not mercilessly order the 
pupil about simply because the pupil dedicated everything to him. The greedy guru  and the indolent disciple —
both fall into perdition. The guru  should not turn into a person who steals wealth (vittha-apahaari) but should be a 
person who steals hearts! The guru  has to be an alarm timepiece. The guru  must wake up those who are enveloped 
in the sleep of ignorance and reward them with teachings on the knowledge of their Atmic  Reality. 
The bad  guru and the bad pupil
A traveler going through the countryside from village to village was confronted by a river in spate. The wa -
ters were rising and rushing. He was helpless because he did not know how to cross to the other bank. He looked Vidya VahiniChapter 12. Instruments of Learning  40all around. He saw two men squatting under a tree, a little distance from where he stood, and walked toward them. 
He found that one of them was lame and the other was blind. So, he inferred that they would not know where the 
river was deep and where it was shallow enough to wade across. He went back, without questioning them. He 
knew their answers should not be acted upon.
The blind man in the story represents the preceptor who has not mastered the scriptures ( sastras ), which are 
the repositories of the experience gained by seekers in the past. The lame person represents the person who has not 
put the knowledge into practice and gained personal experience. In fact, knowledge of the scriptures and experi -
ence gained by its practical application —these two make a full person. Only such a guru  can save the student by 
instruction and example. This is the conclusion expounded in the Mundaka Upanishad .
Even more difficult than getting a good pupil ( sishya ) is securing a good guru . Only when a real guru  accepts 
them can disciples become exemplary persons. Pure-hearted students, unselfish students, non-egotistic students 
—when such aspirants approach them, gurus  exult in ecstatic delight.
Parikshith, the emperor, renounced everything and decided to realise God; right at that moment, Maharshi 
Suka appeared to guide him straight to his goal. Similarly, when good disciples get good gurus , they succeed not 
only in attaining bliss but also in conferring peace, prosperity, and joy upon the entire world. Vidya VahiniChapter 13. Unity in Diversity 41Chapter 13. Unity in Diversity
Students! The Ageless Person, beyond delusion and darkness, has to be cognised by every person through their 
own effort. You have taken birth as inheritors of this estate of eternal bliss. You are the dearly loved children 
of the Lord. You are as pure and as sacred as air. Don’t condemn yourselves as sinners. You are lion cubs, not 
sheep. You are wavelets of immortality, not bodies compounded from matter. Material objects are there to serve 
you and do your bidding: you should not serve them and do their  bidding.
Don’t think that the Vedas  lay down a bundle of frightening rules and regulations and laws. Every one of 
them has been laid down by the Lord, as law-giver. All elements in the cosmos, every particle everywhere, are 
acting every moment as ordered by Him. This is what the Vedas  inform us. No worship can be higher and more 
beneficial than serving such a Lord. One has to offer love to Him, more love than one bears to anything else in this 
world and the next. He must be loved as the One and Only. He has to be remembered adoringly with such love. 
Real education must result in this fruit.
The lotus leaf is born under water; it floats on water; but it does not get wet. You must be in the world like -
wise —in it, by it, for it, but not of it. The special feature of higher education is to prepare you for this role.
That is to say, you must live thus on earth with your heart immersed in the Divine and your hands busy in 
work. Love should not degenerate into an article of commerce. Love fulfils itself in love.
The Vedic religion
The Vedic  religion doesn’t attempt to establish, through conflict and controversy, any one doctrine or theory. 
It seeks to evaluate all theories and doctrines by the touchstone of experience.
The tree is judged by its fruits. Codes of behaviour, spiritual practices, and manifestation of love all have 
enormous virtues, which promote the progress of humanity.
According to the point of view of great people and of the spiritual teachers of India, one advances not from 
falsehood to truth but from the partly true to the fully true. Each individual Atma  can be called a garuda  bird, 
which soars higher and higher and, gathering supranatural strength, at last reaches the solar orb with unlimited 
splendour and majesty.
The basic truth of creation is unity in multiplicity. This was understood by Indians. All other religions have 
accepted certain fixed doctrines and built systems on them. They are content with the establishment of such credal 
groups. They devised methods of worship, prayer, and adoration in accordance with the feelings and emotions 
they laid down as valid and valuable.
The service that every religion offers to mankind is to expand the consciousness of people beyond the mate -
rial sphere and light the spark of divinity already in them. The Indian ( Bharathiya ) mode of worship is based on 
the awareness that the One manifests through many discrete forms and many discrete attributes, when confronted 
by many discrete situations and conditions. So, among all peoples of the world, Indians have the intellectual toler -
ance to proclaim to all four quarters that God exists and can be found in every religion. This is their unique good 
fortune.Vidya VahiniChapter 13. Unity in Diversity 42Faith has guided Indians
One of the basic rules of living is not to be ashamed of your forefathers. As you read more and more the his -
tory of the past and visualise more and more the human condition in those ages, your pride is bound to increase. 
Let faith in the supreme achievements of your forefathers flow in and energise the blood in your veins. Let the 
strength of that faith render your body, mind, and spirit equally strong. The fruit of genuine spiritual learning 
(vidya ) is the recognition that every community of people and every religion has, along with a basic unity, some -
thing special of its own to offer.
In fact, no country in history has been the target of such dire calamities and has suffered under alien rule for 
as long as India. Despite this, Indians are ready to encounter boldly any new calamitous storm, for their lives are 
still more or less firmly based on the ancient ideals. This has been the stable foundation for their way of life. Faith 
in God is faith in Atma . They believe, without any hesitation, that this faith has guided and guarded them.
These guiding principles of Indian ( Bharathiya ) life were not restricted by the geographical boundaries of 
the country. Whether the people of this land desire it or not, the principles are spreading to other lands. They are 
transmuting their literatures by instilling their values into their thoughts and feelings.
The natural sciences can provide us only with food, clothing, and the like. Only spiritual science can add 
strength and steadfastness to the self. Students should pay special attention to this fact. What use are food, cloth -
ing, and the like, even in plenty, when one has no strength or steadfastness in oneself?
Again, when you want to promote the prosperity of the nation, you must, of necessity, gather into yourself 
all the spiritual resources that you can. In the past, the need was known, and efforts were made to fulfil the need; 
in the future too, this need must be felt and fulfilled. That is to say, all the spiritual inclinations, beliefs, and urges 
that are now feeble and dissipated have to be united and reinforced, one with the others.
Tolerance for all religions
The unique features of the Vedic  Bharathiya  (Indian) religion form its solid base. They are as wide as the 
sky and as eternal as nature. As part of the religion, creeds and cults may exist as branches of a tree. One need not 
condemn them as wrong. But no branch should fight against another or compete with another. When that happens, 
the tree will be destroyed and all will end in ruin. When creeds indulge in competitive rivalry, religion is ruined 
and the world is destroyed.
Only One exists; the wise describe it in many ways.
Ekam sath; vipraah bahudhaa vadhanthi.
Each of us may have different ideas on the nature and characteristics, the form and attributes of God. One 
person may believe that God has the qualities and form of humans. Another may believe in a God devoid of hu -
man form and signs, but yet manifesting in embodiments. Another may believe in God as altogether formless. 
Every one of these can find declarations supporting their stands in the Vedas . For, all have faith in God, that is to 
say, in a mysterious power ( sakthi ) that is the source, support, and sustenance of all, a power that subsumes all. 
This is the truth proclaimed and elaborated in the Vedas . Vidya VahiniChapter 14. Vedas, the Authentic Voice of God 43Chapter 14. Vedas, the Authentic Voice of God
The difference in teachings about the name or form of God (Iswara) are not very important. We need not quar -
rel over those distinctions and differences. Instruction on God is service enough.
Indians ( Bharathiyas ) do not accept the view held by others that the world and the universe of which it is 
a part came into being some thousands of years ago and will meet with dissolution sometime in the future. Nor 
do they accept the statement that the universe was born out of the void ( sunya ). They believe that the projection 
(nature or prakriti ) is not born of vacuity but has always been full and complete ( purnam ). It has no beginning or 
end; it has only gross and subtle forms. It is no sign of enlightenment to infer that, since there is no evidence of 
the full and complete, there must be a void in the beginning. There are other levels of existence to consider.
For example, you are not entirely the body; in the gross body there is a subtle body, the mind, and also an -
other body, which is more subtle than the mind, namely, the individualised Atma  or Self ( jivatma ). This last has 
neither beginning nor end; nor does it have any trace of death or decay. This is the truth that Indians ( Bharathiyas ) 
believe in. This faith is based on the declaration of the Vedas  themselves.
We close our eyes when we worship God. We do not try to discover God outside us by raising our faces and 
looking upward. Others accept that their scriptures were written by divinely inspired persons, but Indians believe 
that the Vedas  are the authentic voice of God, emerging from the hearts of sages.
As you feel, so you become
Students! One who condemns themself day and night as petty and weak can never accomplish anything. One 
who thinks that one is luckless and low thereby becomes luckless and low. Instead, when you cultivate the aware -
ness that you are a spark of God, that you have as your reality Divinity Itself, you can become really divine, and 
you can have command over all powers.
As you feel, so you become.
Yadbhaavam, thadbhavathi.
 It is how you feel that matters most. That is the basis for all that you are.
Have faith in the Atma , the Self. This is a must for man. In its absence, man is reduced to a monster, revel -
ing in vice and wickedness. Your forefathers achieved prosperity, peace, and joy and succeeded in attaining their 
goals through that faith alone. When people lose that faith, they are certain to fall, for that faith is the very breath 
of life. When there is no breath, one becomes a corpse ( savam ). With the breath of that faith, one becomes divine 
(siva), the same as Siva Himself. Faith in the Self is the expression of the Siva principle in a person; that faith can 
endow one with all forms of power and render one full and complete ( purna ). For, the Atma , by its very nature, is 
self-sufficient and full. No other spiritual discipline is needed to realise that state.
Purity is also our nature; self-sufficiency ( paripur-natha ) is also the nature of the Self. Impurity and insuf -
ficiency are alien to people. Students should not ignore or forget this fact. Real education must arouse this faith 
and infuse the awareness of this fullness in every activity. This is the essential aim, the core of the right type of 
education.Vidya VahiniChapter 14. Vedas, the Authentic Voice of God 44Religion means experience
One other truth has to be kept in mind, more than every other. For Indians ( Bharathiyas ), religion means ex -
perience, nothing less. Our position is that no achievement is worthwhile unless one earns it by one’s own efforts. 
Everything valuable must be cultivated by oneself. Divine grace awaits individual striving and spiritual practice 
(sadhana ). The doctrines and directives of religion have to be assimilated by means of actual experience. It is not 
enough to learn to repeat them parrot-like.
The truth has to be identified; this is the very first step. The sooner we understand the truth, the sooner reli -
gious conflicts and credal dissensions will disappear. The Beyond the Beyond ( Paraath-para ), the Omniself, is 
nearer than the nearest; though near, all other entities are really far away. Become aware of this fact. Only then 
can the knots in which the heart is entangled be loosened.
Give up life or give up body?
In the vocabulary of the West, a person gives up “life”, but in the language of Indians, a person gives up the 
“body”. Westerners profess that they have bodies and that the bodies have souls. Indians don’t declare so. They 
proclaim that a person has a soul and that the soul is enclosed temporarily in a body. Therefore, they feel that the 
civilisations and cultures seeking sensual pleasures and secular glory are built on a foundation of sand, and they 
can shine only for a brief period of time before they collapse.
Imbibe only the good from others
Students! Imitation can never become culture. You may wear royal robes and act the role, but as a result of 
this imitation, can you become a king? A donkey clothed in tiger skin does not become a tiger.
Imitation is a sign of cowardice. It cannot further one’s progress. In fact the tendency to imitate leads one 
down, step by step, into frightful shape. You must endeavour to uplift yourselves, as yourselves. You must be 
proud that you are Indians ( Bharathiyas ), children of India (Bharath), you must be proud of your ancestors. Your 
commendable heroism lies in your joyous assertion that you are an Indian. You should not imitate others and copy 
their attitudes, though you may imbibe the good in them.
We have to learn good things from others. We sow seeds in the ground. We provide it with soil, manure, 
and water. The seed sprouts, becomes a sapling, and grows into a huge tree. It does not become soil when placed 
therein, nor manure when it feeds thereon, nor water when it partakes thereof. It only imbibes from each of them 
whatever it can benefit from them. It grows into what is essentially IT , namely, a huge tree!
May you grow likewise. You have to learn much from others. Learn about the Supreme and the means of 
attaining it from even the lowest; learn from others how to practise progressive spiritual discipline ( sadhana ) and 
saturate yourselves with it. But do not be transformed into those others. This is the normal teaching for people, the 
code of law ( smrithi ) of Manu. This is the lesson that students have to understand. This is the first and foremost 
lesson, the crucial lesson. Vidya VahiniChapter 15. Ego-less Service 45Chapter 15. Ego-less Service
You may master a billion fields of study, but if you have not cultivated the attitude of detachment, the mastery 
is of no consequence.
Sharing with others, serving others, this is the main rule ( sutra ) of spiritual knowledge ( vidya ), its genuine 
expression. Education is rendered noble when the spirit of service is inculcated. The service rendered must be free 
of the slightest trace of narrow selfishness. But that isn’t enough. The thought of service should not be marred by 
the desire for something in return. You have to perform the service as you would perform an important sacrifice 
(yajna ).
Just as trees don’t eat their fruits but offer them to be eaten by others in an attitude of detachment; just as 
rivers, without drinking the waters they carry, quench the thirst and cool the heat from which others suffer; just as 
cows offer their milk, produced primarily for their calves, in a spirit of generosity born of renunciation ( thyaga ), 
to be shared by others; so too, those who have acquired spiritual knowledge should offer it to others prompted by 
the motive of service and without consideration of selfish interests. Only thus can they justify their status as noble 
men ( sajjana ).
The authentic scholar should not entertain egotism in the thoughts, at any time. Today, however, the misfor -
tune is that scholars as a class are afflicted with unbounded egotism. As a consequence, they follow wrong ideals 
and take to wrong paths; they confer the benefits of education only on themselves and on their kith and kin. As 
a result, they forgo their position among the wise ( sajjanas ) and the respect it can bring. One must grant gener -
ously to others the knowledge, skill, and insight that one has acquired. If this is not done, human progress itself 
is endangered.
Cultivate service to all
To promote the best interest of mankind, one has to cultivate the holy urge of service to others and the attitude 
of sharing. The parrot talk, “Service to people is service to God ( Manava seva is madhava seva )” does not extend 
to all people; those who reel off this axiom don’t inquire which people are to be served. They are eager only to 
fill their own stomachs; for this purpose they restrict their mental horizons to the uplift of their own people. Thus, 
they lay waste the valuable education they have received. One forgets the fact that God is in perceptible form in 
all beings. Service rendered to any being is service offered to God. This has to be the chief goal of the educated.
A human is God ( nara  is Narayana). Every single act has to be elevated as an act of service to God. But 
students today don’t know what exactly God is and what exactly a person is. How can one claim to be educated 
when one can’t identify the Man-God ( Nara -Narayana ) principle? A person and God are the entities denoted by 
the Upanishads   as “you ( thwam )” and “that ( thath ).” One who hasn’t become aware of these two cannot claim to 
have known themself. And education that does not reveal oneself to one, of what use can it be to reveal anything 
else?
But, to our misfortune, the educated who are the educators are engaged not in promoting our best interests 
and serving us but in doing great disservice as much as they need. It is highly strange. For, the educated persons 
must serve not only those who help them but also those who harm them. This attitude makes the service doubly Vidya VahiniChapter 15. Ego-less Service 46holy. Serving those who do service to us is but a natural reaction. Serving those who harm us is the greater virtue. 
This latter course of action involves deeper understanding of one’s best interest and an alert sense of time, place, 
and circumstance. Education must confer and cultivate these qualities.
When dealing with uncultured folk and with ungrateful fellows who forget the good done to them, one has to 
exercise caution. The law is the instrument the government uses to punish those who do wrong. But the educated 
person and the student should not condemn them outright. You must manifest your natural virtue of detachment 
and practise your characteristic attitude of helpfulness.
Shun ostentation; cultivate humility
Protecting one’s motherland is a noble duty. It is the primary duty of each student. Students can’t claim to 
have learned much unless they are able to discover and discharge their duty and their immediate role, when cir -
cumstances call for such decisions. The educated person and the student undergoing education must both cultivate 
simplicity; they must discard ostentation. If they are addicted to ostentation, they lose their genuine nature or 
individuality. Students must note this point well.
People without humility and discipline in dealings with others are certain to be counted out as scholar or 
pundits, no matter what sciences they have mastered or how famous they are as intellectuals. Such people will 
not be honoured by society. They may win respect for some time, but that attitude will decline pretty soon. Such 
respect does not bring credit to the recipient. Only artlessness and simplicity earn honour —and they render the 
honour enjoyable. Insane parade of scholarship brings in only spurts of reputation and ridicule. When one gives 
up ostentation, one can get permanent respect from people. Real education imparts a spirit of renunciation, a dis -
like for ostentation, and the yearning to serve others.
Some people develop swollen heads as soon as they acquire a little knowledge. They pretend to be experts 
in every field and boast the whole day about their attain-ments. They strut about as if they know everything. “The 
leaf-plate on which a full lunch has been served will lie low on the floor. The leaf-plate on which nothing is placed 
will hop high with every gust of wind.” Thus says the proverb. So too, the person who has much scholarship and 
many skills will lead an unassuming life. But one who has not derived genuine education and the strength it can 
confer lives in pomp and pride. That person struggles to hide defects from being known to others. And, in the end, 
the struggles don’t succeed. One meets with double ruin —one doesn’t experience spiritual bliss ( ananda ) and 
one doesn’t impart it to others. In the end, one becomes the target of ridicule.
Therefore, don’t allow the desire for ostentation to enter the mind; don’t allow egotism to approach you. Be 
humble and be loyal to high ideals. Only then can you serve the cause of world peace and prosperity. Only when 
the individual succeeds in being good can the world also become good ( vyakthi sreyas becomes viswa srayas ). 
One who is eager to be a real student must place before himself the ideal of world peace and prosperity. One has 
to be unpretentious. One must vow to be of service to others. This is the essence of true education ( vidya ). Vidya VahiniChapter 16. Compassion and Cleanliness  47Chapter 16. Compassion and Cleanliness  
The student seeking spiritual knowledge ( vidya ) must possess kindness, compassion, and love toward all living 
beings. Kindness to all beings should be the student’s very nature. If it is absent, the student becomes a boor. 
More than anything else, spiritual knowledge means the quality of compassion toward living beings. If a person 
bears ill will against any being, his education has no meaning. The advice given in the Gita,
with no ill-will toward all or any being
adweshta sarva bhuthaanaam ,
conveys the same message. In the same manner, on and off, the Gita warns that any insult or injury or even neglect 
directed against any living being is an act that insults, injures, or neglects the Divine ( Sarva jiva thiraskaaram 
Kesavam prathigachchati ). Love and compassion must not be limited to mankind. They must enfold every living 
being.
The Gita says,
The learned person who has acquired humility through spiritual knowledge must 
deal with the cow, the brahmin , the elephant, the dog, and the eater of dog-flesh with 
equal compassion and consideration.
Vidya vinaya sampanne braahmani gavi hasthini Shuni chaiva shvapaakecha, punditaah sama 
dharshinah.
Uniform compassion shown in this manner transforms itself into uniform welfare for the recipients. Wishing 
well for all is the sign of one who has earned spiritual knowledge. The narrow vision that is limited to the commu -
nity has to be given up. Indian ( Bharathiyas ) culture emphasises the highest truth, the broadest vision. Imparting 
this ideal is the purpose of spiritual education, as laid down in India (Bharath). No other country has placed such 
a lofty, all-inclusive, beneficial ideal before its people.
Today, the country is facing ruin because this ideal has been neglected, spiritual education has been grossly 
circumscribed, and the educational system is polluting the social organism with narrowness and crookedness. 
So, marked changes have to be made in the system. At present, we have mere book learning. But what is learned 
from books has to be confirmed and corrected by practising it in social living. Only then can the knowledge of the 
kinship between person and person be gained. Thereby, learning is transformed into spiritual knowledge ( vidya ). 
Spiritual knowledge cannot be acquired by merely mastering reading, writing, and arithmetic.
Each student must, after intelligent inquiry, decide for themself during every occasion which goal is best and 
which action is best suited to realise it. Both the goal and the action must serve the needs of society and help it to 
progress. People should not be involved in injustice, violence, and immorality. Nor should they deem their own 
gain as primary.
The importance of cleanliness
Students have to pay great attention to another important quality: cleanliness, both outer and inner. When 
either of these is absent, the person becomes useless for any task. The clothes one wears, the books one reads, Vidya VahiniChapter 16. Compassion and Cleanliness  48and the surrounding environment must be clean. This is the outer cleanliness. That is to say, every material object 
one has to deal with for living has to be kept clean. The teeth and eyes, food and drink, all should be free from 
dirt. One can be healthy as a result of all this. The body has to be scrubbed and washed every day, or else layers 
of dust will cause itching and boils will emerge. Not only will one’s condition be rendered miserable, but it may 
cause infections in others. One may possess only one or two sets of clothing, but care should be taken to wash 
them before wearing. They should not gather dirt.
The books used for study should not be thrown about as one pleases. Scribbling on the pages must be 
avoided. Paper should be preserved clean and spotless. Those who see them must appreciate the care taken by the 
student to keep things clean. The room where the student resides and the adjacent area must be kept clean and free 
from stink. And, inside the room, no indecent pictures should be hung on the walls. Only pictures that inspire great 
thoughts and high ideals should be visible to the eye. The student must be able to draw on themself the love of all.
However rich a person may be, the person can’t be happy without health and can’t derive full joy from the 
riches owned. A meal makes the person exhausted; without a meal, the person feels weak. Thus, the person plods 
on without ever being happy. So, external cleanliness promotes health and happiness.
The importance of inner cleanliness
Next, we consider inner cleanliness —that is to say, keeping the mind and the intellect free from dirt, serene 
and sacred. When thoughts and feelings are impure and agitated, one cannot be calm and happy. When the mind 
is polluted, reactions are polluted. To keep the mind clean, one has to analyse sympathetically situations involv -
ing others and their activities, and then decide on how to react to them. One should not rush to draw conclusions. 
Adopting the reactions of others is not desirable. One must resolve on any action only after intelligent discrimina -
tion and inquiry. “Some of our people are doing this, so we will do it too.” This attitude is mean and demeaning, 
it is a sign of weakness. It is the consequence of basic ignorance. Sheep behave in that manner.
Born as people, moving about as educated persons, yet stupidly following others as sheep do and polluting 
the minds with ideas borrowed from the lips of others —these things are to be avoided.
The ideas and pronouncements of others may often be personal, or they may induce feelings of hatred be -
tween people. Why should we accept them as ours and mould our feelings accordingly? We should not try to 
shape our feelings and patterns of behaviour to conform to those of others. We should not relinquish our faith, our 
experience, and our innate holiness.
We may not always be able to know the reasons for our faith. It originates and is shaped by our own personal 
likes and dislikes, our own dominant feelings. But we must not become the target for anger, hatred, and jealousy 
and the evil deeds into which they lead us. A student must cultivate wide, inclusive feelings. Only then is the 
student entitled to acquire the higher learning. Only then can the student earn respect in society. The student must 
keep far away from narrow, selfish thoughts, feelings, and plans. Vidya VahiniChapter 17. Shun Jealousy and Hatred 49Chapter 17. Shun Jealousy and Hatred
The root cause of all anxieties and calamities of man is envy. We can find from the Bhagavad Gita  that Krishna 
warns Arjuna off and on, “Arjuna! You have to be envy-less. Don’t get infected by envy.” Envy is invariably 
accompanied by hatred. These two are twin villains. They are poisonous pests. They attack the very roots of one’s 
personality.
A tree may be resplendent with flowers and fruits. But when the inimical worms set to work on the roots, 
imagine what happens to the splendour! Even as we look on admiringly at its beauty, the flowers fade, the fruits 
fall off, and the leaves turn yellow and are scattered by the wind. At last, the tree itself dries up, it dies and falls.
So too, when envy and hatred infect the heart and set to work, however intelligent and however highly edu -
cated one is, one falls. One is turned into an enemy of society. One becomes the target of ridicule because one is 
no longer human. One cannot be counted as a member of the community. In the end, even trusted friends desert 
and become one’s foes. One loses the respect of one’s group, and one doesn’t evoke even ordinary courtesies from 
others. One spends the days perpetually in misery.
No enemy can be so insidious as jealousy. When one sees a person more powerful, or more knowledgeable, 
or with greater reputation or more wealth or more beauty, or even wearing better clothing, one is afflicted with 
jealousy. One finds it difficult to acknowledge and accept the situation. One’s mind seeks means to demean them 
and lower them in the estimation of people. Such propensities and evil tendencies should never strike root in the 
minds of students and the educated. These should not pollute their character.
Students must learn to be happy and filled with joy when others are acclaimed as good and are respected for 
their virtues and the ideals they hold dear. They have to cultivate breadth of outlook and purity of motives. They 
must be ever vigilant that the demon of envy does not possess them. That demon is certain to destroy all that is 
precious in them. It will ruin their health and damage their digestive system. It will rob them of sleep. It will sap 
their physical and mental stamina and reduce them to the state of chronic consumptives.
Students must resolve to emulate those who do better than themselves and earn equal appreciation. They 
should strive to acquire knowledge and score marks as much as others. That is the proper ambition. Instead, if they 
wish for the downfall of others, leaving them as the only successful ones, they are revealing their brutish nature. 
It will lead them to perdition. It is a deadly virus.
Praising oneself and condemning others are also equally deadly. Attempting to hide one’s meanness and 
wickedness and putting on the mask of goodness, justifying one’s faults and exaggerating one’s attainments —
these are also poisonous traits. Equally poisonous is the habit of ignoring the good in others and assiduously seek -
ing only their faults. Never speak words that demean any one.
 When we are friendly with another and like him very much, whatever he does is certain to strike us as good. 
When the wind changes and the same person is disliked, even the good he does strikes us as bad. Both these reac -
tions are misconceived. They are not commendable at all. In the Sumathi Sathaka , there is a verse that teaches this 
lesson. “O person with good intelligence ( sumathi ), Know that even if friendship is strong, when wrong becomes 
right and right becomes wrong then friendship disappears.”Vidya VahiniChapter 17. Shun Jealousy and Hatred 50The student has to transform themself into a person with good intelligence (a sumathi ) and avoid turning into 
a person with perverted, polluted intelligence ( durmathi ). A huge heap of fuel can be reduced to ashes by a tiny 
spark of fire. A drop of poison can render a pot of milk totally undrinkable. Envy and hatred are the sparks that 
destroy the cluster of virtues in people.
Students must exercise constant watchfulness over their feelings and reactions. They must keep out selfish -
ness, envy, anger, greed, and other such evil tendencies from entering their minds. These are nets that entrap the 
person. These vices overwhelm and subdue the holiness of people, so that the holiness cannot influence them any 
longer. Such people will forget themselves and behave like other wicked individuals, individuals caught in frenzy. 
Such people will blabber as their tongues dictate, without regard to the effect —good or evil. Such people will 
engage their hands in work that the hands favour.
Envy doesn’t stop with this string of mischief. It makes us revel in scandalising others. This evil is wide -
spread among the youth. It comes naturally to them, for it is a sign of ignorance. To get rid of this habit, one must 
devote some time, early in the day and before retiring for sleep, in exploring the mind and examining faults that 
have secured foothold therein. One must pray to God to save one from this tendency. When once we have won the 
grace of God, we can rest assured that such absurdities will not deform our character. The discriminating student 
can be recognised by the good company kept, the good works performed, and the good words uttered.
This is why I emphasise on many occasions,
Eyes that seek evil, ears that relish evil, tongue that craves evil, nose that enjoys the 
foul, and hands that delight in evil —these must be totally avoided.
Whoever has any of these must be avoided. Or else, one’s future is bound to be disastrous. The wrongs of the 
five senses ( indriyas ) will result in the destruction of the five vital energies ( pranas ) and killing of the five sheaths 
(kosas ). Of course, the senses yield momentary pleasure and joy, but, as the saying goes, “senility lies in wait.” 
Sensual pleasures bring about great grief quite soon.
Gain self-confidence
Students require faith in themselves, more than most other qualities. The absence of self-confidence marks 
the beginning of one’s decline. Today, the world is facing ruin and disaster because people have lost confidence 
in themselves. Only self-confidence is capable of granting peace and prosperity to each person. A self-confident 
person receives good everywhere and is honoured in all places. Whatever they touch becomes gold.
When a person has no faith in themself, how can they place faith in others? Even when they have such faith, 
it cannot be sincere and firm. It is at best artificial and superficial. Such a person will not have faith in their mother, 
father, spouse, and children. Such a person pretends to believe, that is all. So, the person behaves treacherously 
and might even injure the parents.
So, self-confidence is a must for every student. Students must study books about people who stuck to justice 
and led straight lives. They must cultivate faith in moral codes laid down in Dharma Sastras , instead of neglecting 
them. The Puranas  (ancient epics) provide foundational ideals for our welfare and progress. Vidya VahiniChapter 18. Sense Control 51Chapter 18. Sense Control
Teachers and students
Teachers reveal the direction and the goal. Students lay the road and journey into the future. The skill and 
strength, the status and stature of mankind are shaped and furthered in proportion to the quality and character 
of its teachers. Character is the hallmark of humanity. Teachers must dedicate their learning and wisdom to the 
great task of uplifting pupils to higher levels of knowledge and action. The virtues that they help to inculcate in 
their pupils are essential for the uplift of society also. When virtues are rooted in the heart, man shines in full 
glory. A life without good character is a shrine without light, a coin that is counterfeit, a kite with a broken string.
Teachers who teach with the salary paid to them in their minds and students who learn with the jobs they 
may procure in their minds are both pursuing wrong paths. In fact, the task of the teacher is to discharge their duty 
of instructing and inspiring the students so that they develop their latent talents and advance in the perfection of 
their skills. The task of the student is to unfold the divine that is within and equip themself for serving society 
with skill and knowledge.
Thought, speech, and action
People have three instruments gifted to them: the mind, which involves them in thought; the power of 
speech, which enables them to communicate their thoughts; and the power of action, by which they can execute 
their thoughts, alone or with others, for themselves and for others. The mind designs thoughts that are either help -
ful or harmful. The mind can lead one into bondage, into deeper involvement in desires and disappointments. It 
can lead one into freedom, detachment, and desirelessness. The mind is a bundle of likes and dislikes. The mind 
(manas ) is the seat of chewing the cud of sensual and mental experiences ( manana ).
Reining in the mind
The mind is engaged in two activities: thinking ( alochana ) and inner dialogue ( manasika-sambhashana ). 
These activities follow different lines. Thinking is intent on solving problems that present themselves before the 
mind. Mental dialogue multiplies the problems and confounds the solutions, causing confusion and adoption of 
wrong and ruinous means to solve them. The inner conversation and controversial chatter continues from morn -
ing till night, until sleep overtakes the mind. It causes ill-health and the early setting-in of old age. The topics on 
which the chatter is based are mostly the faults and failings of others and their fortunes and misfortunes. This 
perpetual dialogue is at the bottom of all miseries. It covers the mind with thick darkness. It grows wild very quick 
and suppresses the genuine worth of manhood.
The talk that inhabits the mind during the waking stage persists even in dreams and robs one of much-needed 
rest. And the sum total of all this exercise is, to speak the truth, nil. No one can call themself full and free unless 
they succeed in stopping this evil.
The Upanishads  announce certain remedial spiritual practices ( sadhanas ) to get rid of this obstacle to inner 
peace. The first spiritual discipline is regulation of breath ( pranayama ). Regulation of breath is no gymnastics, Vidya VahiniChapter 18. Sense Control 52nor a formidable exercise. The mind has to concentrate on the period of retention ( kumbhaka ), on the process of 
inhaling ( puraka ) and exhaling ( rechaka ). When attention is fixed thus, the inner talk on other irrelevant matters 
will end. And mental strength is acquired.
The second spiritual discipline ( sadhana ) is: immersal in beneficial activity ( karma ) —that is to say, service 
to people that will help diminish the ego sense, acts that are good and godly. When one’s thoughts are engaged in 
such activities, the mind turns away from the talk it indulges in.
Again, the spiritual practices ( sadhanas ) of listening to spiritual advice ( sravana ), reflection on spiritual 
directions ( manana ), and discovering ways and means of confirming faith in the Spirit ( nidi-dhyasana ), also of 
recital of the names of God ( japa) and withdrawing the mind from sensual pursuits ( tapas ), have been prescribed 
by the scriptures more for the silencing of this mental chatter, this inner talk. They are more a preparation for at -
taining the Reality than for its Realisation. For it is only when the mind is cleansed and clarified that it can achieve 
such a profound task. Only then can the lessons taught and the experiences undergone be pure and unsullied.
Use speech properly
The second instrument that is gifted to people for uplifting themselves is speech —the use of words. Speech 
is charged with tremendous power. When, through speech, we communicate to a person something that upsets 
their balance or shocks them into grief, the words completely drain off their physical strength and mental cour -
age. The person falls on the ground, unable to stand. On the other hand, when, through speech, we communicate 
something happy or unexpectedly cheering, the person gets the strength of an elephant.
Words don’t cost anything but they are priceless. So, they have to be used with care. They must be employed 
not for gossip, which is barren, but for pure and productive purposes only. The ancients recommended the vow of 
silence in order to purify speech of its evils.
 A mind turned inward toward an inner vision of God and speech turned toward outer vision of the Lord —
both will promote spiritual strength and success. Vidya VahiniChapter 19. Love and Brotherhood 53Chapter 19. Love and Brotherhood
Happiness and misery are due to our own actions
Of the three instruments used for thinking, speaking, and action, the third instrument is the body with its hands 
ready to execute the thought that is expressed in words. The deed, the work, the labour in which the hand is 
engaged are the source of all the happiness or misery in which a person is involved. One asserts that one is happy, 
or that one is anxious and afraid or that one is in trouble. And one attributes the cause of these conditions to some 
person other than oneself. This belief rests on a wrong basis; happiness and misery are due to one’s own actions. 
Whether one accepts or rejects this truth, one has to go through all the consequences of one’s action. This is the 
law of nature. One may not believe in summer or winter, in fire or rain, but one cannot escape from heat and cold. 
They affect the person anyway. Therefore, the best course is to direct our activities along proper lines.
Hands are not the only limbs or agents that are involved in human activity ( karma ). Whatever is done, what -
ever is seen, whatever is heard, one should be vigilant about its purity. Thought, word, and deed must be free from 
pride, greed, and hatred. The words that one utters must be free from these faults; things that one yearns to hear 
must be free from these superficially attractive qualities; the pleasures that one seeks must not be polluted by evil.
Students must assimilate the lessons
Students must first assimilate these mental lessons and demonstrate their effect in their speech. The lessons 
that are taught by words must be translated by them into action.
Today, however, education does not transform the mind. It stops the listening process, through the ear. What 
enters the ear might not be clear to the mind; it might reach the mind only in a hazy form. So education has to 
be so imparted that it is received clearly by the mind. To achieve this aim, it has to be transmitted through heads, 
tongues, and hands that are pure, with no blemish that warps. Only then can the learning be clear and the wisdom 
bright.
The role of the teacher
Students study only for a few years, but teachers, in order to justify being in the profession, have to be en -
gaged in studies always without stopping. So teachers are to be reckoned as the only genuine students. To the 
question who is a real student the answer is, “The teacher”. The motto, “I shall be the ideal student, for my pupils 
to emulate,” must inspire the teacher. Such a teacher has surely recognised their duty. The teacher must come 
down to the level of the student; if the teacher doesn’t and still continues to teach, the fate of the student is best 
left to the imagination.
This process is called “descent”. It does not mean stepping down from the top to the ground. It means only 
accepting the level of the person who is to be benefited. The baby on the floor cannot jump to the arms of the 
mother when she calls upon it to come up. “I am a great person; I can’t stoop” —if the mother feels like that, she 
cannot possess the child. Stooping does not make a person small. Similarly, it is not demeaning for the teacher to 
come down to the level of the pupils in order to teach them. It is simply a laudable sign of love.Vidya VahiniChapter 19. Love and Brotherhood 54Many teachers, at the present time, have fallen into the habit of asserting. “Well! I have got ready one les -
son on one topic for today. My duty is to speak on that. I will do just that and go.” Have the pupils grasped the 
lesson aright? Which subject has to be taught in which way, through which method? These problems do not seem 
to bother them. Moreover they should conduct themselves just in the same manner as they advise and expect the 
students to behave. When they are taught the lessons through love, their reverence for the teacher will also be 
deepened. Each teacher should strive to encourage the all-round development of the student. Each teacher must 
expand their own heart through love and not waste years in furthering their own interest.
The teacher should not cultivate divisive traits. The saints and sages ( rishis ) of ancient times treated their 
own sons and their students with equal affection. Today, we have lost faith that our teachers are of this nature. 
When the principal’s son is answering question papers for an examination in one hall, the principal will not be 
posted as invigilator there, lest he should dictate the correct answers and help his son to get good marks! But, in 
the hermitages of old, there would be no suspicion that the guru  would show such preference or partiality. Today, 
corruption has crept into thought, word, and deed at all levels. Hence these precautions. Teachers have to adopt 
the spiritual discipline ( sadhana ) of purifying their emotions in order to earn the status and authority of gurus . 
The true guru  must lead the pupil into a worthy and happy life. And the true pupil must respond with eagerness 
and adoration. 
Teachers are responsible for the nature and quality of the activities and character of students. For they 
impress the youth by their scholarship and leadership. So, they must keep clear of selfish aggrandisement and 
political manoeuvering and have only spiritual enlightenment as their ideal in life. The members of the teaching 
staff must move among themselves as brothers. Students become aware of differences and rivalries between their 
teachers. Of course, differences are inevitable and may even be useful. But differences shouldn’t pollute mutual 
relations, hinder the progress of the institution, and affect adversely the processes of teaching and learning. In 
these fields, teachers must consult each other and cooperate with others.
Students must practise cooperation
Among students also, we don’t find this spirit of singleness of purpose and fraternal cooperation. Good na -
ture ( sadbhava ) and good company ( sathsanga ) have become rare; mutual love and yearning for good company 
have weakened. “As the ruler ( raja), so the ruled ( praja ),” says the proverb. “As the teacher, so the pupil” seems 
to be equally true. Teachers, therefore, have to be interested in high thinking and a life steeped in renunciation.
The expert in chemistry or physics may not know much biology. But there is every need for them all to be 
friendly and work as a team. For whatever the science in which one specialises, the science of the spirit, the sci -
ence that leads to the ultimate truth has also to be mastered.
The basis of humanity is God
At the Atomic Research Centre, I said that everything has energy latent in it —a piece of paper has it, a strip 
of cloth has it. When the latent energy is exhausted, death results; when energy fills, birth happens. Being-aware -
ness-bliss ( satchidananda ) is energy. We ( sat) are ( chit) happy ( ananda ). Energy is all, and energy is derived from 
God. That is the very basis of all people.
Now, we are building super-structures somewhere else, not on the basis. The foundational divine principle is Vidya VahiniChapter 19. Love and Brotherhood 55being ignored. We are fascinated by subjects and studies that promise to feed our stomachs and make us materially 
happy and powerful. But the hard truth is the Divine beneath all. People must either know the supreme truth of 
the one Being behind all becoming or at least know the practical truth of love and brotherhood. These two points 
are the limits that education must ever keep in mind —the starting point and the goal.Vidya VahiniGlossary 56Glossary
This glossary contains many Sanskrit words, people, places, and literature that Sathya Sai Baba uses in His 
discourses, especially discourses appearing in this volume. The glossary attempts to provide comprehensive 
meanings and detailed explanations of the more important Sanskrit words, for the benefit of lay readers who are 
interested in Hindu religion and philosophy.
In an electronic version of this volume (e.g. an e-book for the Ipad, Kindle, or Nook), you can click on most 
names, places, people, and Sanskrit words within the text in order to immediately access the word in this glossary. 
Your device will also have an arrow or other link to press to get back to the text.
Abhimanyu . Arjuna’s son and Parikshith’s father; slain in battle.
adhika-ari . Worst enemy.
adi-kari . Official, person of authority.
a-dwaitha . Nondualism, monism, the doctrine that everything is God, the philosophy of absolute oneness of 
God, soul, and universe.
a-dwaitha-avastha . Abiding in Brahman.
a-dwaitha-bavana . Non-dual state.
a-dwaitha-sthayi . Staying in Brahman.
ahamkara . Ego, self-love, selfish individuality.
ahimsa . Nonviolence.
a-jnana . Ignorance, stupidity.
alochana . Planning, considering.
ananda . Divine bliss. The Self is unalloyed, eternal bliss. Pleasures are but its faint and impermanent shadows.
Anasuya . Wife of sage Athri  and mother of Dattatreya ; an incarnation of the Trinity.
a-paroksha . Inner knowledge; direct spiritual knowledge.
Aranyakas . Religious or philosophical texts closely connected with the brahmins , either composed in the forest 
or studied there.
Arjuna . Krishna’s disciple, in the Bhagavad Gita ; third of five Pandava brothers. See Mahabharatha .
artha . Wealth, prosperity, material object, thing, aim, purpose, desire.
Asathya-narayana . Lord of untruth.
Atharva-veda . The fourth Veda . Atharva  means “fourth”. Steady, unmoved person, of stable nature .
Athri . A sage; father of Dattatreya. Also, one of 10 mental sons of Hiranyagarbha.
Atma . Self; Soul. Self, with limitations, is the individual soul. Self, with no limitations, is Brahman , the Su -
preme Reality.
Atma-ananda . Atmic  bliss, bliss of Self-realization.
Atma-jnana . Knowledge of Self-realization; awareness of Atma .
Atma-vidya . Knowledge of supreme reality or Atma .Vidya VahiniGlossary 57Atmic . Of or relating to the Atma .
Aum . Om; Designation of the Universal Brahman ; sacred, primordial sound of the universe.
Avatar . Incarnation of God. Whenever there is a decline of dharma , God comes down to the world assuming 
bodily form to protect the good, punish the wicked and re-establish dharma . An Avatar  is born and lives free 
and is ever conscious of His mission. By His precept and example, He opens up new paths in spirituality, 
shedding His grace on all.
a-vidya . Ignorance.
Ayodhya . City where Rama was born and ruled.
Bhagavad Gita . Literally, Song of God. Portion of the Mahabharatha  that is a dialogue between Arjuna , one of 
the Pandava  brothers, and Krishna .
bhajans . Congregational chant group worship by devotees with devotional music in which repetition of holy 
names predominates.
bhakthi . Devotion to God.
Bharath . India; Indian; descendent of King Bharath, first emperor of India.
Bharathiya . Indian, dweller in the country of Bharath (India).
Bible . Collection of sacred texts in Judaism and Christianity. There are many different versions with varying 
contents. The Hebrew Bible includes the Torah (teachings or law). The Christian Bibles generally consist of 
the Old Testament (including the 24 books of the Hebrew Bible) and the New Testament (including the four 
Gospels, the Acts of the Apostles, Epistles or letters, and the Book of Revelation), The content varies for the 
Catholic, Protestant, and Eastern Christian groups.
bimba . Disc of sun or moon; object compared in comparisons.
Brahma . The Creator, the First of the Hindu Trinity of Brahma (the Creator), Vishnu (the Preserver), and Siva 
(the Destroyer).
Brahma-jnana . Knowledge of Brahman.
Brahman . The Supreme Being, the Absolute Reality, Impersonal God with no form or attributes. The uncaused 
cause of the Universe, Existence, Consciousness-Bliss Absolute ( Sat-Chit-Ananda ); The Eternal Changeless 
Reality — not conditioned by time, space, and causation.
Brahmana . A section of each of the four Vedas  dwelling on the meaning and use of mantras  and hymns at vari -
ous sacrifices.
Brahma Sutra . Spiritual text of Vedantic  teachings in short maxims, attributed to Badharayana or Vyasa.
Brahma-vidya . Spiritual attainment, knowledge of Brahman.
brahmin . First of four castes of social order, the priestly or teacher caste; a person belonging to this caste.
Buddha . Prince Gautama, circa 556 –480 BC. Founder of Buddhism after attaining enlightenment.
buddhi . Intellect, intelligence, faculty of discrimination.
caste . The four castes of social order are: brahmin  (priestly or teacher), kshatriya  (warrior, protector), vaisya  
(trader, merchant, agriculturist), and sudra  (worker, helper). See varna dharma .
chaithanya . Consciousness, intelligence, spirit.
Chaithanya . Fifteenth century Vaishnava mendicant reformer; taught the path of love and devotion to the Ava-
tar of Sri Krishna.Vidya VahiniGlossary 58chit. Consciousness, knowledge, awareness.
chittha . Mind stuff, memory, subconscious mind..
Dasaratha . Son of Aja and father of Rama; King of Ayodhya; the name means “ten chariot hero”.
Dattatreya . Sage son of Athri and Anasuya.
dhana . Wealth, possessions.
dharma . Righteousness, religion, code of conduct, duty, essential nature of a being or thing. It holds together 
the entire Universe. Man is exhorted to practise dharma  to achieve material and spiritual welfare. The Vedas  
contain the roots of dharma . God is naturally interested in the reign of dharma .
Dharmavyadha . Hunter who became a sage.
Dharma Sastras . Codes of law and ethics concerning virtuous living.
dharmic . According to dharma , righteous.
Dhritharashtra . Father of Kauravas; holder of ruling power.
dhyana . Meditation
drishti . Vision, seeing, intelligence.
drisya . That which is perceived by the senses; the seen.
Durga . Goddess of the universe; mother earth; daughter of Himaval and wife of Siva.
durmathi . Person with perverted, polluted intelligence.
dwaitha . Dualism, the doctrine that the individual and the Supreme Soul are two different principles or entities.
Gandhi , Mohandas Karamachand. Famed for his peaceful opposition to British rule in India and his part in 
achieving India’s independence.
Gandiva . Arjuna’s bow.
Ganga . The 1560-mile-long Ganges river; starts in the Himalayas and flows generally east into the Bay of Ben -
gal; the most sacred river of India.
Garuda . Celestial bird, white-crested eagle, king of the feathered race, vehicle for Lord Vishnu.
Gauranga . Name for Chaithanya, a great saint.
Gayatri mantra . A very sacred Vedic  prayer for self-enlightenment; it is repeated piously at dawn, noon, and 
twilight devotions.
Gita. See Bhagavad Gita .
grantha . Scriptual text or book.
Granth Saheb . Sacred scriptural text of the Sikhs.
guna . Quality, property, trait; one of the three constituents of nature ( sathwa , rajas , and thamas ). They bind the 
soul to the body. Man’s supreme goal in life is to transcend the gunas  and attain liberation from the cycle of 
birth and death.
guru . Spiritual guide; a knower of Brahman, who is calm, desireless, merciful, and ever ready to help and guide 
spiritual aspirants who approach him.
guru-kula . Spiritual teacher’s house, where pupils were educated.
Harischandra . King of the solar dynasty; very renowned for his unique truthfulness and integrity. Sold himself 
and family for the sake of truth.Vidya VahiniGlossary 59Hiranyagarbha . Cosmic divine mind; cosmic womb; golden egg first created by Brahman from which all cre -
ation issued.
hridaya . Heart.
hridaya-kshetra . Heart field.
indriyas . Senses.
Iswara . Easwara. The Supreme Ruler, the Personal God. He is Brahman associated with illusion ( maya ) but has 
it under His control, unlike the individual soul, who is illusion’s slave. He has a lovely form, auspicious at -
tributes, and infinite power to create, sustain, and destroy. He dwells in the heart of every being, controlling it 
from within. He responds positively to true devotion and sincere prayer.
Janaka . A self-realized king; Sita’s father and Rama’s father-in-law. His ancestor was Nimi, a great emperor.
japa. Soft prayer or repetition of the name of God.
Jayadeva . Sanskrit poet; wrote the Gita Govinda , which describes the early life of Krishna.
jiva. Individual or soul, in a state of non-realisation of its identity with Brahman. It is unaware of its own nature 
and is subjected to sensations of pain and pleasure, birth and death, etc.
jivatma . Soul or true Self, at the individual level.
jnana . Sacred knowledge; knowledge of the spirit, pursued as a means to Self-realisation. It is direct experience 
of God, as the Soul of the souls. Jnana  makes a man omniscient, free, fearless, and immortal.
Jnana-kanda . Portion of the Vedas  that deals with knowledge of Brahman through the path of spiritual wisdom 
or discriminative knowledge.
jivana-paramavadhi . Goal of life.
jivana-upadhi . Means for living.
Kabir . Also Kabirdas . 15th century mystic poet; preached equality before God of all creatures and the religion 
of love/devotion, which was aimed at the union of the soul with God. Born to a Muslim weaver family of 
Benares.
kama . Desire, lust, worldly fulfillment; one of four goals of humans.
karma . Action, deed, work, religious rite, the totality of innate tendencies formed as a consequence of acts done 
in previous lives. Every karma  produces a lasting impression on the mind of the doer, apart from affecting 
others. Repetition of a particular karma  produces a tendency ( vasana ) in the mind. Karma  is of three kinds: 
(i) praarabdha , which is being exhausted in the present life: (ii) aagami , which is being accumulated in 
the present life, and (iii) samchitha , which is being accumulated or stored to be experienced in future lives. 
Akarma  is action that is done without any intention to gain the consequences; vikarma  is action that is inten -
tionally done.
Kauravas . Family that fought Pandavas. See Mahabharatha .
Koran . Holy text of the Muslims accepted as revelations from the prophet Mohammed; divinely authorized 
basis for the regulations of the Islamic world.
kosa . Sheath.
Krishna . The Avatar  of Vishnu  in the Dwapara yuga , prior to the present Kali yuga .
kshetra . Field or life.
kumbhaka . Retention of air, holding the breath.
Lakshmi . Consort of Vishnu, goddess of wealth.Vidya VahiniGlossary 60Madhava . God (name for Krishna ); Master of illusion ( maya ), Lord of Lakshmi.
Mahabharatha . The Hindu epic composed by Sage Vyasa , which deals with the deeds and fortunes of the cous -
ins (the Kauravas and Pandavas ) of the Lunar race, with Lord Krishna  playing a significant and decisive role 
in shaping the events. The Bhagavad Gita  and Vishnu  Sahasranama  occur in this great epic. It is considered 
to be the Fifth Veda  by devout Hindus. Of this great epic, it is claimed that “what is not in it is nowhere .
maha-purusha . Outstanding sage.
mahatma . Great soul.
Mallamma . Name of a great lady devotee.
manana . Reflection, meditation, understanding.
manas . Mind, the inner organ, which has four aspects: (i) mind ( manas ), which deliberates, desires, and feels; 
(ii) intellect ( buddhi ), which understands, reasons, and decides; (iii) the  ‘I’ sense, and (iv) memory ( chitha ). 
The mind, with all its desires and their broods, conceals the Divinity within man. Purification of the mind is 
essential for realisation of the Self.
manasika-sambhashana . Inner dialogue.
Manmatha . God of love.
mantra . A sacred formula, mystic syllable or word symbol uttered during the performance of the rituals or 
meditation. They represent the spiritual truths directly revealed to the rishis  (seers). The section of the Veda  
that contains these hymns ( mantras ) is called the Samhitha .
mantra-sastra . The science of the Vedic  sacred formulae.
Manu . The first father of mankind; author of the codes of righteous conduct ( Dharma Sastras ); son of Surya 
(the sun) and father of Vaivaswatha Manu, the present progenitor of mankind .
maya . Delusion. The mysterious, creative, and delusive power of Brahman through which God projects the 
appearance of the Universe. Maya  is the material cause and Brahman is the efficient cause of the Universe. 
Brahman and maya  are inextricably associated with each other like fire and its power to heat. Maya  deludes 
the individual souls in egoism, making them forget their true spiritual nature.
Meera . Princess of Rajasthan and queen of Chittor; devoted to Krishna; took poison from her husband without 
any effect; composed devotional songs of exceptional quality.
mithya . Mixture of truth and falsehood; neither true nor untrue, but something in between. The world is not 
untrue ( asat) but mithya .
moksha . Liberation from all kinds of bondage, especially the one to the cycle of birth and death. It is a state of 
absolute freedom, peace, and bliss, attained through Self-realisation. This is the supreme goal of human en -
deavour, the other three being, righteousness ( dharma ), wealth and power ( artha ), and sense-pleasure ( kama ).
mukthi . See moksha .
mumukshu . One who desires liberation.
Mundaka Upanishad . One of the ten most important Upanishads , of Artharva-veda ; it presents the Vedantic  
doctrine of knowledge of Brahman.
nara . Man; divine man; primeval man, human being.
Narayana . The Primal Person, the Lord, Vishnu.
nidi-dhyasana . Inner concentration, profound meditation.Vidya VahiniGlossary 61nir-vikalpa . Undifferentiated, without ideation.
nir-vikalpa-samadhi . Undifferentiated deep communion, transcendental absorption.
Om. Designation of the Universal Brahman; sacred, primordial sound of the Universe.
Pandavas . Sons of Pandu; family of 5 brothers that fought the Kauravas: Dharmaraja , Bhima, Arjuna , Nakula, 
and Sahadeva. See Mahabharatha .
Paraath-para . The Omniself, That which is beyond the Beyond.
Para-brahman . Universal Absolute Brahman.
parama-santhi . Highest peace.
Param-atma . Supreme Self, Supreme Atma .
Parikshith . Emperor of Kuru dynasty; grandson of Arjuna and son of Abhimanyu.
paripur-natha . Self-sufficiency.
paroksha . Unseen, invisible.
Parvathi . Siva’s consort. Also known as Gauri (fair complexioned) and by other names.
pasu . Animal, bull.
Pasupathi . Lord of animals or individualized souls; another name for Siva.
Patanjali . Author of the Yoga Sutras , which form the foundation of the yoga  system of Indian philosophy. See 
raja-yoga .
praja . Ruled, people.
prakriti . Nature, the Divine Power of Becoming. Also known as maya , avidya , and sakthi ; the world of matter 
and mind as opposed to the spirit. Prakriti  has three dispositions or gunas  (sathwa , rajas , and thamas ), which 
go into the make-up of all living and non-living beings in the Universe, in varying proportions leading to the 
appearance of infinite multiplicity in form, nature, and behaviour .
pralaya . Dissolution of the world.
prana . Life-breath, life force, vital energy, the five vital airs of the body. English doesn’t seem to have names 
for these vital airs, so we list them with their Sanskrit names: prana  (located in lungs), apana  (flatus, which 
moves downward through the rectum), vyana  (diffused throughout the whole body), samana  (navel; essential 
to digestion), and udana  (rises through throat to head).
pranayama . Breath control.
prapancha . Cosmos; created world composed of the five elements.
Prasthana Thraya . The three supreme spiritual texts: the Upanishads , Bhagavad Gita , and Brahma Sutra .
prathi-bimba . Image, that with which an object is compared.
pratyaksha . Direct knowledge, perceptible, before one’s eyes.
prema . Ecstatic love of God; divine love of the most intense kind .
puja. Worship.
pundit . Learned scholar, wise man.
puraka . Inhalation of air.
Puranas . Any of a number of collections of ancient legends and lore embodying the principles of the universal, Vidya VahiniGlossary 62eternal religion and ethics. There are 18 Puranas , the most famous being the Mahabhagavatham  and the Devi 
Bhagavatham .
purna . Complete, full.
Purusha . Primeval Person, Supreme Spirit, Lord, God.
Purushothama . The supreme Lord of all.
raja. Ruler, king, member of ruling class.
rajas . One of the three gunas  (qualities or dispositions) of maya  or prakriti . Passion, restlessness, aggressive -
ness, emotions such as anger, greed, grief. Associated with colour red. See guna .
rajasic . Adjective form of rajas , passionate, emotional.
raja-yoga . Royal yoga  of meditation, detachment, and desirelessness. Eight-fold path of yoga  developed by 
Patanjali, which includes control of the mind and withdrawal of the senses from the external world.
rajoguna . Quality of passion, restlessness, aggressiveness. Associated with colour red. See guna.
Rama . Avatar  of the Thretha yuga . Hero of the Ramayana ; killed the wicked Ravana  to rescue his wife Sita, 
who had been kidnapped. “Rama” means “he who pleases”.
Ramakrishna Paramahamsa . (1836–1886) Celebrated mystic; mastered all types of yoga  and also Christian 
and Islamic practices. Swami Vivekananda took his message of universal religion to the West. Married to 
Saradadevi.
Ramayana . This sacred epic, composed by Sage Valmiki , deals with the incarnation of Vishnu as Sri Rama , 
who strove all his life to reestablish the reign of dharma  in the world. The Ramayana  has played an important 
role in influencing and shaping the Hindu ethos over the centuries.
Ramdas . Maratha 17th century saint; author of work on religious duty; guru of the great King Sivaji.
Ravana . Lord of demons and king of Lanka, who abducted Sita (Rama ’s wife).
rechaka . Exhalation of air.
Rig-veda . First Veda  composed by the sages, consisting of 1028 hymns. Oldest religious text in world.
Rig-vedic . Of or relating to the Rig-veda .
Rik. See Rig-veda .
rishi . Sage, wise man.
sadbhava . Goodness, good nature.
sadhaka . Spiritual aspirant.
sadhana . Spiritual discipline or exercise; self effort.
sahasra-nama .  1000 names of Siva or Vishnu..
sajjana . Wise, virtuous people.
Sakkubai . A famous Krishna devotee.
sakthi . Great universal power, divine energy, strength. Maha  means Great , so Mahasakthi  is great sakthi .
sakthi-path . Descent of divine energy.
Sama , Sama-veda . Collection of certain verses of the Rig-veda  arranged for liturgical purposes.
samadhi . Literally, total absorption. The state of super consciousness resulting in union with or absorption in Vidya VahiniGlossary 63the ultimate reality, the Atma ; perfect equanimity. The state that transcends the body, mind, and intellect. In 
that state of consciousness, the objective world and the ego vanish and Reality is perceived or communed 
with, in utter peace and bliss. When people realise in this state their oneness with God, it is called nirvikalpa 
samadhi .
samhitha . Collection of methodically arranged verses or text; continous text of the Vedas  as formed out of the 
separate words by proper phonetic changes.
samsara . Worldly life; life of the individual soul through repeated births and deaths. Liberation means getting 
freed from this cycle.
Sanathana Dharma . Eternal religion. A descriptive term for what has come to be called Hinduism. It has no 
single founder or text of its own. It is more a commonwealth of religious faiths and a way of life.
Sanjaya . An advisor to the blind King Dhritharashtra. Sanjaya had the gift granted by sage Vyasa of seeing 
events at a distance, and he tells Dhritharashtra what is happening in the battle. See Mahabharatha .
Sankara . Also Sankaracharya . Celebrated philosopher, preceptor of non-dualistic Vedanta . Defeated all reli -
gious opponents in debates throughout India.
santham . Equanimity, serenity, tranquility.
santhi . Peace, equanimity, serenity, tranquility.
sanyasa . Renunciation-detachment, mendicancy.
sanyasi . Also sanyasin . Renunciant, mendicant.
Saradadevi . The holy mother, wife of Ramakrishna Paramahamsa.
Sastras . The Hindu scriptures containing the teachings of the sages. The Vedas , the Upanishads , the ithihasas  
(epics), the Puranas , the Smrithis  (codes of conduct), etc., form the Sastras  of the Hindus. They teach us how 
to live wisely and well with all the tenderness and concern of the Mother.
sat. Existence, being, good, real.
sat-chit-ananda . Existence-knowledge-bliss, or being-awareness-bliss.
sath-sang . Good company.
sathwa . One of the three gunas  (qualities and dispositions) of maya  or prakriti . It is the quality of purity, bright -
ness, peace, and harmony. It leads to knowledge. Man is exhorted to overcome thamas  by rajas  and rajas  by 
sathwa  and finally to go beyond sathwa  itself to attain liberation.
sathwic . Adjective form of sathwa ; serene, pure, good, balanced.
sathya . Truth.
Sathyanarayana . Sathya Sai Baba, as an incarnation of Narayana, the Primal Person, the Lord, Vishnu.
savam . Corpse.
sayujya . Union, merger with the Divine.
seva. Selfless service; service to others while trying to serve the God within them.
sishya . Pupil, student, disciple.
Sita. Wife of Rama; brought up by King Janaka  who found her in a box in the earth. Also, a tributary of the 
Ganga, flowing westward.
siva. Divine, auspicious, gracious, goodness.
Siva. The Destroyer, the Third of the Hindu Trinity of Brahma (the Creator), Vishnu (the Preserver), and Siva Vidya VahiniGlossary 64(the Destroyer).
sivam . Grace, auspiciousness, goodness.
smrithi . Code of law; traditional law delivered by human authors.
sravana . Listening to discourses on the scriptures.
Sravana . Son of hermits; was killed accidentally by Dasaratha, who was cursed by Sravana’s parents to die 
from loss of children.
srishti . Creation.
sruthi . Sacred revelations orally transmitted by brahmins from generation to generation, differing from tradi -
tional law codes ( smrithi ). Divinely sourced scripture; Veda ; divine words known by revelation; that which 
was heard or listened to.
Suka . Divine son of author of the Mahabharatha , Vyasa. Visited King Janaka, who instructed him in the path to 
liberation. Also, a messenger of Ravana was named Suka.
sumathi . Person with good intelligence.
Sumathi Sathaka . A Telugu poetic work on ethics.
sundaram . Beauty.
sunya . Emptiness; void.
Surya . The sun god, the father of time. A name for the sun. Also, son of Kasyapa and father of Manu.
sutra . Concise rule or aphorism; that which, through a few words only, reveals vast meanings; text consisting of 
aphorisms or maxims; a thread; something, like a thread, that runs through and holds everything together.
tapas . Concentrated spiritual exercises to attain God, penance, severe austerities.
thamas . One of the gunas  (qualities and dispositions) of maya  or prakriti . It is the quality of dullness, inertia, 
darkness and tendency to evil. It results in ignorance.
thamasic . Adjective form of thamas , dull, ignorant, passive.
thamoguna . Quality of dullness, ignorance, delusion, inactivity, inertia, sloth. Associated with colour black. See 
guna .
Thath . That, the Godhead.
thri-karanas . Three instruments: thought (mind), word (mouth), and deed (hand).
thwam . Thou, You, This, the individual.
thyaga . Sacrifice, renunciation.
thyagi . Renunciant.
Tukaram . Well-known Maratha 17th century writer. He abandoned the world and became a wandering ascetic.
Tulsidas . Author of the greatest medieval devotional poetical work concerning the acts of Rama.
Upanishadic . Relating to the Upanishads .
Upanishads . The very sacred portions of the Vedas  that deal with God, humanity, and universe, their nature and 
interrelationships. Spiritual knowledge ( jnana ) is their content, so they form the Jnana-kanda  of the Vedas .
vahini . Stream, flow.
Vaishnavite . A person belonging to Vaishnavism , one of the major branches of Hinduism. It focuses on worhip -
ing Vishnu and his ten incarnations.Vidya VahiniGlossary 65Valmiki . The saint-poet who wrote the Ramayana .
varna dharma . The Hindu community is divided into four social groups, or castes ( varnas ), based on qualities 
(gunas ) and vocations: (1) Brahmana  (the brahmins ), the custodian of spiritual and moral role), (2) kshatriya , 
the warrior group, which rules and defends the land), (3) vaisya , the group dealing with commerce, business, 
and trade, and (4) sudra , the group devoted to labour and service to the community. Each varna  has its own 
dharmic  restrictions and regulations that strive to canalise impulses and instinct into fields that are special to 
their place in society, controls pertaining to the duties of the caste.
Vasishta . One of the greatest rishis  (sages) of ancient times; priest of the solar race of kings; revealer of several 
Vedic  hymns. Had sacred, wishfulfilling cow called Nandini.
Veda . Knowledge, wisdom. This knowledge is generally viewed as being given in the Vedas .
Vedanta . Means “the end of the Vedas ”. It is the essence of the Vedas  enshrined in the Upanishads . The philoso -
phy of non-dualism, or qualified non-dualism, or dualism based on the Upanishadic  teachings, is denoted by 
this term.
Vedantic . Of or pertaining to Vedanta .
Vedas . The oldest and the holiest of the Hindu scriptures, the primary source of authority in Hindu religion and 
philosophy. They are four in number: the Rig-Veda , Sama-Veda , Yajur-Veda , and Atharva-Veda .
Vedic . Of your relating to the Vedas .
vidya . Spiritual education, spiritual knowledge, learning, that which illumines, that which gives light, supreme 
teaching.
vikasa . Expansion, blooming state; illuminating.
vinasa . Destruction, extinction.
vinaya . Modest conduct, discretion, humility.
Vishnu . The Preserver, the Second of the Hindu Trinity of Brahma (the Creator), Vishnu (the Preserver), and 
Siva (the Destroyer).
visishta-adwaitha . Qualified nondualism. The doctrine that men’s spirits of have a qualified or partial identity 
with God.
Vivekananda . Disciple of Ramakrishna; one of the founders of the Ramakrishna order. He taught Vedantic  phi-
losophy in Europe, America, and India.
Vyasa . Compiler of Vedas  and author of the Mahabharatha , Mahabhagavatham , and Brahma Sutra .
yaga . Oblation, sacrifice, ceremony in which oblations are presented.
yajna . Holy ritual, sacrifice, or rite. Also, personification of rite (when capitalized).
Yajur-veda . Second Veda , consisting of a collection of sacred texts in prose relating to sacrifices.
Yama . God of Death; death personified.
yantra . Mechanics; instrument..
yoga . (a) Union of individual self or Atma  with Supreme Being or Universal Self; act of yoking. (b) Spiritual 
discipline or exercise aimed at control of the senses. (c) Science of divine communion. (d) self control. Patan -
jali’s Yoga-sutras define yoga  as a series of 8 steps leading to union with God.
Yoga Sutras . An aphoristic treatise on yoga  by Patanjali.
Yoga-vasishta . Sacred work in the form of dialogue between Vasishta and his pupil Rama, teaching the way to Vidya VahiniGlossary 66eternal bliss.
yogeswara . Master of yoga .
yogi. One who practices yoga .
yuga . Era or age. There is a cycle of four yugas : the Kritha yuga , Thretha yuga , Dwapara yuga , and Kali yuga . 
Present age is the Kali yuga .
Zend Avesta . Original scriptural work of the Zoroastrians.
Zoroaster . Founder of the ancient Persian religion Zoroastrianism. The sacred text called the Gathas  were re -
vealed to him while in deep meditation. Ahur Mazda is the name for the Supreme.Vidya VahiniGlossary 67