BHAVAN S BOOK UNIVERSITY 
Sri Samkara’s 
eer 
ss “ TINA MZ \ 
| 
: 
=, : 
= a ia —. . 
— oak 
a 
‘a. o 
= at = oF 
WITH AN ENGLISH TRANSLATION 
of 
‘-, WEE SANSKRIT COMMENTARY OF 
SRI CANDRASEKHARA BHARATI OF SRNGERI 
a Laan. Bharatiya Vidya 
>} Bhava Ns A S 
aT AT MT: Sweet Ae FervEe: | 
a noble iiaugn come to us from every side 
oe I-89-i 
BHAVAN'S BOOK UNIVERSITY 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 
OF SRI SAMKARA BHAGAVATPADA 
Translator 
P. SANKARANARAYANAN 
B : 
_ JAGADGURU SRI CANDRASEKHA. BHAVAN'S BOOK UNIVERSITY 
VIVEKACUDAMAN OF SRI SAMKARA BHAGAVATPADA | 
with an English transtation a the ebabtnlindary i in - Samskrt by 
A BHARATI SVAMINAH | 
(Sri Samkaracarya of Sarada Pitha, ‘Srngeri) | | 
Translator | 
P. SANKARANARAYANAN 
BHARATIYA VIDYA BHAVAN - 
Kulapati K. M. Munshi mae. 
Mumbai - 400 007° 
© BHARATIYA VIDYA BHAVAN. _ Kulapati Munshi Marg 
_ Mumbai - 400 007 
First eaition published in 1973, San the Aner: assistance oF the 
Ministry of Education and Social Welfare, Government of India. 
Second Edition : 1979 
‘Third Edition 9: 1988-060) fics don 
Fourth Edition : 1999 Se 
Fifth Edition : 2008 = ees 
Price : Rs. 400/ - 
PRINT ED IN INDIA 
By Atul Goradia at Siddhi Printers, 13/14, Bhabha Building, 
13th Khetwadi Lane, Mumbai - 400 004, and 
Published by P. V. Sankarankutty, Additional Registrar, 
for the Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, 
Kulapati Munshi Marg, Mumbai - 400 007. 
E- Mail : bhavan@bhavans. info 
Web-site : www. bhavans. info - 
pe? aes © 
MIATA RY 
te mov haiti er ybaoian ibaa 
faer faerary” eerearnfzerta aa wat NET e 
eeferchrertrstg: swferereat wa dfegraat geet ater: rar fare 
Beene gio Sarat away watt | 
| _ samt: ‘qefaget: sre sent SE TORE safararerd 
ae aerate 1 safe ° 
fit Penton frerereiarer: rete ioe sete STC 
surearat: Seaelines ene Fetes seererette | TTS 
seams aca sheep: “sine arent oem: 
SSAA - gaPegtireraa ls clean RSMO 8 TTT TTA 
aalfaed oriare | “aateat ada aagtat:; fafeeataaaerer amps Fat 
Se ik eemrenteeg hs! Birt aq FaMaTaraafeerenra 
‘Translation of the PREFACE (in Sarhskrt) by His Holiness 
od AGADGURU SRI ABHINAVA VIDYATIRTHA SVAMINAH 
RA MIRARACARY A OF SRI SARADAPITHA, SRNGAGIRI 
To the ee Sarhskrt Edition 
| Om. 7 
Bhagavan Sri Vasudeva who incarnated to rescue the men of 
the world from the dense darkness of avidya spoke of the know- 
ledge of the atman (adhyadtma-vidya) as the most eminent of all 
kinds of knowledge when He told Arjuna who had supplicated to. 
Him, that He was “adhyatma-vidya vidyanam”. That adhyatma- 
vidya should be understood from the Upanisads which are the acme 
of the Vedas. The doubts that may arise in the minds of men in 
respect of their teachings are to be resolved only by reasoning pre- 
 Scribed in the Sartrakamimamsa of Sage Vyasa. The Bhagavad Gita 
is the quintessence of the Upanisads. Bhagavan Sarmkara, taking the 
form of Paramahamsa Parivrajaka, wrote commentaries on the triad 
of the Upanisads, the Brahma Sitras and the Bhagavad Gita in 
words of clear and majestic import and clearly conveyed the truth 
about the 4tman which is taught in the Upanisads. Thinking that 
the comprehension of the truth of the 4tman by examination of the _ 
import of the Upanisads etc., is difficult for generality of men, Sri 
Samkaracarya wrote many treatises like the Vivekaciidémani. which 
are easy to understand. This work called “The Vivekacidamani” 
is the most popular everywhere of all of them and shines as the 
_ erest-jewel among them. The truth about the 4tman, however diffi- 
cult of comprehension, becomes clear like the myrobalan fruit in 
_ the palm of the hand. Even those who feel diffident to enter into 
a study of the Upanisad commentaries etc., will find this text ‘easy | 
to. “study. 
Our revered Acarya graciously thoubhe: af there is oe an 
authoritative commentary to the pre-eminent work of this nature, 
it will be like adding fragrance to a flower of gold,’ and he wrote 
a Commentary for clear understanding of the work and its. deep in- 
sight. About the excellence of the Commentary nothing need be 
said by us. To produce conviction of the superior merit of the Com- 
mentary, it is enough to affirm that our revered Acdrya was an emi- 
nent tapassvin, master of all the Sastras, uncompromising in the 
scrupulous observance of all that is intimated in them, one who had 
direct realisation of his Atman, a rare jivanmukta. 
VIVEKACOUDAMANI tits an 
The incompleteness of the Commentary causes a bit uneasiness.* 
We unce requested our revered Acarya to complete it. He replied: 
“Whatever has to be said has been conveyed in these pages them- © 
selves. My mind cannot now engage in anything else other than 
profound meditation.” We, therefore, believe that this incomplete- 
ness does not take away the fullness of the Commentary, 
We confer our benedictory prayer that all men should carefully 
study this work, and realising the true 4tman, they may have the . 
satisfaction of reese fulfilled their duty. 
ABHINAVA VIDYATIRTHA 
| Disciple initiated by the lotus hand of 
adguru L Sri Candragekhara Bharati Svaminah 
*There is no commentary on verses 516 to 581. 
- The Shae Vidya Bhavan is grateful to His Holiness J. agad- 
guru Sri Abhinava Vidyatirtha Mahasvaminah, Samkaracarya of 
Sri Garada Pitha, Srngeri, for his gracious permission coupling it 
with his benediction to translate into English his saintly pre- 
decessor’s masterly Commentary on Sri Sathkara Bhagavatpada’s 
: ia orca caries 
‘THIS ENGLISH TRANSLATION IS INSCRIBED TO 
Doctor M. K. SUBRAMANIAM = 
(of Kumbakonam) _ 
and | 
"Sri T. V. VISWANATHA AIYAR 
(of Mere Madras) 
_who have, each in his own way, invested friendship with 
a new dimension. | 
| Appendix Ew) aR Seon ete Tape 
: “Index to glokas hae re : _ 7 “a A ria 495 
. Errata a ook a _— a Lok e504 CONTENTS 
Page 
. ‘retin of the above ae oe ar a es oe : - | ii 
cy Translator’ s Preface to the First Edition | es, : . viii 
. Preface to the Second Edition i yar te aie ee, a - x 3 
. List of Abbreviations : we ne ane bat Pas. xi 
Scheme of Transliteration...  .- i ine ome <! 
- Introduction eee eee es “a. a 
Analysis of Vivekacidimani be ra he a xxxiv 
Invocation by the Author of the Commentary ne a a 1 
Text of the Vivekacadamani and Commentary 1 rendered 
into English eT ae ge? ae - a <" 
= Appendix 1 1 on ae ae — e + .. 490 — 
-TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE 
TO THE FIRST EDITION 
It was little over fifty four years ago that I had first intro- 
duction to Advaita Vedanta through Sri Sarkara’s Vivekacidamani. 
Since then, I have been reading the work a number of times and 
each reading gave me a new insight into its contents and produced 
a deeper understanding. Of all the Prakaranagranthas of Bhagavan 
Sri Sarhkara, this stands in a class by itself for its exhaustiveness of 
treatment, lucidity of its style and directness of its expression. In 
fact, the reader feels that the Guru in this work takes him by. hand 
and leads him step by step to the grand finale so picturesquely 
described in the concluding Slokas. That is why the Vivekacida- 
mani had all along a special fascination for me as for all students of 
_ This fascination increased a great deal when, in 1958, by a stroke 
of good fortune, I happened to see in the camp at Tiruchirapalli of | 
His Holiness the present Sarnkaracarya of Srngagiri a printed copy 
of the Vivekaciidimani with the Commentary in Samskrt by His 
Holiness Jagadguru. Sri Candragekhara. Bharati -Pijyapadah who 
adorned the Srigagiri Pitha succeeding with rare distinction that lion 
among ascetics, Jagadguru Sri Saccidananda Siva-Abhinava. Nrsimha — 
Bharati Mahasvaminah. In the well-chosen words of the full-throat- 
ed tribute that the present Acarya tenders to him which cannot be 
bettered, Sri Candragekhara Bharati Svaminah was krtatapascaryah, 
sarvatantrasvatantrah Sastropadistarthanusthdnanisthagaristhah, apa- 
roksikrta-dtmatativah and jivanmuktaih. He was both a scholar and | 
saint of outstanding eminence. His Commentary on. this work 
modelled on Sri Sarnkara’s Bhasyas bears not only the impress of his 
deep knowledge of the source-books of Advaita Vedanta from which 
he quotes to give point to the. Bhagavatpada’s teachings, but also re- 
_veals the touchstone of his personal anubhava against which he has 
verified the truths that he elucidates. 
From the time that I saw the book and went through the Com. 
mentary, I conceived a strong desire to translate it into English 
to come into grips with it and understand it with greater intimacy | 
and clarity, and also to make available to those who could not read 
the original, but are ardent votaries of Advaita Vedanta, a classica 
Commentary true to tradition, without diluting it to suit the so 
VIVEKACUPAMANI ix 
called temper of ‘ther modern times. I shall be gratified if, after 
going through the translation, such as it is, the reader feels an im- 
pulse to qualify for reading the original itself to catch its spirit and | 
substance which no translation can ever convey. | 
Brahmasri Bhasyabhavajia Ve R. Kalyanasundara Sastrigal, at 
sient University Grants Commission Professor of Samskrt in the — 
Vivekananda College, Madras, sisya of Sastraratnakara Veppathur 
-Vaidyanatha Sastrigal and an erudite scholar in the g4stras, was good — 
enough to assist me to make this translation. I went through the 
original for the best part of a year reading it with him line by line, 
in certain cases more than once, and verifying the translation with 
him. That he condescended to give his time to me in this behalf 
in the midst of the heavy schedule of his duties in the College and 
the demands on him outside, and so willingly and so cheerfully, 
overpowers me in my sense of unrequitable obligation to him. 
Dr. C. S. Venkateévaran, Head of the Department of Samskrt 
_ in the Ann§malai University very kindly went through the transla-. 
tion, rectified the omissions and amended it in many places. I am 
very much beholden to him for this and for SprAeneee, it to be 
printed and published. | ee ae i Gu 3 | 
| ‘Two esteemed friends of mine warmly appreciated | my inten- | 
tion to make this translation of a work by an author. held in great. 
and devout reverence by both of them. One is the. late lamented | 
Sri K. Balasubrahmanya Aiyar and the other, Sri T. V. Visvanatha 
Aiyar. From the time I took it up, they gave me every encourage- 
ment and counsel, watched its progress with a concern which was 
indicative of their desire to see the accomplishment of a good and 
holy purpose—a concern which also bespoke their affection for me. 
For all of this, my debt to them is immense. My only regret: is 
that Sri Balasubrahmanya Aiyar is not alive today; for, he would 
have been greatly delighted to see the translation printed and pub- 
lished for the very excellent reason that the name of the illustrious 
author of the original Commentary always evoked from him ex- 
pressions of deep and spontaneous reverence. 
Before I close, I must place on record the very valuable assist- 
ance of my friend, Dr. M. Narasimhacari of the Samskrt Depart- - 
ment in the Vivekananda College, Madras, in going through the 
- proofs from the Press and correcting them with his usual thorough- 
ness and efficiency, particularly wading through line after line re- 
x TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE 
plete with italics and diacritical marks. No words of mine are ade- 
quate to express my obligation to him. Without his help, there 
- would have been more errors than have been listed at the end. The 
reader is requested to rectify them before perusing the book. 
It only remains for me to pray that Bhagavan Sri Samkara and 
the great personages bearing His haloed Name may help me through 
my future lives to convért this mere faltering Sastrajfiana of Advaita 
into at least a semblance of a felicitous plenitude of a realised 
experience. | pes 
ieee Madras fe | : | | 
January 15, 1973 fy eS ne SANKARANARAYANAN 
PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION 
In preparing this second edition, I had the benefit of sugges- 
tions by His Holiness Swami Jiianananda Swamigal of Manadi- 
mangalam, Madurai District, before he attained Samadhi and I am 
grateful to him for the same. Prof. S. Ramaswamy, Retired Pro- 
fessor of English Presidency College, Madras was good enough to 
polish the English in many places in the book. 
While this Edition was going through the press, I was afflicted 
by cataract of the left eye and so, many misprints might have 
eacaped my scrutiny for which I crave the pardon of the reader. 
~ Bangalore, oo a | | 7 Ps. 
July 1, 1978. | : 
INTRODUCTION. 
(BY THE TRANSLATOR) 
Sri Gurubhyo Namah 
Sri Sarnkara, reverently adored as the Bhagavatpada belongs to. 
the galaxy of Master-Minds of the world holding a pre-eminent 
place among intellectuals and prophets. He is by far the most out- 
standing personality of all times and of all countries. One must 
search long, wearily and in vain among the illustrious of every land 
for a seer and saint of such stature and of such achievements as he 
_ packed into his all-too-short life.: ‘During a period of intense acti-. 
vity which, in the thirtytwo years of his sojourn on earth, omitting 
the years of his nonage, could not have exceeded fifteen or sixteen 
of them, he sanctified the soil of this ancient land by traversing its 
farflung corners, performing his intellectual digvijayas, and ulti- 
mately, he established himself on the throne of omniscience. His 
marvellous intellect has evolved out of the tripod of our scriptures 
-a school of philosophy of great speculative daring and logical sub- 
tlety. Acknowledged as such by everyone in the east and in the 
west, in its thoroughness and its profundity, the system of Sri Sam- 
kara holds the first place among the philosophies of the world, 
Much as followers of other schools may deplore it, it is not wholly 
unmerited that Vedanta and Advaita are understood to be synony- 
mous. The chronological first in the triad of the main current 
Vedantic. interpretations is also acclaimed as the logical highest. 
| ‘Si Sarhkara was no mere dialectical. metaphysician. He also 
prescribed a way of life which must inevitably lead to a vision in 
_ which the individual loses himself in the discovery of his true nature. 
Appalling as it is in its heaven-kissing grandeur, relentless in its 
incisive logic, and forbidding in its austere absoluteness, Advaita 
Vedanta has been the despair of minds made out of common clay. 
But, we have the authority of the illustrious line of his disciples. 
that to a wise and initiated mind instinct with faith and under- 
standing, governed by discipline and held by devotion, Sri Sarnkara’s 
system, grounded on Sastra, guided by yukti, and confirmed by anu- 
bhava, in its design and in its execution, has an artistic merit all 
its own which compels conviction and invites acceptance. Its nume- 
xiv _- VIVEKACUDAMANI 
rous followers since his time have borne testimony to the validity | 
and value of his teachings and, even in our day, we see amidst us 
walking verifications of the verities that he preached. 
It is our firm belief accepted from tradition that he was no 
ordinary mortal. It is the habit of the Indian mind to worship 
whatever is excellent in the world as of divine essence. 
yadyad vibhitimatsattvam srimad urjitameva va | 
tattadevavagaccha tvam mama tejo’msasambhavam | 
So declared the Bhagavan in the Git&. But in respect of Sri 
Sarmkara, we hold that he is not merely an. amsa of divinity, but 
divinity itself. Those who beheld the young sarnnyasin of austere 
beauty, radiant with spiritual light, clad in the orange garb of 
soothing grace, and carrying the anchorite staff to chase away the — 
myriad ills which ache the human heart saw in the youthful Pre- 
ceptor of the aged pupils the replica of the cosmic Guru who, sitting 
on Himalayan heights, His gaze southward bent, dispels the dark- 
ness in the caves of ignorance by an initiating look which utters the 
unspoken word. They had no doubt in their minds when ney 
exclaimed: 
ajna aaa aahanaanian eaaetivotudsede | , 
tratum lokin bhavadavasikhaétapapapacyamanan 
muktva maunam vatavitapino milato nispatanti 
Sambhormirtiscarati bhuvane Samkaracadryaripa | 
If Siva, whom we adore as Daksinamirti is the eternal Teacher 
of all the worlds seated in supreme silence under the ageless banyan 
tree, Sri Samkara is the dynamic edition of that static splendour 
who walked abroad delighting in the sustenance of his vadabhiksa 
speaking words of Vedantic wisdom, to rescue erring mortais from 
the tormenting fires of life in this vale of tears. The eternal Sam- 
bhu became the historical Sarmkara. A Be 
In the realm of. religion, Sri Sarnkara is a great revivalist, hailed 
as sanmatasthapanacarya, who re-established the six ways of worship 
of the Godhead, purifying them of excrescences that had gathered 
round them. In the process, he also established the non-difference 
1 wafeqfanerca stagtrayre ar | 
ahah ih ee Ae asrararay 
2 aararargarticary areafratreet: : 
aid area wacahrerarcaresaarart 
Racal att aefaefeedl gaat frorarctt 
warartdd Tat “MET ATSTT Ut 
- INTRODUCTION © : — 
between Siva and Visnu with his cardinal principlé of abheda in the 
sects of our religion. By this, he taught the universality of the Vedic 
religion and successfully rid it of the contradictions of its partisan 
adherents of different schools. He also synthesised the triple way of 
karma, bhakti and jfiana assigning to each its proper and necessary 
- place in the unitary method of achieving liberation from the ills of 
Samsara. 
| - All these stemmed from the philosophy of Advaita which he 
taught as the central truth of the Upanisads, the Brahmasitras, and 
the Bhagavad Gita known as prasthanatraya of Indian Philosophy. 
He expounded this at length lucidly and cogently in a language cha- 
racterised as prasannagambhira in his commentaries on all three of 
them. That they have been surviving in the thoughts and utterances 
of men during the centuries that have elapsed since he wrote and 
that they have secured understanding appreciation even from people 
of alien faiths in lands far removed from ours is eloquent vindica- 
tion of their truth and vitality. 
The study of these prasthainatraya-bhadsyas requires profound 
knowledge of Sarnskrt and proficiency in Vydkarana, N yaya and 
Mimaémsaé and in Veda-adhyayana. A long line of scholars thus 
qualified have taken to the study of the bhasyas which they have been 
transmitting down the centuries to their Sisyas similarly qualified. 
This line of scholarship is being kept alive to this day in all parts 
of our country in guru-sisya relation which is characteristic of Indian 
tradition in the Mathas that Sri Sarnkara established or sprang up 
under his auspices or in his name and in the private residences of 
Vedic and Vedantic scholars. | | | 
But Sri Bhagavatpada realised that not all will be thus patie 
fied. Intending to instruct such persons in the truth of Advaita 
Vedanta, he wrote what are called prakarana-granthas in verse 
and prose varying from a single sloka to a thousand. The more 
important among these. are the Satasloki, Sarva Vedanta Sara San- 
graha, the Upadesa Sahasri and the Vivekacidamari. The first is a 
work of.a hundred. verses, the second of a thousand verses, the third 
a mixture of prose and verse, and the last a work of five hundred 
and eighty-one verses—all conveying the quintessence of Advaita 
Vedanta. The last which is appropriately called “The Crest Jewel 
of Discrimination” contains in its 581 Slokas a dialogue between the 
Guru and the gisya, expounding the Advaitic truths and culminat- 
ing in the ecstatic experience of the Sisya of his non-difference from 
Brahman and the realisation of his mukti. Alike by the nature of 
xvi - VIVEKACUDAMANI 
its contents and the easy language of the Slokas, the Vivekacudamani 
has been justly popular among students of Advaita. 
IT 
Sri Jagadguru Candragekhara Bharati Pijyapadah of sacred 
memory adorned the Saradapitha at Srnhgeri (Srnga giri) establish- 
ed by Sri Sankara Bhagavatpada which has grown through the years 
as one of the prominent bastions of Advaita Vedanta in our 
land. Discovered by the versatile scholar-saint Sri Jagadguru 
_ Sacchidananda Siva Abhinava Narasimha Bharati Svaminah, and 
later nominated to succeed him, Sri Candrasekhara Bharati 
quickly fulfilled in ample measure, by his sage deportment, 
“noble bearing and endearing nature, the hopes and expectations 
reposed in him. Undergoing his tutelage on the pathasala under the 
watchful care of his illustrious predecessor, he gained mastery in 
Nyaya, Mimarnsa and Vedanta in a manner that evoked the admiration 
and respect of his preceptors. Alike by his dtmagunas and panditya, he — 
was eminently qualified to preside over the pitha to which he suc- 
ceeded in 1912 and carry on his spiritual ministry: with conspicuous 
success for forty-two years until his mahasamadhi in 1954. This - 
well-nigh half a century may be said to be the golden period 
of South India’s spiritual history when its people were fortunate © 
to have in their midst two Mahapurusas, Sri Candragekhara Bharati 
of Srngeri and Sri CandraSekharendra Sarasvati of Kafici (happily 
with us now)—both embodiments of our country’s sacred lore, tradi- 
tion and culture transmitted through the ages. Both of them tapas- 
svins of great eminence—they have been radiating saintliness and 
wisdom inducting all who had the good fortune to come under their 
influence, by precept and example, into ways of a-better. life oriented 
to whatsoever is true, good and holy. | 
Spending the later years of his life as an antarmukha, with- 
drawing himself from the distractions of the external world, Sri 
Candrasekhara Bharati appeared to others bala-unmatta-muktavat 
(as a child, mad or tiberated soul) for most of his time. He was. 
verily a jivanmukta, who had realised the Absolute and lived in the 
bliss of that realisation. It has been reported that once, during the 
course of his Sahasrandma-arcana to Sri Sarada, whom he worship- 
ped, when he came to the nama, Tatpadalaksyaérthiyai namah, he 
suddenly stopped with his fingers clasping the kumkumam, and | 
lapsed into samadhi. Becoming bahirmukha after a long time, he 
addressed the person who was the lone witness of this event and 
burst forth in breath-taking ecstacy “advaitam satyam, advaitam 
INTRODUCTION | xvil | 
satyam’’. Such was the mahapurusa who is the author of this Com- 
mentary. This calls to mind an incident in the life of Sri Sarnkara 
- himself mentioned in the Anandagiri Samkaravijaya. “From Cidam- 
baram, Sri Sarnkara travelled southwards to Ramesvaram. First, he 
visited Tiruvidaimarudtr known as Madhyarjuna in Samskrt and 
offered worship to Mahalinga in the great shrine there. A miracle 
happened then. Sri Samkara prayed that Mahalinga at the temple 
should Himself declare the truth of Advaita so that the doubt 
in regard thereto lingering in the minds of some people might be 
dispelled. In response to Sri Sarnkara’s prayer, Lord Siva ap- 
peared out of the Mahalinga, raised the right hand and proclaimed 
the truth of Advaita three times thus: satyam advaitam, satyam 
advaitam, satyam advaitam.”3 oF : 
It is interesting to note in. this connection | a . parallel peiwaen 
His Holiness and the jivanmukta described in this work in Sloka 560: 
kulydyam atha nadyém va sivaksetrepi catvare ; parnam patati cet 
tena taroh kim nu Subhasubham |; 4 which means: “It is imma- 
terial to a tree whether its leaf falls in a stream or a river or in a 
place consecrated to Siva or where four roads meet. The atman is not 
concerned with where the body falls.” Is it any wonder that the 
jivanmukta that Sri Candrasekhara Bharati was decided to cast away 
his body when he had no further use for it, in the waters of the 
Tunga river? 
Such is the noble soul who has conferred a great boon on us 
by bequeathing to us a Commentary in Sanskrit on the Vivekacida- 
mani authenticated by his direct and personal experience of the 
truths enshrined in it and which has all the simplicity, richness co- 
gency and elegance that are the distinguishing features of Sri 
- Bhagavatpada’s Commentaries on the Prasthanatraya. The glory of 
Advaita Vedanta expounded by Sri Bhagvatpada is that, as he fre- 
quently refers to it, it is awpanisadam saStram, a philosophy that is 
based on the bedrock of the Upanisads which is the body of the 
3 aa R UAT: Prarazerarig TaRT TT ATT weaTsla am fratfantacaatiagts srt 
wearstaarragsega favarfefa: qfraqretar | ] | 
BalTarTaasTT TUT frrearact HAGA TAT 1 
aa faa ana wea: aarfaaaaaa fq—' caTiat aearsaar | aatafrraatsfa 
assitsfa i (afa) farardrat arecaarazy gafarura: agafacray at orcas: | asgat aaa TATA 
— arafaatt Fe" afa | oa sifaat HeaaT: Ferqyraret aramaetoy frost Neredreat fret 
aferorgeateqeea | TAACAT, TARE TA , ‘aeanaay’ efa fasaat oferta fasisaée | 
(Madras cee Edition, p. 17) 
4 Heararag vat ar fraetaste saz 
qo qafa Aaa att: far yl TATAAA I 
Xvili VIVEKACUDAMANI 
canonical literature on super-sensuous Reality. The Vivekacida- 
mani is a compendious vade mecum giving between its covers the 
quintessence of Advaita Vedanta in a convincing manner. In pro- 
viding his Commentary on it, Sri CandraSekhara Bharati has 
brought out at every turn by appropriate quotations the Upanisadic 
sources in support of the truths affrmed in the work. Nuances of | 
expression with their grammatical peculiarities are explained as they . 
arise and this adds to the inherent richness of the statements of | 
Sri Bhagavatpada. Parallel explanatory passages from the Bhaga- 
vad Gita, the Brahma Sutras and other Sastraic works elucidate 
_ the Commentary much to the edification of the reader. And above 
all, where necessary, he helps to remove doubts and difficulties that 
may arise in regard to various topics of the original as, for instance, 
the relative importance of karma and samnydasa, of the place of 
vairdgya, bodha and uparati in the scheme of sAédhanas of a mum- 
uksu, of the hindrances of adnétmavasanas and the way to get over 
them etc. The distinctive value of this Commentary is that it is by 
a person in whom saintliness was combined with scholarship. With. 
him the reader is able to go through the entire gamut of Srutis and 
smrtis relevant to the understanding of the original work in an at- 
mosphere of guru-sisya relation which he is able to create for him- 
self as he reads the original with the Commentary which is as lucid 
as it is enlightening, underscored by the anubhava of a jivanmukta. 
Hil 
Vivekaciidamani is a philosophical treatise expounding the 
cardinal truths of Advaita Vedanta, according to which, liberation 
_ or moksa can be secured only through jmana which, in the first in- 
stance, begins with the discrimination between the eternal and the 
transient, nitydnityavastu-viveka. The work itself is called the 
‘Crest Jewel of Discrimination’—Viveka-ctidimani—to emphasise the 
paramount importance of such viveka in the quest for liberation. 
_ According to Advaita Vedanta, like all Hindu systems of philosophy 
and religion, the cycle of birth and death, which is called samsara, 
is the effect of actions of individuals, whether it is punyakarma or 
papakarma. For, one has to take another birth if the effects of both 
these karmas are not worked out in the present life itself. Action 
is prompted by desire, kama. Kama arises from a sense of incom- 
pleteness in the individual, who, identifying himself with the things. 
5 Thus repudiating the claim fathered on him that he is the originator of 
Advaita Vedanta. He was only its exponent systematising the material found in 
its sources. 
INTRODUCTION XIX 
_ of the world or his own body, desires to acquire those things think- 
ing that they will conduce to the happiness of the mind. This, in| 
other words, is the result of confusing the 4tman with the things 
that are not the atman, and thus a prolongation of the samsaric series 
is effected. The annulment of this confusion between the atman and 
_ the anatman can be effected only by discrimination between the two. 
The atman is nitya and all that are the andatman are anitya. Hence 
the emphasis on “nityanityavastuviveka.’ 
In the Hindu scheme of knowledge, a distinction is nae bet! 
ween. higher and lower knowledge, para and apara vidya. “dve 
vidye veditavye parad ca apara ceti.” .The latter includes all the 
sciences and arts that pertain to the experiential world. It is 
wrong to say that the Hindu outlook is entirely otherworldly and 
does not attach importance to things which concern this world. Such 
knowledge, which is called apara-vidya, is obligatory to every indi- 
vidual. to enable him to go through the concerns of his life success- 
fully and has an important place in the Hindu scheme of education. 
But, it is pointed out that over and above this, there is a sphere of 
knowledge, which is called para-vidya. While apara-vidya gives 
knowledge of the perishable, para-vidya relates to the imperishable. 
The mind functions at the point of the Great Divide between the 
external world facing a man and the inner world within himself. As 
the Kathopanisad has it, Svayambhih, the Self-born, that is Brahma 
directed the sense-organs outside. Therefore, a man looks outward 
and not within himself. A brave, wise man desiring immortality 
turned his eyes inward and saw the a4tman within. Such vidya, is 
known as atma-vidya and, in the Hindu tradition, ‘it is extremely 
important for the attainment of liberation. Listing the super-emi- 
nent things of every class with which He identifies Himself; the 
Bhagavan says in | the Gita, that He is ee among the 
vidyas. 
According to us, the pursuit of any vidya, be it Paeciies or spiri- 
tual, involves the Guru-sisya relationship with its concomitants of 
jijias&, adhikara and vinaya (the desire to know, the qualification to 
know and humility) on the part of the pupil and the possession of 
the relevant knowledge, compassion and anugraha on the part of 
the teacher. In addition, the pupil must possess vairagya or a sense 
of detachment. The teacher must be a sadguru, one who imparts’ 
instruction in the sadvastu, who takes the pupil in hand after ex- 
6 Tafa afr ATUEAIET: TEATS TAT APTA | 
afagre: saad Hata: aon tl 
eye VIVEKACUDAMANI 
amining him and ascertaining his fitness to receive instructior in 
atmavidya. This is compactly expressed in the dicta that one should 
not instruct anybody unless he is requested to do so, and all know- 
ledge is derived only from a teacher.’ 7 
In accordance with this, the Vivekacidamani is written in the 
form of a dialogue between a teacher and a pupil, in which the pupil 
humbly approaches the guru, and having propitiated him by his 
service, implores him to rescue him from being drowned in samsara. 
and to confer on him, his gracious glance and saving instruction. — 
‘The guru, pleased with his pupil and convinced of his qualification 
and earnestness promises to teach him the wey of emanicipation 
_ from the ills of life. : | 
IV 
To begin with, guru says “You are bedi the Paramatman. Your 
involvement in the bondage of samsara is due to your understanding | 
being clouded by ajnhana. This bondage to the anatman is itself 
-samsara. The fire of the discrimination between the atman and the 
anatman will completely burn out the effect of ajfana.” (Sl. 49) 
Upon this, the gisya reverently submits to the guru seven ques- 
tions. (i) What is bondage? (ii) How did it arise? (iii) How does 
it continue? (iv) How is one released from it? (v) What is this. 
-anatman? (vi) Which is the Paramatman? and (vii) How to dis- 
tinguish between the 4tman and the anatman? The succeeding pages 
_ of the Vivekactidaimani are the guru’ s answers to all these questions. 
The guru takes up the fourth question first, namely, how is. 
liberation achieved. The reason for this is stated by His Holiness 
thus: “When a man is caught in a house on fire, his first impulse 
will be to quench the flames and escape death, and he will not linger 
to ask how the fire was caused, what is its extent ete.” This is remi- 
niseant of the parable of a man pierced by an arrow spoken by Lord 
Buddha. The guru tells the Sisya that to attain liberation he should | 
_ develop vairagya, acquire the virtues of sama, dama etc., adopt sdi- 
nydsa, give up all karmas, receive upadega on the gruti texts from his 
guru, contemplate thereon, discriminate between whatever is the anat- 
man and the 4tman by unceasing meditation on the import of the scrip-_ 
tural texts, attain the state of nirvikalpa-samadhi and realise his non- 
difference as the 4tman from the Paramatman. It is to be noted 
7 anqse: weafaa art) areata gest Fz araraty se fer fafear 1 
area: carafrar | WeATaA cre T Sereaa | 
sqeeaha & ata atfaaecteaatara: 
INTRODUCTION | xxi 
here that the guru prescribes samnyasa, which involves sarva-karma- 
 tydga, the giving up of not only kamya and natmittika karmas, but 
also of nitya karmas. The idea is that knowledge of the 4tman is 
not karmajanyam, what is produced by karma. It is vastu-tantram 
and not purusa-tantram, that is, it is knowledge of the ever-existing 
aAtman, and not what is to be effectuated by human endeavour. 
Action relates to one of four things, what is janyam, dpyam, vikdr- 
yam or samskéryam, that is, what is produced de novo, what is to 
be attained or reached, what is modified, or what is purified. The 
atman is ever-existent and so cannot be a janyam. The Sisya is 
Brahman always; there is no need to reach it as a far-off goal and 
so it isnot dpyam. Brahman is changeless, avikari, it is not vikdar- 
yam. It is ever pure and cannot be samskaéryam. Due to ajiana, 
the individual does not know he is Brahman. The truth has to be 
‘revealed to him by the light of knowledge and he has to realise it 
by himself. The entanglement in karma militates against know- 
ledge. Hence, the guru’s insistence on sarvatyaga, abandonment of 
all karmas and, making the mind fit by the acquisition of the disci- 
” plines of Sama, dama etc., to receive and meditate on this know- 
ledge, proclaimed by gruti and imparted by the guru. But this does 
not imply abandonment of prescribed karmas even from the start. 
As the Upadesa paficaka has it, the aspirant to liberation must start 
with daily training in learning the Vedas, engage himself in the per- 
formance of the karmas stated in them and earn thereby and by 
undivided devotion, the grace of God. He must withdraw his mind 
from sense-pleasures and kamya karmas, see their futility and deve- 
lop atmecché which is longing to know and realise the 4tman. When 
this desire to know, vividisé, has taken deep root in his mind, then 
is the time for him to adopt samnyasa PeuOuuce all karmas and 
engage in ‘Vedanta-vicara. 
Next is taken up the fifth question, “ko’sau anatma?” What is 
this anatman? For, to realise the 4tman one ought to be able to 
separate it from the anatman. This naturally leads to the question: 
what is the andtman? A person is compacted of three kinds of 
bodies: the sthiilasarira, the siksmagarira, the kdranasarira—the 
physical, the subtle and the causal respectively. The guru points 
out that all these three belong to the class of the anatman, for one 
or more of the following reasons: , | 
(i) it is gross. | 
(ii) it is what is possessed, i.e., a person, body. 
(iii) it is an aggregate, made up oi parts, 
xxii VIVEKACODAMANI 
(iv) it is compacted of ganas: | 
(v) it is impure. 
(vi) it does not exist in all the three periods of Time and is 
subject to modification. 
(vii) it is delimited by space, time and objects. 
(viii) it is seen. and later hot: seen; it. is of drsta-nastasva- 
bhava.,74 : ss 
(ix) it is produced, krtaka, i.e., it is an effect. 
(x) it is the known, not the knower. 
(xi) it is ruled, not the ruler. 
(xii) it is dependent, not sel eeabeiateak: 
‘Having thus eliminated all that i is andtman, the guru ‘proceeds to 
help the gisya, to determine the nature of the atman. -Prefacing his 
teaching with the statement that the 4tman, thus separated from the 
three kinds of bodies, is inmost, apart and beyond them all, he con- 
veys to the Sisya that it is the self-existent, the eternal, the reference | 
_ of what is signified by aham, the I, the witness of the three mental 
states, different from the paficakogas (the five sheaths), vibhu (all- 
pervasive), illumining all, the inmost self of the sadhaka, beginning- 
less, of the nature of Existence, Knowledge and Bliss Absolute. 
The guru takes up the first question now, and answers that 
bondage (bandha), is due to the identification of the Atman with 
the anadtman due to ajnana, that is, mistaking all things which are 
anatman as being the 4tman and directing the activities a one’ S life 
in Hues of the things which are not the atman. eg Ge Rats 
Turning to the second question, how this Bondage arose, it is 
taught that it is due to two powers of ajfiana—dvaranasakti to be 
traced to its tdémasic component which conceals the real nature of 
the Atman and the viksepasakti resulting from its rajasic eee 
which projects the non-Atman as the atman. i; 
Reverting to the fourth question and expounding at length 
what was said in brief earlier, the guru proceeds to explain the nature 
of the 4tman, unveiling it from the sheaths of the paficakogas, name- 
ly, the annamaya, prinamaya, manomaya, vijnanamaya and ananda. 
maya kogas—the bodily, the vital, the mental, the intellectual and 
the blissful sheaths. In the process, he also provides the answer to 
seventh question of the Sisya, namely: How is one to distinguish bet- 
eae, 
7a naga adarsgane: the root nas is employed to indicate not being seen. 
INTRODUCTION | XXili 
‘ween the Atman and the andatman. This answer is found in different 
contexts throughout the work. 
The gisya who has been making the analysis of himself in the 
manner instructed by the guru, and who has been thinking away 
all these kogas as not being his Atman and has been separating his 
self from them is now assailed by a doubt and submits, “When I 
think away all the kosas, I see only a void. I don’t see the atman”. 
The guru replies, “You say, ‘I see only the void’; you, who are the 
witness of the void is the 4tman, the objectless Subject » It is the | 
saksi which is common to the states of waking; dream and dreamless 
sleep (jagrat, svapna and susupti) and of the state of consciousness 
which is beyond these, turiya, experienced in the state of samadhi. 
Thus the guru expounds the nature of the atman encased in every 
individual and known as tvampadartha in the equation ‘tat tvam asi’. 
He then proceeds to the determination of the nature of Brahman, 
known as tatpadartha. Distinguishing the world from Brahman, it 
is pointed out that it is not real, because what is real must exist in 
all periods of time and must not be limited by space, time or other 
objects; it must be trikdla-abadhya and aparicchinna, in terms of 
dega, kala and vastu. It must also not be subject to any of the 
twelve defects listed earlier. The world is not real like Brahman 
which persists in all places and at all times and is the All. But, 
on that account, it is not unreal, because it is seen. It is expe- 
rienced by every individual. It is not sat or real; it is not asat or 
unreal, it is not both sat and asat, these being contradictory; it is 
sadasadvilaksana, different from both, but having an existential 
character of its own which is referred to as mithyad. Brahman or 
the Supreme Reality is One without a second, of the nature of 
pure Intelligence, kevala caitanyasvariipa, beyond thought and 
name, untramelled by maya and the upddhis. It is supreme efful- 
- gence which permeates the entire experiential world and animates 
it. The world itself derives its existential character from Brahman 
of which it is an appearance. 
Having thus separately determined the nature of the tvuam and 
tat padarthas, the guru proceeds to elucidate the equation between 
the two in terms of the_ mahavakya, tat tvam asi. The apparent 
distinction between the two is due to their respective conjunction 
with the upadhis, as a result of which the universal A4tman becomes 
circumscribed as a jiva, and Brahman takes on the vestments of 
igvara. When their respective upadhis are negated and the two 
padarthas are understood, not literally, but by their implied mean- 
XXIV * 3 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
ing on the principle of jahadajahallaksana, the two will be found to 
be not different from each other, and meditation on this mahavakya 
will lead to the realisation of the identity between them. When that 
happens, the awareness of the world as existing apart from Brah- 
man will disappear and the sadhaka will be suffused by Brahman- 
consciousness whole and entire. This state is known as ‘Brahmat- 
mana samsthitih’ in the words of the first sloka of Vivekaciidamani 
7 and that experience is ‘svanubhava’. 
‘The guru next goes on to explain the danger of sliding from 
that experience due to the action of the vasands, the influence of 
ahamkara and the effect praméda or negligence. Warning the Sisya 
against yielding to these things which are deleterious to the culti- 
vation of 4tma-vasana, he counsels him to be for ever established in 
the contemplation of Brahman by concentrating his mind on his 
pratyagatman. This will lead him to: the nirvikalpasamadhi in 
which he will no more look at the external world as an independent 
real as it appears, and he will be immersed in the transcendental - 
experience of the bliss of Atmanubhava. As a final counsel, the guru 
emphasises the importance of tivra veeeye: bodha and uparati for 
such realisation. , 
The jmani who has attained such Brahman ¢ consciousness shakes 
off his bondage to experiential world. Or, to put it more truly, 
the world affects him no more and he becomes a jivanmukta. The 
taint of karma does not affect him, all the karmas of this and past 
lives are burnt away in the fire of jnana, and in respect of future 
-karmas, due to the absence of the sense of kartrtva and bhoktrtva, 
he is neither a doer nor an enjoyer. The prarabdha karmas alone 
which have begun to operate will affect his body helping to sustain 
it, and not his mind. He will live in the world till they are work- 
ed out, after which his body will fall off and the divans is then 
said to attain videhamukti. 7 | 
Expatiating on the qualities of : a avanulee: the guru describes 
how he goes through his life for the remainder of his days, He is 
a brahmavit, brahmavidvara, brahmavidvariyin and brahma-vidva- 
ristha, i.e. who has experiential consciousness of Brahmanhood by pro- 
gressive stages. He realises himself as pure Intelligence. He is not 
drawn to sense-objects; no sin attaches to him. He is neither attracted 
nor repelled by anything. He is self-contained and self-satisfied. He 
enjoys a bliss that is not. of this world. Even as a lad delights in 
his playthings unconcerned with his hunger or afflictions of body, sc _ 
too does he delight in Brahman with no consciousness of ‘I’ or ‘mine’ 
INTRODUCTION XXV 
A serene stillness of mind, eating what is offered, drinking out of a 
tank or river, moving about autonomously like an automaton, sleep- 
ing without fear even in forests or burial grounds, being uncon- 
- cerned about apparel, wet or dry, or even with no covering round 
the body, with the bare ground as his couch and wandering in the 
royal roads of scriptural sayings—these are the ways in which the 
_ jivanmukta sports in Brahman. He goes about in the expanse of 
supreme wisdom like an unsophisticated child, like one possessed, 
or like a mad man. To some he appears as a fool, to others as a 
royal personage. Some call him mad; others are drawn to him by 
the lustre of his countenance. Sometimes he lies inert. Now he 
is honoured; or he is ridiculed; or: he is ignored. Though in the 
body, he has no body-consciousness. He is firmly established in his 
true self, and so, pleasure and pain, good and evil do not affect him 
in the least. Joy and sorrow pertain to one who has attachments. 
But one who is detached from everything worldly : is untouched by 
good or evil, by pleasure or pain. 
Thus a jivanmukta cares not for his body or its. needs. He is — 
not worried about its decay or destruction. The space encased in 
a pot is unaffected by its walls, whether they are intact or broken. 
When the pot is broken, the space it contained becomes indistin- 
-guishable from the space outside. So too does a jivanmukta’s atman 
become indistinguishable from Brahman which it has ever been. 
Like milk mixing with milk and becoming one with it, oil with oil, 
water with water, so too does at atmajfani merge in Brahman and 
- is one with It. When this happens, upon the fall of the body, the 
mukta never more gets into a body again. He does not return to 
an embodied state. He is not born again; he is immortal. | 
In truth, from the ultimate Advaitic point of view, there is no 
bondage for the atman, and hence there is no meaning in speaking 
of its release. It is all an ‘as if’, a make-believe. Man has made 
himself believe that he is the body etc., and so is said to be ‘bound’ 
by it. It is the ajfiana that makes him feel so. Really the atman 
is unbound and: free. Bondage and liberation are expressions of 
maya; they do not pertain to the 4tman which is ever unaffected 
by the upadhis even as the sun is unaffected by the cloud that hides 
it from view. By the same token, scripture, the guru, instruction 
by him—are all features of maya-prapanca.’”” At best, they are all 
scaffoldings to ascend to the brahmisthiti and to remain firmly esta-_ 
blished in it. They have no meaning ultimately. Even so, even 
7b Maya is not illusion; it is a positive element (bhévapadirtha) which, as it 
were, finitises the Infinite. It is truly false and falsely true. 
XXvi | | VIVEKACUDAMANI 
saying ‘I am Brahman’ (aham Brahmdadsmi) does not pertain to this 
brahmi sthiti. In that condition there is. no awareness of I of 
which am Brahman can be affirmed. Upon the breaking of the pot, 
ghatakaga does not say ‘I am mahakaSa’. It was mahakasa before, 
and mahakasa after the pot is broken. | It is, as it were, speechless. 
Brahmi sthiti is experience, transcendental, not of the worldly type; 
it does not permit of expression. It is being, not speaking. The 
Upanisadic teacher explained it by silence (maunam vyakhyanam), : 
The guru confers his final upadega on the gigya. Earlier, when 
the Sisya implored him to vouchsafe to him the means of escaping 
from the bondage of samsiara, he said, ‘Don’t be afraid. There is _ 
no danger. There is a way to cross the ocean of samsara—the way 
by which others before you have crossed. I shall instruct you in 
it.” This promise has been fulfilled by the guru and he tells him > 
that pursuing the path outlined by him, with detachment, know- 
ledge and constancy, he will never more fall into the tentacles of 
samsara. His final admonition to the Sisya is to heed to the words 
of Sastra conveyed by the competent teacher, understanding their 
import by accordant reasoning, to meditate on them and to discover 
their verification in his own conscious experience. After all, the 
words of the guru can only show the way—as of a tatastha; it is the | 
Sisya that has to apply his mind to the aay of his true self, 
aided by the anugraha of the guru. 
It is to be presumed that the Sisya who was a true sadhaka with 
all. the qualifications for the pursuit of Brahmajiiana, followed the 
instructions of his guru and obtained realisational knowledge of the 
Supreme and finally turned into a jivanmukta. The last section 
of the Vivekactdamani describes the ecstatic experience of the gisya, 
where he declares his discreteness from the entire experiential 
world and his non-difference from the Paramadtman. Giving it a 
realistic touch, Sri Bhagavatpada concludes the work by saying that, 
at the end, the sisya and the guru parted from each other, the one 
freed from all bonds, and the other continuing to sanctify the earth 
that he trod immersed in the bliss of his realisation. His Holiness 
has left this portion unexplained in the Commentary because it is 
best known only by one’s anubhava and is too sacred for any ex- 
planation. 7 
V 
In regard to Vedantic knowledge, it is necessary to draw atten- 
tion to the pramanas for such knowledge. They are éruti, as im- 
INTRODUCTION xxvii 
parted by a teacher, yukti and anubhava. Vedanta relates to the 
realm of the super-sensuous and: we must rely on the declaration 
of Sruti which contains the revelation by those endowed with a 
spiritual vision of these transcendental truths. It is not for us, who 
do not now possess such vision, being caught up in the world of 
sense, to question the validity or the value of Sruti® The state- 
-ments are paramount truths before which other pramanas will have 
no force in respect of what they speak. Sruti is beneficent in- 
struction on the ultimate and is entitled to reverence and faith as 
Srutimata. The sisya must receive these Sruti texts with absolute 
trust from the guru and meditate on them to realise their full signi- 
ficance. The Hindu tradition in respect of Vedantic training em- 
phasises the importance of hearing the word of gruti from the lips 
of the teacher, who, as pointed out earlier, reinforces them with 
his compassion and his benediction. Sri Bhagavatpada and, follow- 
ing him, His Holiness stress the importance of upadega of the sruti 
‘by the guru who has realised its truth in himself. If the Sruti is 
the seed of Vedantic knowledge, it should be sown by the guru on 
the soil of the Sisya’s mind prepared by the sadhanacatustaya, 
watered by the guru’s grace and ploughed by the sisya’ S Sravana, 
manana and nididhyasana. 
It will be noticed that, in this as in his other works, Sri Bhaga- 
vatpada has developed the truths of Advaita adopting the purely 
scientific method conducting a rigorous analysis of man fortifying 
his findings from the statements of Sruti only when they cannot be 
subjected to experiential test. He never has recourse to dogma, be- 
lief or theology however sacred or authoritative it may be. That 
is why Advaita is a tattva, truth, not a mata or a theory. 
_ A cardinal doctrine of Advaita Vedanta is the concept of jivan- 
mukti. It is distinctive to it as contrasted with other schools of 
_ Vedanta. Moksa, being liberation from the bonds of Samsara, must 
be effected by oneself. If it is granted, as it must be, that bandha 
_is due to ajhana, which makes one mistake the anatman for the 
atman and consequently get involved in samsara, freedom from such 
8 Not to be traced to human authorship, the Srutis are believed to be apauru- 
seya, They are said to be the breath of God. Vide: 
@ rary facerfa qa 
ery a aaiva sfeonifa seq} 
pS ail chs 
: MUTASE WITH a) 
XXVIII VIVEKACUDAMANI 
- involvement will arise only by the annulment of ajiana by jfiana. 
Such jfiana must be acquired, here and now, in this life itself, lead- 
ing to the liberation from samsara. Then alone, will moksa be 
meaingful and of value to the individual. Hence the Advaita 
Vedanta’s insistence of the concept of jivanmukti. That such a 
-mukti is not merely necessary as a corollary of Advaita Vedanta, 
but that it is also possible is detailed extensively in the pages of © 
this work as of other works on the subject. Great names in the 
spiritual tradition of our country, both in puranic and historical 
times, have borne testimony to the fact of jivanmukti. Suka, Vama- 
deva and Prahlada were illustrious jivanmuktas even from their | 
birth. Sri Sarnkara Bhagavatpada was a jivanmukta par ezcel- 
lence who vouched for it from his own experience.’ In that tradi- 
tion have followed other jivanmuktas in recent times like Sri Sada- 
giva Brahmendra, Sri Ramana Maharsi, Sri Seshadri Swamigal, Sri 
Ramakrishna Paramahamsa and the worshipful author of this Com- 
mentary not to speak of many adorable personages among the living 
like Sri Candragekharendra Sarasvati of Kafici Kamakoti Pitha. 
These are only a few that come to our lips of the hundreds of such 
jivanmuktas that have sanctified our land in different periods of 
history and set the seal of their personality on this great truth of 
Advaita Vedanta. 
Vil | 
It must be remembered that the path of jfana which is pre- 
scribed as the way to liberation involves mental disciplines which 
are exacting and uncompromising. The sadhana-catustaya includes 
not only the intellectual discrimination between what is nitya and 
anitya, the eternal and the transient, but also moral disciplines of a 
high order among which vairagya or non-attachment to material 
things is the foremost. That is why Vedantavicara is said to be 
possible only for samnydsins, who have renounced the world and 
do not have to perform religious karmas.™ Rigorous as such dis- 
cipline is, great is the fruit that awaits the sadhaka at the end. 
The guru in the Vivekacudamani insists on this again and again 
_ 9 Vide his statement in his Bhdsya on the Brahma Sutra IVi15. wa gtaet 
eagcaneaa «Aaa Agere aT te onfaeicee HAT When one feels in his 
heart that he has realised Brahman and yet holds the body, how ean this be 
denied by another? It is obvious that here Sri Samkara refers to himself. 
10 In fact, the Brahmasttras of Badaradyana, which are codified texts. of 
Vedantic tradition epitomising the Srutis are known as Bhiksu Siatras. But this 
does not preclude persons belonging to other a$ramas from studying Vedanta to 
cultivate the appropriate samskara and vasana that, now or later, will qualify them 
_ for samnyasa. 
INTRODUCTION | | XX1X 
and cautions the Sisya against harbouring anatma-vasanas in. his 
mind and getting into their grip. These vasanas, he mentions, are | 
difficult to overcome because of their strength acquired in a num- 
ber of previous lives. They can be liquidated only by persistent and 
continuous culture of the 4tmavasana. This cannot be done during 
the span of a single life. That is why, the Bhagavan said in the 
Gita, “bahiném janmanim ante jninavan maim prapadyate”: Many 
births are necessary for the anatma-vasanas to. wear away. If great 
personages have become jivanmuktas in their present lives, it only 
means that during their past lives up to the present their anatma- 
_ vasanas have been gradually seco to. the extent: of. pede te 
extinction. : . 7 hoes | 
vil 
Readers of Vivekicuaament will notice hat thers: is. = Oreeleally 7 
no mention in it of the worship of a personal God. ‘ Advaita Vedanta 
affirms two Brahmans, nirguna and saguna Brahmans. The ulti-— 
mate metaphysical truth is the nirguna Brahman. That is declared 
in a number of passages in the Upanisads. This nirguna Brahman is 
from one point of view transcendental (paramarthika), because it 
‘has not in it any of the features of the empirical (vyavaharika) 
world. - From another point of view, it is immanent, because all that 
constitutes the empirical world is only an appearance of the nir- 
guna Brahman, which is its substratum. The -prapafica is dropita 
on Brahman: which is its adhisthana and, as such, the whole world 
is only Brahman appearing variegated. in name and form. When 
nirguna Brahman is conceived as saguna, with the power to start the 
“cosmic process with the aid of may4, it is known as igvara, who, in 
essence, is not different from the nirguna Brahman. sarvam khalu 
idam Brahma and ayam dtmaé Brahma only express in. philosophical 
language the religious truth of the immanence of God in all things 
and all men and which bids us see and act towards them, not as 
they appear as discrete entities, but in terms of the divinity im- 
bedded in them of which they are the visible expressions. There- 
fore, the difference between the two Brahmans is only in the man- 
ner of conception and approach, whether it is by way of jhana to 
understand and realise the Supreme Principle of the universe, or 
by way of bhakti towards the same Principle considered as a. Person 
responsible for the creation etc., of the world. 
The main purpose of the Vivekaciidamani is to describe the in- - 
tellectual approach by analysis of the inner self and equating it oe 
XXX | VIVEKACUDAMANI 
the cosmic Self and showing that, in substance, it is only Brahman 
appearing manifold in name and form as jiva and jagat. When the 
jiva is shorn of the upadhis that make for individuation, and when 
_ the world is divested of the manifolding elements of name and form, 
in both cases the viksepa Sakti of maya over-weaning on its avarana 
Sakti is annulled and the residual Brahman will be experienced as 
the sole Reality. But this to be a fact of realisation and not a mere 
metaphysical theory must be by a process of not merely intellectual 
analysis, but each step of the analysis must be consciously felt in 
the anubhava of the sddhaka. The Sisya in this work apparently 
went through all this process as is seen when he speaks of a void > 
vafter thinking away all his koSas and when he gives expression at 
the end to the ecstasy of his Brahmanubhava. But this does not 
militate against the existential reality of the individual body and 
of the world for vyavaharic purposes even for the jivanmukta when 
_ he comes back to external consciousness from the nirvikalpa sama- 
dhi. Nor does this deny such reality to the ordinary man who has. 
not risen to the vision of the jivanmukta, but it affirms his need to 
approach the Paramatman as he conceives It (Him) by devotion | 
and service through bhakti and karma. And, it is not as if Advai- 
tins looked down upon the bhakti approach of religion to the Sup- 
reme. The sanmatasthépana by Sri Bhagavatpada, the images of 
God that he installed and sanctified and the Cakras that he estab- 
lished in numberless places of worship in all parts of the country 
from the Himalayas to the Cape, and the hymnal literature that he. 
has left behind are evidences to the contrary. Religious practices 
and attitudes which are necessary and meaningful at one level cease 
to be so and fall off of their own accord on the dawn of atmajfiana.") | 
But, that they are not valid and serviceable at a higher level will 
not warrant or justify their being given up or given a subordinate 
place by a people for whom, and in a sphere in which, they are 
relevant and essential. After all, religion which starts from and is 
sustained in the predicament of the devotee-deity duality finds its 
consummation in annulling that duality in the oneness of mystic 
union. What is called union in religion is spoken of as unity in 
11 Vide the following abhiyukta Sloka: 
WENTAT ALAC Wad VATAATT WA 
at inlalse By hai aHe | 
atesafefa alearata were freltarag 
Bhasmoddhilana bhadramastu bhavate rudraksaméle gubhe 
ha sopadnaparampare girisutakantalayalamkrte 
adydradhanatositena vibhuna yusmatsaparyasukhé- 
lokacchedini moksanémani mahamohe niliyamahe 
INTRODUCTION es 
philosophy; for, the effectiveness of such union lies in its insevera- 
bility. Ultimately, the Saint of religion and the Seer of metaphy- 
sics are one in their synoptic view which sees the Many as manifesta- _ 
tions of the One Reality: They realise the ground of their Being 
in and the goal of their nee ae ani a it Brahman or 
Isvara.? | | oak 
Ix 
There may be some who genuinely question the purpose and 
value of such metaphysical quest in this technological age when man 
sets himself no limit to the conquest of Nature and extending the 
frontiers of scientific knowledge. It can only be said in reply that 
the metaphysical quest in the privacy of one’s being is no less ar- 
duous in its preparation and execution and no less exhilerating and 
_ fruitful in its result than the adventures of modern man to set foot 
on the Moon or on Mars. On the other hand, it requires a courage 
and a strength of will far exceeding the latter, and its successful 
accomplishment dowers one with a peace and.a bliss which these 
modern adventures can never hope to give. Atmavicara is no 
less scientific, because it signifies the rigorous analysis of the Atman- 
anatman complex, rejection of every layer of non-atman, and the 
final knowing and being the residual atman. While the reward of 
the one is the glory of the ‘conquest’ of Nature and. the extension of 
the frontiers of scientific knowledge, the gain from the other is. the 
transition from the unreal to the Real, from darkness to Light, from 
death to Immortality. The former, when it is not tainted by pride, 
fills the heart with wonder, humility and awe. Vide the exclama- 
tion of the first cosmonauts that set foot on the moon. The latter 
dowers one with a joy and peace signified by the word ananda or 
bliss. Such a one is not born again. As Sri Bhagvatpada puts it, 
punarna tasydnga guhapravesgah. Both are adventures of the Spirit 
to explore the Infinite, the one of the spirit of man, the other of 
the Spirit that is Man. The one is the expression of conquest of 
Matter; the other of the negation of Matter. The second is more 
exacting and rigorous than the first. | 
x 
Another question that is raised is: Of what use to the world 
are these jivanmuktas? They might have secured their own mee 
12 All this is abundantly exemplified in the life of Sri “Ramakrishna Parama- 
hamsa. | 
xxxii VIVEKACUDAMANI 
but what good. do they do to the world? This is a question which 
-many people ask, contrasting the jivanmukta with people who en- 
gage themselves in what goes by the name of social service. A 
jivanmukta is an enlightened person, a virakta, who has conquered 
his passions, who has given up his possessions and is at peace with 
himself. As such, he is at peace with the entire world and is 
characterised by universal benevolence and goodwill. His look is 
a benediction, his words are wisdom; and his conduct a consecration. 
In his presence, all physical and mental ills disappear in the sense 
that their edge is blunted and one becomes able to bear them with 
fortitude. Than this there cannot be a higher service to suffering 
humanity. They leaven society by their presence and raise its 
‘ moral and spiritual tone. They are really the benefactors of man- 
kind in a truer and more purposeful sense than any number of 
people engaged, honestly and sincerely as it may be, in acts of 
social service. It is only those who have scaled the vertical heights 
of the Spirit that can generate public weal to the greatest horizontal 
extent without consciously intending to do so. Have we not seen 
in recent times Bhagavan Ramana, a jivanmukta in sahajasamadhi, 
effecting, by his very presence, a Copernican revolution withdraw- 
ing men’s minds from things material and centering them on the 
atman? For, as the great men have taught us, the happiness which 
the pursuit of worldly things and the removal of physical ills will 
give us is neither unmixed nor lasting, and is nothing when com- 
pared to the peace and bliss of dtmalabha exemplified by these 
jivanmuktas. In fact, as the Sruti recommends in the words: tas- 
mat atmajiiam hi abhyarcayet bhitikamah,? even for the worldly 
_ prosperity, one should seek it from a man of self-realisation who 
has it in his power to bestow it without consciously endeavouring 
or appearing to do so. For, by his very presence in society like 
all saintly personages, he wafts the fragrance of the Spirit far and 
wide, and helps to dispel the ills of body and mind that afflict men 
about him. And, all the world over, in every age, have we not 
seen countless instances of the victory of the Spirit over Matter? 
XI 
To know Advaita Vedanta is not the same as being Advaitin 
with atmajiiana and atmanubhava. One can be a Brahmavit as a 
matter of paroksa-jnana or textual knowledge. Lecturing or writ- 
ing on Advaita to the amazement of others is easy, but to go through — 
the sadhanas with faith and determination cut off from the limelight 
13 TENT aeae wradaa wfrara: 
INTRODUCTION 3 XXXili 
of publicity, in the seclusion of guru-sisya relation and in the privacy 
of one’s being is possible perhaps for one in a million. For, as the 
Bhagavan said in Gita:'4 
manusydnim sahasresu kascid yatati siddhaye 
 yatatémapi siddhanéim kaschinmam vetti tattvatah 
Sri Madhusiidana Sarasvati, the celebrated Krsnabhakta and Advai- 
tin in one, explains this sloka thus: “Among thousands qualified by 
their Sastraic knowledge and punyakarma, perhaps some one, who 
has. acquired nityanityavastuviveka as the result of the good 
deeds in several lives, endeavours to attain siddhi ensuing upon 
dawn of jnana through purity of.mind. Among such sadhakas some 
one obtains saksatkara of Me as the fruition of his Sravana, manana 
and nididhyasana, and as non-different from his. pratyagatman 
having | learnt from his guru’s upadega of the mahavakyas. like. tat- 
tvamasi etc. Among innumerable men, he who adopts the ‘jfiana- 
| sadhana is extremely rare; even among such, it is very. rare to find 
one who has reaped the fruit of his jfananistha.” ae 
Whatever may be true of other persons, the. speccat writer: is 
S no means thus qualified. He rests in the hope, that it may be 
given to him by the grace of Sri Bhagavatpada and of the great 
Acaryas who have followed in his pontifical succession and, bear his 
holy name to come, in his future lives, ever so ‘little near the con- 
summation celebrated in Sruti and taught by the Brahmanisthas 
down the ages. In all the future births that he may have to take, 
may the astra of this study be Sariramimamsa—Inquiry | into the 
Atman, the God of his worship SH Candrasekhara and ‘his teacher 
Sri Sarhkaracarya. 16 p ghorra ty all 
- Sastram sartramimamsa devah Sri Candrasekharah 1 
dearyah Samnkaracaryah santu me sarvajanmasy. Khia. conve: 
14 FAST = AeeaT aferaafa fared | 
qaarate frarat afraeai afe aaa: 1 : 
15 WAST wredaaranga ea at aera weg afrad oT; HAPAASTTHATATT aaa 
frearafaae: aq, aafa aad | faza araafeara AMARA | Aaah ATaTATA wars, fear mafsatrsaat aerate otf we afrag Un:, satoadafafeearaaa fara a gsqen, afa aTeATeHUa qeaT: seat aramdrenfareafacenaraeaea: 1 maby ATSaG 
ATAAAMINTSA TAGTT:, Meares Hey Kea FRAGA a far aacea- wer aAeT Areceaueapasra: | 
16 Wea Wrereaqratar ea: HlaeawT|e: | 
Aaa: TEMA: Be A aA 1 
_. ANALYSIS OF VIVEKACUDAMANI | 
(The Arabic numerals indicate the number of the $lokas) 
I. INVOCATION 
(a) By His Holiness Sri CandraSekhara Bharati, author of the 
Commentary; (b) by Sri Sarhkara Bhagevaipida (1) 
IT. INTRODUCTION 
Value of human birth, and the imperative to strive for mukti — 
(2. 8)—one should salvage oneself from sarhsara by self-effort aided 
by Viveka, Vairagya and Karmasarnnyasa (9-10). “ai : 
Atmavicira the only means to mukti (11-15 ) qualifications for 
Atmavicara: sadhana-catustaya (16-19)—i. nityanitya-vastu-viveka | 
, (203) —ii. | vairagya (213)—iii. Samadisatka: (a) Sama (22 }—(b) 
dama (234)—(e) uparati (24)—(d) titiksa (25)—(e) Sraddha (26)— 
 (f) samadhana (27)—iv. mumuksuté (28): its three kinds and im- 
portance of guruprasada (29)—primacy of vairagya and mumuksuta 
over the rest (30-31)—place of bhakti: two ‘definitions of bhakti 
( 82-32). - 
7 e person thus qualified should approach a Guru (334)—the 
marks of a Guru (343-35)—method of approaching a Guru (36)—. 
prayer. to the Guru (37-42 )—duty of a Guru when so approached 
(43-44)—the Guru’ S assurance to the gisya (45-46)—means to mukti 
enumerated: ‘$raddhi, bhakti and dhyana (47-48 )—sarnsara- caused 
by ajiana to be destroyed by the fire of jfiana (49). 
The Sisya’s request to the Guru and his seven questions (50-51) 
—the Guru’s appreciation of the questions (52)—-one should endea- 
-vour for mukti oneself. (53-57)—only means to mukti: realisational 
knowledge of oneness of 4tman and Brahman (58)—the Guru again 
commends the Sisya’s questions and bids him listen (69-70). | 
Ill. KATHAM VIMOKSAH 
(Fourth question) 
How is mukti achieved? 
7 Reason for taking the fourth question first (vide introduction to 
Commentary on p. 71)—preliminary statement of the means includ- 
ing vairagya, Sama, dama, sarnnyasa: giving up all karmas, receiving 
ANALYSIS OF VIVEKACOUDAMANI = 
Sruti-texts from the Guru, contemplation thereon, nirvikalpa-sama- 
— dhi, all preceded by the discrimination of the Atman from the anat- 
man (71-73). 3 | 
IV. ATMANATMA-VIVECANAM: 
_ KO'SAVANATMA 
(Fifth question) 
What is this anatma? 
: - Atman to be identified by negation of the anatman; ‘the things 
which are the anatman: | 
(a) ‘The ‘sthila $arira (74-16) —it iahaiees for. paudase ieee 
addiction to sense-pleasures (77-82)—these pleasures ‘should be: re- 
nounced (83-84)—sthilagarira not to be pandered to -(85-88)—it is 
despicable (89)—its constituents (90)—its functioning in jagrat state 
(91)—not the atman being the owned like a house, not the owner 
(92 )—its characteristics (93). 
(b) The siksma Sarira: made up of: i. the ‘five jianendriyas, 
ii. the five karmendriyas, iii. the five pranas, iv. the five subtle ele- 
ments, v. the four aspects of antahkarana, vi. avidya, vii. kama and 
viii. karma (collectively called the puryastakam ) (94-98)—also call- 
ed lingaSarira; effect of unquintuplated elements; carrier of vasanas, 
beginningless upadhi of the 4tman (99)—svapna, its special condi- 
tion (100)—the features and functions of the suksma garira affect 
the body, but do not touch the 4tman (101-104)—how they are mis- 
taken to be the atman (105-106)—worldly joys and sorrows to be 
traced to the modifications of the antahkarana (107)—that things are 
dear for the sake of the atman which is of the nature of bliss 
established on the basis of Sruti, pratyaksa, the declarations of. the 
wise and inference (108-109).  « Eriee, 4 
(c) The kérana Sarira: called avyakta, the power of Igvara, 
beginningless avidya made up of three gunas, inferred from its 
effects, the cause of the universe (110)—anirvacaniya (111)—the . 
three gunas constituting. avidya (112)—effect of rajoguna: its power 
of viksepa prompts samsaric activities, makes for bondage (113- 114) 
—effect of tamoguna: Avaranasakti facilitating viksepa (115)—its 
power even on the learned (116)—how these two make for bondage 
(117-118)—-sattvaguna: the mixed and the pure (119)—the mixed 
sattvaguna: shorn of tamas but with a trace of rajas, its — features. 
{120)—the pure sattva guna not overlaid with rajas and tamas: its 
_oxxxvi --s VIVEKACUDAMANI 
features (121)—susupti, special state of karanasarira (122-123). -all these are the anatma (124-125). ae ie ae a 
_V. PARAMAH KA ATMA 
OO (Sixth question) 7 
Analysis of the ‘tvam’ padartha: 
What is the a&tma? 
The self-existent, the eternal, the reference of ‘T’, witness of the 
three mental states, different from the five sheaths (127)—the wit- 
ness (128)—pure intelligence (129)—all-pervasive and illumining 
all (130)—by the mere presence of which bodily organs are drawn 
_ to objects by wrong attachments (131)—that by which everything | 
is known (132)—the inmost self of the sadhaka, beginningless, of 
the nature of plenary bliss, unchanging pure intelligence, in whose 
presence everything functions (133)—more about t ne ‘&tman (134- 
137 )—-exhortation to the sisya to realise “I am the atman” (138). 
VIL A: KO NAMA BANDHAH 
(The first question) : 
___ What is bondage?—Identification of the atman with the anat- man due to ajfiana (139-140). a iia wae Gane 
Ss B.KATHAMESAAGATAH 
| (The second question) | 
i How. did it arise ?—It arose by (a) tamoguna concealing the 
effulgence of the tman; (b) rajoguna causing its wrong identifica- tion with the body and its qualities (141-146). —o ~~ 
_C. KATHAM PRATISTHA’SYA 
: - (The third question) How does it: continue ?—the tree of samsara (147)—eontinues 
as long as ajfiana persists and causes sarhsaric afflictions (148). 
_ VIL KATHAM VIMOKSAH — 
| (The fourth question) . 
How is mukti obtained?—not by crores of karmas, but only by 
vijfidna aided by the grace of Paramesvara (149)—karma not ruled 
_ ANALYSIS OF VIVEKACUDAMANI Xxxvii 
out apenas: but limited to PREHyeng the. ae to be the instru- 
ment of atmajnana (150). 
(Earlier the Guru referred ‘i the great sword of viveka-vijnan 
implying that jmana arises from viveka or discrimination ees 
the 4tman and the andtman. The Sisya asked: ‘Please instruct me 
in the process of this viveka or discrimination”. The Guru proceeds 
to convey in detail what was said in brief relating to sthila, siksma 
and karana Sariras and teaches the ee and rejection of Panca- 
koSas). , : 
DETERMINATION OF THE ‘TVAM? PADARTHA BY ANALYSIS 
OF PANCAKOSAS — P 
The process of unveiling the atman hidden eae the five kogas 
(151-159). , ee Sh; oe. 
| i. The Annamayakoga 
Its nature and constitution; cannot be the atman, because born 
of and sustained by food and decaying without it (156)—imperma- 
nent, many, insentient, the ‘seen’ (157)—-subsists even if a limb is 
removed, is the controlled, not the controller (158)—atman different 
from the body and its constituents (159- 160)—how the fool and the 
wise man look on the body (161)—the ways in which the ordinary 
man, the mere scholar and the man of wisdom understand the ‘T’ 
(162)—advice to identify the ‘I’ with Brahman (163)—no | mukti 
otherwise (164.)—how to look on the physical body: like the body’s 
shadow, like. one seen in a dream or in eee anon (165)—dehatma- 
buddhi, prance cause of samsara (166). - | 
i | The Pemanayelers 
| Made up of the five pranas and the five karmendriyas, permeates | 
the Annamayakoga and makes it act (167)—not the atman (168). 
ii. The Manomayakosa 
_ Made up of the jfidnendriyas and the mind, the cause of the 
sense of ‘I’ and ‘my’—pervades the Pranamayakoga (169)—-how it 
makes for bondage, and for liberation (170-176)—warning to the 
mumuksu not to yield to the enticements of the mind (177-179)— 
how it entices and plunges one into grief (180-182)—the duty of the 
mumuksu to cultivate purity of the mind (183)—how to do it (184) 
~-Manomayakoga not the 4tman as it has a beginning and an end, 
xxxviii : - VIVEKACUDAMANI > 
is subject to change, is of the nature of grief, is directed to sense- 
objects and is the ‘seen’ ae | 7 
iv. The Vijn fdémamayakosa ¥ 
Made up of buddhi and the jiianendriyas, of the nature of aeien: 
mination, compacted of knowledge, desire and action, cause of sarn- 
sara (186)—reflects the cit or pure intelligence, modification of 
miila-prakrti, characterised by knowledge and action, makes for 
identification of the 4tman with body etc., producing the sense of ‘I’ 
(187)—how it is associated with action (188)—-and with enjoyment 
(189)—<its locus nearest to the 4tman; so, the most proximate upadhi 
of the atman (190)—the consequences thereof; kartrtva, bhoktrtva 
and identification with the qualities of the upadhis (191- 193). 
A doubt of the Sisya: 
If the upadhi which is the cause of jivahood is Lepitingiie 
jivahood too must be without beginning. As what has no beginning 
cannot have an end, jivahood too must be eternal. So, ee which 
is liberation from jivahood will be impossible (194-195). 
The Guru’s reply: 
(a) False imaginations due to delusion cannot ee real (196)— 
jivahood is the product of delusion; it is not real; it vanishes with 
| the removal of the delusion (197-200). (b) What is beginningless 
can have an end as in the case of anterior non-existence (pragabhava) | 
(201). (c) Whatever is the product of upadhi will vanish when 
samyak-jiiana dawns (202-203)—the meaning of samyak-jfiana (204) 
—the need to acquire it to clearly discern the atman (205-207). 
The Vijfidnamayakoga cannot be the dtman as it is subject to 
change, is insentient, is limited, is the ‘seen’ and is liable to become 
non-existent (208). | : 7 ; 
v. The Anandamayakoéa 
Is a reflection of the bliss of the Paramatman, odidention: of 
the 4tman wrought by tamas or avidy4a, shines when fruits of punya 
are experienced without.effort (209)—evidenced in full in. susupti 
and partially in svapna and jagrat states (210)—not the 4tman as 
(a) during svapna and jagrat it depends on getting what is desired, 
(b) during susupti it is modification of avidya, (c) is an effect of 
good. deeds, and ‘is associated with the assemblage of other modifi- 
cations (211). , 
ANALYSIS OF VIVEKACODAMANI XXXIX 
What remains after the five koSas are eliminated is the atman 
(212-213). 
The Sisya’s doubt: 
| “After the elimination of the five ‘eaces I see a mere void” 
(214). | 
The Guru’ s ea 
_ That which sees the wiodifications: of the Kose and also the 
void when they are eliminated is the atman (215)—it is the witness 
in the three states of jagrat, svapna and susupti; the knower of all 
(216-219)—not ordinarily realised due to delusion caused by the 
upadhis—example of the sun’s reflection in water mistaken for the 
real sun, and the truth about it (220-221)—the Atman described: its 
realisation sole means to mukti (222-225)—-one who has this reali- 
sation is not born again; so non-difference of Brahman from the 
Atman should be known (226). | 
VII. THE “TAT’ PADARTHA: BRAHMAN 
Brahman, the real, the infinite, the pure, the self-existent, aver 
blissful, not: different from one’s atman, eternal (227)—the supreme 
: advaitic truth (228). 
~The world seen in variegated forms is Bish only (229)—no 
pot as such apart from clay (230-231)—the entire world an appear- 
ance of Brahman; to say that the world is real is to prattle as in 
sleep (232)—éruti quoted (233 )—consequences if the world is real: 
(a) infinitude of the 4tman will be impaired; (b). Sruti will be ren- 
dered untrue; (c) the upadesa of the Iévara will become false; these 
not. acceptable (234)—The Gita quoted (235): if the world is true, 
why is it not seen in susupti? (236)—it is mithya like the rope- 
serpent (237-238). 
Final conclusion about the ‘tat’ padartha, viz., Brahman: the 
supreme Reality without a second, compacted of pure Intelligence, 
flawless, peaceful, without beginning or end, actionless, of the nature 
of eternal Bliss—free from all difference wrought by maya, eternal, 
beyond thought, formless, without name, effulgent, without the 
differences of knower, known and. knowledge, endless, free from 
modifications, infinite Intelligence, the supreme Truth, not capable of 
rejection or acceptance like a physical object,. beyond thought and > 
speech, beyond reasoning, the full, the Supreme Effulgence (239-242). 
; a - VIVEKACODAMANI | 
“SV ANUBHAVAH” | 
IX. TATTVAMASI 
Svanubhava is explained as Brahmasaksatkara following nidi-. 
dhyasana. | | | 
After the baaieciiee of the two squdeuhees ‘tvam’ and ‘tat’, their 
_ identity established on the basis of Sruti (243)—their literal mean- 
ing (vacyartha) points to difference (244)—their upddhis, cause of 
the apparent difference (245)— negation of the upadhis helps to 
understand identity (246-247)—-how to negate the upadhis (248)— 
the theory of laksanas (249)—negation of opposed qualities in each 
leaves both identical as pure cit (250-251)—exhortation to the gisya 
to realise himself as pure Brahman (252-265)—the disappearance 
of the perceived world in Brahman-consciousness (256 one: rebirth 
afterwards ( 267). ¢ Git te | a 
XX. “BRAHMATMANA SAMSTHITIE” | 
(Remaining as Brahman by vasanaksaya and manonasa ) 
Despite knowledge of the Real, the vasanas causing the sense 
of ‘karta’ and ‘bhokta’ may persist: they must be attenuated (268-269) 
—the how of it (270)—loka-vasana, deha-vasana and sastra-vasana, 
obstacles to Brahmajfiana (271-273)—-when these are got rid of, 
atmavasana shines clearly (2172-277)--exhortation to get rid of 
| super-imposition to nullify the vasands (278-288). | 
Being a Brahmanistha involves: (a) not. Per eoe to. forgetful- 
ness of the atman,. (b) not thinking the body to be the | Atman 
(289-290), (c) transferring the sense of the ‘I’ from the body to the 
atman (291-293), (d) realising that everything that is ‘seen’ is only 
an appearance ( 294)—clear statement of the nature of the atman 
(295-296 )—advice to give up attachment to the flesh and rest the 
mind on the atman as the only way to attain peace (297- 298). 
Aharnkara, the chief obstacle to Brahman-realisation—to be 
destroyed to obtain the bliss. of atmasamrajya; warning against its 
recurrence. by the forcé of vasanas and thought of sense-objects 
which are the seeds of Sarnsara (299- 316). 
How to destroy this obstacle: negatively, cessation of action 
will prevent thought of objects and that will root out vasanas 
(317-318)—positively, development of good vasanas leading to the 
enjoyment of non-dual pratyagatman (319-320)—if the ‘world 
ANALYSIS OF VIVEKACUDAMANI xli 
appears due to prarabdha, one should lead one’s days in the confem- 
plation of its adhisthana, Brahman (321). 
- Warning to a Brahmanistha against © negligence ( pramada), 
said to be death itself (322)—greatest — evil for jnani, negligence 
causes delusion which breeds aharnkara which in turn causes bon- 
dage (323)—affects even a wise man (324-325)—the successive 
degradations of one who yields to pramada (326- 328 )—-advice to 
Sisya to avoid it and be for ever constant in uninterrupted contem- 
plation of the 4atman (329). 3 Pas 
‘Warning against perception of difference and looking on the 
‘seen’ as the atman (330- 333)—duty | of a sarnnyasin: to be for ever 
established in the contemplation of Brahman to the exclusion of 
everything external (334-335)—the steps of the progressive ascent 
to mukti when the sense for the external is controlled (336)—-a man 
of viveka will shrink from yielding to the external which is non- 
real | i aaa to ney ete. and = mukti cannot €o-exist 
(338). . : : 
Description of the mukta: sees his atman as the substratum ‘of 
everything inside and outside, is free from all upadhis, has the 
plenal experience of infinitude (339)—-sarvatmabhava, the means to 
liberation and cause of non-apprehension of the ‘seen’ a ccs al 
sruti in support of this (342)—and yukti (343). ve 
Repetition of warning against viksepa-sakti and. ‘its | cause, 
avarana-gakti (344-347 )—samyakpadartha-dargana, the means to get 
over the three: ‘Avarana, viksepa and the Buer caused by it ae 
i Gimavagdauan ee conviction that everything other than the 
atman is mithya (350-351)—atmadargana: what it is and when it 
arises (352-356)—attained in nirvikalpa-samadhi (357-358)—bhra-. 
marakitanyaya applied to prove that nididhyadsana brings about 
Brahmabhava (359-360)—the supreme Brahman is beyond gross per- 
ception, available only to the purified intellect, when by abhyasa 
everything external has been eliminated in Tor el alae 
(361-367). a 
, The means to sivoiicalpa-sansahi. the steps to it (368-371 )— 
importance of vairagya and viveka (372- 374)—nature of akhandaka- 
ravrtti (375- 379). 
Restatement of what has been said so far on atmanisthi (380- 
393). | , | 7 
xii | - VIVEKACUDAMANI 
_ Nature of Brahman reiterated (394-395)—the manner of Brah-— 
-manistha (396-399)—negation of difference in nirvisesa Brahman 
(400-405)—¢ruti declares it and susupti confirms it (406)—proved 
by yukti: dropya not different from adhisthana (407)—the bhranti_ 
of difference is mind-born; hence need to liquidate the mind (408). — 
_ Brahmanubhava in samadhi (409-411)—its effect: no more con-" 
tact with sarnsfra (412-415)—experience of pure bliss (416)—no 
body-consciousness (417-418)—this is the condition of the yogi who | 
is a jivanmukta (419). | : ate 
The relation of vairagya, bodha and uparati assessed (420)— 
their respective fruits (421-424)—the signs of fulfilment of vai- | 
ragya, bodha and uparati (425). 
‘(XL JIVANMUKTI 
The jfani and his incomparable bliss (426)—the mark of a 
_ jivanmukta (427-442)—no more involvement in sarnsadra for him Sat 
it persisted, one is not a Brahmavit (443)—any semblance of bond- 
age disappears before Brahmajfiana (444-445). oe 
The effect of karmas on a jivanmukta: any external awareness 
_ by him due to prarabdha-karma (446); experience of pleasure and 
pain indicates fruition of previous karma (447)—saficita-karma melts — 
away by Brahmajfiana like actions in a dream (448-449 )—bhavikar- 
mas do not touch him who knows he is an akarta (450-451 )— 
karma which has begun to bear fruit before the dawn of Brahma- 
jiana does not wear out without fulfilment (452-453)—summary — 
statement of the effect of the three kinds of karmas; but these three 
karmas do not at all affect those who are steeped in Brahmanubhava 
(454-458 )—really there is no connection between the prarabdha and — 
the 4tman (459-462)—the gruti speaks of prarabdha only to explain 
why the jivanmukta still lives in the world (463)—the reference to 
the body is only from a vyavahiarika point of view and not from the 
paramarthika standpoint (464)—Brahman is non-dual; there is no 
plurality in it (465-471 )—this truth realised by the great yatis who 
enjoy the supreme peace (472). 
XII. FINAL UPADESA 
Promise made in Sloka 45 to lead the Sisya along the ancient 
path to liberation recalled and instruction to him to pursue it 
(473-474)—the criteria for 4tmadargana; Sruti, yukti, upadega and 
ANALYSIS OF VIVEKACODAMANI | | xliii 
anubhava (415) —the limitation of eg by the Guru and the | 
need for self-effort abate): 
XIII. CONCLUSION 
The gisya becomes an Atmanistha (480)—experiences samadhi 
for a time, wakes up and exclaims (481)—he describes his advaita- 
nubhava achieved by the grace of the Guru (482-517)—his grateful 
obeisance to the Guru (518-520)—the Guru’s benediction and final | 
charge to the Sisya (521--528). 
The jivanmukta’s life for the remainder of his aa (529- 567) 
—he is not born again (568-569)—-no bandha or moksa from an ee 
mate point of view (570-575). 
Parting words of the Guru. (B76 cr listened to the Guru, 
making obeisance to him, the Sisya, freed from bondage takes leave 
of him (577)—the Guru departs in a state of ecstatic bliss purifying | 
the ground that he treads on (578)—the nature of the 4tman thus 
expounded in the form of a dialogue for the benefit of the mumuksus | 
--(579)—this upadeSa recommended for the earnest mumuksus free 
from all defects of the mind, who have turned their faces against 
worldly pleasures, who enjoy inward peace and have regard for 
Sruti (580)—purpose of this work to nop. those afflicted by sarmsaric 
woes to attain liberation (581). - | | 
Orn Tat Sat 
eel i ae ab 
| - Srih Om Srih _ 
-Obeisance to the lotus feet of Saccidananda Sivabhinava 
Nrsimha Bharati Swami. * 
VIVEKACG ODAM ANI WITH COMMENTARY. 
Invoking the grace of the divinities to aid him to write 
this commentary, its author, His Holiness the J agadguru Sri 
Candrasekhara Bharati Pijyapada, Head of the Sti ? iradapitha at 
Srgagiri says: 
siere-armrefrmer aiid: a 
Dsaracissa-AAS-TES AT | 
HSUPITST CS HUNT 
a aferrreaatarat ef avaatfa uw 
arene anda wracaraafaa | a 
qsmit fadertg sarpesa qWeram 
Taal Wat Taai aferafina: bo 
araaepra fad wedi AA MITTS 
TaTa THM faracara-faarac t 
fatact qzaedat eqrent wrecasad 11 
arantawax faa sataaraariaa 1 
- earruta sasorg faaqarfasaenc i 
sathsdra-sigara-nimagna-janoddidhirsuh 
yo vataracchiva-nrsimha-gurucchalena | 
_jadyandhakadraharanam karundsamudram 
tam daksinasyam anisam hrdi bhavayami | 
jfidnasvaripe vagdevi bhagavatpadapiijite | 
cidamanin vivekaddim vydkurusva mukhénmaina }| 
prasannandm gabhirdnam vacasdm desikesituh | 
bhavastvatkrpaya citte bhisatim mama Sarade || 
~* $ri Saccidananda Sivabhinava Nrsimha eheat Swami is the Guru of the 
author of the Commentary. 
V.C.—-2 
an | VIVEKACUDAMANI 
ratnagarbha ganesana vighnadhvanta-vibhakara 
nirvighnam pirayasvemém vydkhydm karunyasevadhe | 
candramaulisvara vibho brahmavidyasamasrita 7 
svinubhitim prayacchésu cinmudrivilasatkara || 
I ineeees ty adore in my heart Sri Daksinamirti, the ocean 
of mercy, Who destroys the deepest darkness (of avidyé) and Who, 
to saloase men caught up in the ocean of samsara, descended down 
a to earth) in the form of Sri Sivanrsimha Guru. : 
- oO! Goddess of Speech! the embodiment of wisdom and Who 
was worshipped by Sri Bhagavatpada, be pleased to explain the 
Vivekaciidémani through my lips. 
O Sdrada! May the import of the clear and majestic words of 
_ the best of teachers (Sri sae shine in my mind through Your 
grace. | | tn oe 
O! Ratnagarbha GaneSa! the ‘Sun Who , dispels the darkness of 
obstacles! Thou mine of mercy! e enable me to complete this task 
without any hindrance. : eye 
O! Candramauliévara! Who is consorted Liej Brahamavidya and 
Who displays the cinmudra! pray, endow me quickly. with the reali- 
sation (of the Supreme Truth). | 
SRi VIVEKACUDAMANI 
1 
aa-aarafagraattat aaMaTa | 
Thad gears TaTs WHATeFAST Ug 
sarva-vedanta-siddhanta-gocaram tam agocaram| 
govindam paramanandam sadgurum pranato’smyaham }) 
I tender my obeisance to my sadguru, Govinda, the em- 
bodiment of ‘supreme bliss, Who is beyond thought and 
speech and Who is the goal of all Vedantic truths. 
(It is to be noted here that Sri Bhagavatpada combines in this 
loka his. obeisance both to his own immediate guru, Sri Govinda- 
bhagavatpada and to the Supreme God Sri Govinda Himself. He 
identifies his guru with the Supreme God.) | 
| 2 
Beat ATHR FTAA: Gea aat fastat 
acmafen-raantacar fagraaearcaey | 
aearanatadad earvat aera ateuta: 
afradt mamfeseang ga: quafiat weTa URN 
jantunadm narajanma durlabham atah pumstvam tato viprata 
tasmad vaidika-dharmamargaparaté vidvattvam asmat param) 
atmanadtmavivecanam svanubhavo brahmatmand samsthitih 
muktirno sa att aa krtaih punyairvina | 
labhyate 1) 
| To those who take birth, birth as a human being is diffi- 
cult to get; more difficult than that is birth as a male; and — 
more than that is birth as a Brahmana. Because it is so, 
steadfastness in pursuing the path of dharma prescribed in 
the Vedas (must be got by present effort). After that (after 
securing the requisite learning), discrimination »petween 
the self and the not-self (must be made) and also perfect — 
experience. Liberation which is permanent being as Brah- 
man cannot be obtained without meritorious deeds done in 
hundreds of crores of births. 
4 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
Like the verse in the Bhagavad Gita: 
asocydnanvasocastvam prajndvadamsca bhasase | 
gatasin agatasimsca nénusocanti panditah |; 
“Thou grievest for those who should not be grieved for; thou 
speakest like wise men; but those who have attained dtmajnana are 
not concerned either with those who are dead or those who are alive”, 
this verse in the “Vivekacidamani” beginning with jantiinam nara- 
janmo durlabham gives in a nutshell the entire substance of the work. 
An astika alone is qualified to embark on the study of Vedanta 
Sastra. An dstika is one who believes in the existence of the dtman 
apart from the body. By saying that birth as a human being is diffi- 
cult to obtain, the fact of the existence of 4tman apart from the body 
is conveyed by implication. As Sri Bhagavatpada says in his Sutra 
Bhasya: ‘a wise man does not perform actions ordained in the Sistras 
without the knowledge and belief that the 4tman is distinct from 
the body and has an other-worldly connection.’ The very fact of the 
performance of these actions implies this conviction. 
The word jantiném means ‘jananegilandm’, those who are sub- 
_ ject to janana or birth in the world.. To creatures who are born, it 
_ is said that a human birth is difficult to obtain. The rarity of this 
birth can be stated only on the basis that one goes through many 
births successively. Birth means combination (of the atman) with 
a body. When it is said that one 4tman combines (successively) with 
many bodies, the distinctness of the 4tman from the body is indi- 
cated. It is. well known that the thread in which several flowers 
are strung is separate from them. Similarly, the body that winds 
round itself successively or simultaneously many clothes is different 
from them. Even so, the atman that acquires bodies in different 
births is different from them. | 
If birth is the result of the conjunction of the atman with 
the body, then it behoves a person to obtain a body which will pro- 
duce joy and avoid a body which will cause grief. By this are 
indicated the duty to endeavour towards punya to obtain the former 
kind of’ body, and the duty to refrain from actions which will cause 
papa to avoid the latter. Regarding what is punya or papa, astra 
which conveys prescriptions and ‘prohibitions is the authority. The 
astika is one who believes in this $4stra and acts by it. So, an 
astika alone is qualified to study astra dealing with karmas. It is 
€ven so in respect of moksasastra for the liquidation of all karmas 
by jiiana. | 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 3 
Thus, it is the astika alone who believes in the distinctness of 
the 4tman and in the fact of liberation whereby the Atman cuts it- 
self off from involvement in bodily birth that is qualified to pursue 
the study of this Sastra. | | 
(Some people maintain that the body itself is the 4tman. They 
are called dehatmavadins.) If it is true that the body is the atman, 
the body being visible to the eyes, the 4tman too must be an object 
of sense-perception (pratyaksa). Then how to reconcile this with 
the Upanisadic statement: dGtma va are drastavyah Srotavyah man- 
tavyah nididhydsitavyah: “the Atman should be seen, should be 
heard about, reflected on, should be repeatedly meditated upon’? 
What is the point in saying that a thing which is actually seen 
should be seen? | 
There is a loka which says: subhairapnoti devatvam nisiddhair 
narakim tanum | ubhibhyam punyapapabhyam manusyam labhate’- 
vasah 1; “By good deeds one attains the state of a deva; as a result 
of doing prohibited actions, one obtains in spite of oneself a body 
designed to suffer the tortures of hell. By a mixture of good and 
bad deeds, one takes birth as a human being”. This indicates that 
different kinds of body are secured by the same person through 
many lives by performing good or bad or mixed deeds. How other- 
wise can we’ account for the variety of joys and sorrows which are 
evidenced in the world? If it is said that, independent of one’s actions, 
God creates certain individuals happy and others unhappy, then He © 
will be guilty of partiality and cruelty. In that case, His divinity 
itself will be in peril. Hence, the following Brahma Sitras are in 
point: vaisamyanairghrnye nd sapeksatvat tatha hi darsayati; na 
karmivibhagaditi cenna anaditvat; upapadyate cépyupalabhyate ca: 
“Inequality (of dispensation) and cruelty (the Lord can) not (be 
reproached with) on account of His regarding (merit and demerit), 
for, so (scripture) declares. If it be objected that it (viz, the 
Lord’s having regard to merit and demerit) is impossible on account 
of the non-distinction (cf merit and demerit previous to the first 
creation), we refute the objection on the ground of the world being 
without a beginning.” “(The beginninglessness of the world) re- 
commends itself to reason and is seen (from the scriptures)”. These 
sutras declare that God acts only in accordance with one’s actions 
(in previous births) and that the flow of samsara is heginningless. 
If a quality (dharma) is beginningless, then the bearer of: that 
quality (the dharmin) too must be beginningless. If samsara which 
is the quality of a person is without a beginning (anadi), ie., if no 
6 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
beginning can be postulated for it, then it plainly follows that the 
samsarin, the person also to whom the samsara pertains, has no de- 
terminate beginning. Therefore, the distinctness of the Atman from 
the body is thus established. As pointed out earlier, he alone is an 
astika who holds that there is an atman distinct from the body. 
Being an astika is a precondition for engaging in Sastraic discussion. 
As the term astika can be applied to a human being only, it is said 
. that birth as such a human being is rare and difficult to obtain. 
The next thing stated by Sri Bhagavatpada as more difficult to 
obtain than a human body is to be born as a male human being; 
for, women are not qualified to study the Vedas. The idea is that 
they can never know and realise the atman which can be done 
only by a concentrated study of the Upanisads.! 
Next in the list of things rare to obtain is vipratad, being a Brah- 
mana. It is true that all the three twice-born castes are qualified to 
study the Vedas. But a ksatriya has to be engaged for a greater 
part of his time in ruling over his kingdom and a vaigya in agricul- 
ture, trade, etc. These functions involve activities which are direc- 
ted outward and will have the effect of diverting the mind. Hence, 
to the men of these castes undisturbed inquiry into the nature of 
the 4tman will be impossible. Moreover, a smrti text says: sarh- 
nyasa leading to the realisation of the ultimate vaisnavam padam? is 
the dharma only of. Brahmanas who are born out of the face of the 
Supreme Purusa; that that dharma is not prescribed for the ksatriyas 
and vaisyas who came out respectively from the arms and thighs of 
the Purusa. If these should qualify for sarnnyasa, they must ascend 
through further lives to Brahmanahood. Therefore, they cannot 
take to sarnnydsa as they are. As they are disqualified for sarnnyasa 
which alone invests one with the right for Vedantic enquiry, in 
their present life itself, they cannot know and realise Brahman. 
Hence it is that Sri Bhagavatpada does not say dvijatva (being twice- 
born) as being difficult to attain, but refers to viprata (being a Brah- 
mana). There is a special appropriateness in speaking of viprata as 
the qualification for Brahmavicdra. A VaAsistha-smrti says: brah- 
manasya tu deho’yam nopabhogaya kalpate | iha kleséya mahate pre- 
tyanantasukhaya ca | “This body of a Brahmana is not intended 
1 The reason for such disqualification may also be that Veda-adhyayana and 
Vedantavicéra are wholetime occupations for which women are unfit by reason of 
their involvement in domestic duties as such pursuit will be interrupted by their 
child-bearing and child-rearing activities. Gadrgi, Maitreyi and other Brahmavadinis 
are obviously exceptions due to their age. 
2 Vaisnavam padam is the ultimate stage of the Absolute or Brahman. Vide 
‘tadvisnoh paramam padam’, — Oo , 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 7 
for enjoying sense-pleasures. It has to be subjected to strict dis- 
ciplines here which will lead after death to unlimited bliss.” From 
this it is implied that a Brahmana can know and realise Brahman in 
a single (ie., the present) life itself by the observance of the two- 
fold dharmas of the nature of pravrtti and nivrtti ordained in the 
Vedas. — | | | . : | 
Hence it is that it is said: tasmad vaidikadharmamargaparata: 
being inclined to the path of.dharma prescribed in the Vedas. This 
‘means that mere viprata by itself. will not help to attain what is to 
be attained. It means, having been born a Brahmana, one should 
engage in the observance of the prescribed dharmas. The sruti says: 
dharmo vigvasya jagatah pratistha, dharmena papamapanudati (Taiit. 
Samhitai): “Dharma is the foundation of the entire universe. One 
gets rid of sin (papa) by dharma”. It is only dharma that can 
secure joy and avoid papa, the cause of sorrow and by such avoid- 
ance lead to a state of no sorrow. 
- It is to be noted here that Sri Bhagavatpada does not say vaidika 
karmaméargaparata, but says vaidikadharmamargaparaté. Every- 
body says: May I be happy; may I not be unhappy. The Acarya 
Sri Bhagavatpada uses the words dharma instead of karma to show 
that the supreme objective of man which is of the form of attain- 
ment of joy and the avoidance of sorrow can be secured only by 
dharma. It is said: ‘dharatiti dharmah; dhriyate anena iti va dhar- 
mah’: “Because it supports the universe, it is called dharma; or it 
_ (the universe) is supported by this: hence it is called dharma’. That 
_ dharma is the cause of the stability of the universe is affirmed by 
ruti. Specially to convey this, without saying ‘vaidikakarmamar- 
gaparata’, Sri Bhagavatpada says ‘dharmamargaparata’. For. though 
vaidikakarma comes under dharma, the expressed objective (of sup- 
reme, endless, unalloyed bliss) cannot be secured by mere karma. 
If there were any other means to secure joy and to negate sorrow, 
‘by adopting it all men wil be happy and without sorrow for ever. | 
Sri Bhagavatpada says ‘vaidikadharmamargaparta’. For 
dharma is super-sensuous; it can be known only by the deliverance 
of astra. Men cannot comprehend it by any source other than dastra. 
Hence, if the means of Sastra is not resorted to, the effect (of getting 
joy and avoiding sorrow) cannot be achieved. Hence the import- 
ance of the word ‘vaidika’ (prescribed in the Veda). 
Maharsi Jaimini defines dharma as of the nature of a command; . 
i.e., it is what is commanded by the Vedas. That declaration by 
8 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
Veda is the only criterion of dharma is shown by the use of the 
adjective ‘vaidika’ in the expression of ‘vaidikadharma’. As, being 
supersensuous, sense-perception cannot apply to it, apart from Veda, 
there is nothing else which can be the criterion of dharma.3 So, 
perception (pratyaksa pramana) cannot intimate dharma. Inference 
(anumana) too is inapplicable here, for inference is based on per- 
ception. The premises of inference have to be provided by percep- 
tion. Therefore, the third pramana sabda (verbal testimony) must 
he resorted to, to know about dharma. But this gabda too is of two 
kinds, laukika gabda and alaukika Sabda. The former refers to state- 
ments made by the people of the world. It can convey only what 
las been apprehended by perception (pratyaksa) and inference 
(anumana). 
The declarations of smrtis too have a human source. They are 
pauruseya. They also are theoretically liable to be vitiated by the 
defects of bhrama and pramada and the taint of human authorship 
and hence a suspicion about their validity may, perchance, attach to 
them. Being absolutely untainted by the possibility of such defect 
alone can be the criterion of dharma. Hence any égabda (utterance 
of human origin) which is other than Veda cannot be by itself the 
authority for dharma. | oe | 
Moreover, how did the authors of the smrtis learn about dharma 
which is supersensuous? If it is said that they comprehended it by 
the power obtained by their yoga, how did they acquire that power? 
If it is replied: ‘by the observance of dharma’, how did they come 
to know about this dharma? No human. being can obtain a know- 
_ ledge of dharma by his own powers. Such knowledge is to be traced 
to the Vedas vouchsafed by divine grace. This is stated in the text 
yo brahmanam vidadhati piirvam, yo vai vedaméca prahinoti tasmai: 
“He who in the beginning created Brahma and He who, then dower- 
ed Him with the Vedas”. The éruti teaches that even in the case of 
Hiranyagarbha who was created first, knowledge of the Vedas is 
to be traced to the grace of the Supreme Being. When that is so 
with reference to Hirenyagarbha, the first-born, what needs to be said 
about others? So, it has been very properly said vaidika (pertain- 
ing to the Vedas) in the expression ‘vaidikadharmamargaparata’. 
or notary Agee mrelt on ged None off these ean be dace apeanliorigs 
| the organs of sense connected with these activities are inoperative with 
reference to it, dharma cannot be perceived by the senses. 
4 which are liable to be defective. Moreover, words uttered by men are subject 
to one or more of six defects, namely ajidina (ignorance), viparyaya (Wrong under- 
_ Standing), pramdda (careles ), apatukaranatva (defect of the organs of speech 
and. hearing) and vipralambha (deceit). 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 9 
An objection may be raised here. The Vedas may be the source 
of the knowledge of dharma. But how does it follow that they are 
the only source? May it not be said that the Vedas and certain 
others are the sources? We reply to this objection by a reference to 
a similar statement. “Tapassvins are said to be abbhaksah or vayu- 
bhaksah i.e., they are said to live on water or on air. These sent- 
ences do not mean that they subsist on water or air as the case may > 
be and other things also. What is meant is that they live on water 
_ only or on air only. Hence, here also it is to be taken that dharma 
Pies _ ean be understood only from the Vedas. 
The word dharma here refers to its two-fold aspect of pravrtti- 
dharma and nivrttidharma, dharma towards and dharma away from. 
Sri Bhagavatpada declares in his Gitabhasya ‘dvividho hi vedokto 
dharmah, pravrttilaksano. nivrttilaksanasca’. ‘Dharma spoken of in 
the Vedas is of two kinds: one of the nature of pravrtti (worldly 
activity) and the other of the nature of nivytti (withdrawal from 
the world)”. 
The Karma Mimamsakas hold that dharma by itself is the final 
means for the attainment of eternal bliss and that there is nothing 
else that is required. Sri Bhagavatpada indicates his dissent from 
this view by using the word mdrga in the expression ‘vaidikadhar- 
mamargaparata’. To realise Brahman, intensive study of Vedanta has 
to be pursued. To be qualified for Vedantic study, one should adopt 
the samny&sa asrama with its attendant nivrttidharma or withdrawal 
from worldly activity. To quality for sarnnyasa, one should culti- 
vate vairagya or detachment. Vairagya is acquired only by purity 
of mind or cittasuddhi. Cittaguddhi itself can be secured only if 
actions are performed without desire for their fruits. Thus it will be 
seen that Karma or action prescribed in the Vedas comes almost last 
in the series of means to secure supreme bliss. The use of the word 
marga shows that dharma, whether of the pravrtti kind or of the 
nivrtti kind, cannot by itself, directly and immediately, give the 
bliss of moksa. It is to the same effect that sage Badarayana speaks 
when he says: dvavimavatha panthinau yatra vedah pratisthitah | 
pravrttilaksano dharmah nivrttisca prakirtitah 1): “Two are the 
paths laid down-in the Vedas. Dharma is said to be of two pare of 
the nature of pravrtti or of nivrtti.” 
The same series of means detailed above are given (in the-re- 
verse order from the first step to the final goal) in Sri Sankara’s 
Sopdnapaficaka: “By the Brahmana, after upanayana the Vedas 
should be learnt and recited every day. The karmas prescribed in 
10  - VIVEKACUDAMANI 
them should be performed properly. By such performance the grace 
of God should be secured. All thought of enjoying the fruits of 
actions should be abandoned. Refraining from all sinful actions, one 
should constantly think of evils attendant on the quest for worldly 
pleasures. The desire to know (realise) the 4tman should be assi- 
duously cultivated. Quickly getting out of one’s home, one should 
resort to the company of the good. Devotion to God must be firmly — 
established in the mind. The qualities of sAnti (mind-control), danti 
(sense-control), uparati (detachment), titiksa (enduring the dua- 
lities of heat and cold, pleasure and pain, etc., without extraneous 
. aids), sraddha (faith) and samadhi (concentration) should be culti- 
vated, and all (entangling) karmas should be quickly given up.” As 
stated in this ladder of spiritual ascent, it is taught that karma should 
be performed in a spirit of dedication to God, that, by that means, — 
the mind should be purified and that such a purified mind will with- 
draw from worldly pleasures and refrain from all karmas. The 
same thing is conveyed in the section Moksa-dharma in the Maha- 
bharata: naitidrsam brahmanasyasti vittam yathaikaté samatg sat- 
yata ca | silam sthitirdandanidhdnamarjavam tatascoparatih krvyi- 
bhyah 11: “There is nothing which makes for the Spiritual riches 
of a Brahmana as acquiring the following virtues successively, name- 
ly singleness, equanimity, truthfulness, good conduct, steadiness, non- 
violence, straightforwardness and the withdrawal from actions.” 
Next in the order of things difficult to obtain as stated by Sri 
Bhagavatpada in this loka is vidvattvam. This relates both to prav- 
rttidharma and to nivrttidharma. In respect of the former, it refers 
_ to the performance of the Vedic rites with the understanding of the 
meaning of the mantras uttered to the accompaniment of the rites. 
_ As the Chandogyopanisad has it, yadeva vidyaya karoti sraddhayo- 
panisadé.tadeva viryavattaram bhavati: “Whatever is ‘done with-the 
knowledge of the meaning of the mantras with an earnestness born 
of faith and insight into them is more efficacious than what is done 
without these accompaniments.” Any karma that is done, if gone — 
through with its auxiliary of the knowledge of the meaning of the 
mantras, becomes fruitful in an abundant measure. Commenting on 
the Chandogya text quoted above, Sri Bhagavatpada says: “It is a 
matter of common knowledge that when a dealer in precious stones 
and a fisherman, each comes by a diamond, by his knowledge of the 
nature of the object, the former makes a huge profit which is not 
the case with the latter.” 
In respect of nivrttidharmas, vidvattvam means this: It has been 
Said: ‘samnyasya Sravanam kuryat’ which means that one should hear 
VIVEKACUDAMANI as it 
about (receive instruction in and obtain knowledge of) Vedantic 
texts after taking sarnnyadsa. So vidvattvam here means mediated 
knowledge (of Brahman) obtained by listening to the upadesa on the 
Vedantic texts after ordination as a samnyasin.* 
The next requisite for final liberatidn is Gtmanatmavivecanam, 
discrimination between the 4tman (the self) and whatever is not 
the 4tman. This will be explained clearly in the course of this 
work. By that (i.e., by vivecanam) is stated mananam or deep re- 
flection on the distinction of the atman and the non-atman. This 
reflection is to produce firm conviction of the truth of the Stutis sup- 
ported by proper reasoning. By constantly meditating on the im- 
port of sruti, one gets rid of all doubts and one avoids wrong a 
standing of the meaning. 3 
Then comes svanubhavah. By this is meant direct realisation 
of Brahma preceded by nididhyaisana (constant meditation on the 
upadega of the Guru). Hence it is called svanubhava i.e., su-anu- 
bhava, proper and perfect anubhava. For the anubhava or the ex- 
perience that springs from hearing and reflection in the absence of | 
nididhydsana which removes wrong apprehension will not be per- 
fect. It is not characterised by sausthavam. By this are conveyed 
the four-fold steps for spiritual wisdom, namely, Subheccha (the long- 
ing for release preceded by vairagya or detachment), vicaranda (list- 
ening to and reflection on the upadega of the guru which takes the 
form of ascertaining the meaning of the words of the sruti in accord | 
with the criteria for determining their import: tatparyalingasaha- 
karanavakyarthanirdhaéranam Ssravanam), tanumanasa (having a light 
mind unaffected by sense-objects), and sattvapatti (being mentally 
established in the Supreme Reality or the Sadvastu). 
That these must be further accompanied by non-attachment 
(asamnsaktih), the state of absence of awareness of things internal or 
external, (padérthabhdvand); and remaining steadfast in one’s 
natural self (turyaga) is indicated -by the last item in the series 
which is brahmatmanda samsthitih, being firmly established in Brah- 
man, which means liberation.*# Sarhsthiti (being firmly establish- | 
ed) indicates su-anubhava which is concomitant of the destruction 
of tendencies and impulsions and the liquidation of the (outgoing) 
mind. By this is also implied that the states of samipya (being in 
4 This is known as paroksajniana as distinguished from immediate knowledge. of 
Brahman synonymous with its realisation which is called aparoksajiiana. ; 
4a Vide on the subject of these. steps or bhimikds the extract from’ Sri 
Vidyaranyasvamin’s Jivanmuktiviveka at the end. | 
12 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
close proximity to the Supreme), salokya (being in the same world), 
saripya (being of the same form), and sdyujya (unitive experi- 
emcee) are not of the nature of liberation in its proper and true sense. 
As they all pertain to the saguna Brahman, these four are to be con- 
sidered as mithya or non-real. The ultimate Brahman is free from 
the limitations of place, time and objects and such freedom from limi- 
tation cannot be predicated of the saguna Brahman. | 
Brahmaétmanaé samsthitih means being free from connection with 
all imagined limitations and remaining in one’s true state of full- 
ness as ever pure, intelligent, free and non-different from one’s inner 
self. This is called kaivalyam. This is ‘being alone’, free from 
every taint or upadhi. This is liberation. This cannot be secured 
except by merit (punya) acquired by good deeds done in hundreds 
of crores of lives. a a 
3, 4, 5, 6, 7. 
eat AAA ATT TATTTLTTA bo 
masa TyACA AIYSIAAT: U3 Ut 
oem wifad TEA FH, 
aati Gea orfrarcarty | 
aearnara $F add Aeet:, 
waar es FrhagTRETETE Thal 
OR wt sated Asteat weg cary ute 
qi aren 24 sea aah dhe WKN 
qerg meat aq sar Fag wathor waeq act: bo 
arereaatad fant faafer: a facafe wqrreratst . Wg 
arqeeaea atenfiet fretaed aaa fig spf: | 
| watfar erie ae: Hee Fe Aa Wo 
durlabham trayam evaitat daivanugrahahetukam | 
manusyatvam mumuksutvam mahdpurugasamsrayah 11 
labdhva kathamcit narajanma durlabharn | 
tatraépi pumstvam srutipdradarsanam 1 
yassvatmamuktyai na yateta midhadhih 
sa dtmaha svam vinihantyasadgrahat \\ 
_VIVEKACUDAMANI 13 
itah konvasti midhatma yastu svarthe pramadyati | — 
 durlabhamn mainusan deham préipya tatrapi paurusam 11 
 pathantu Ssadstrani yajantu devin 
kurvantu karmani bhajantu devatah | 
adtmaikyabodhena vind vimuktih 
na siddhyati branmasatantare’pi 
-— 7 = 
amrtatvasya nasasti vittenetyeva hi Srutih | . 
braviti karmano mukteh ahetuivam sphutam yatah 1| 
| r 
These three are difficult to obtain: to be born as a 
man, to have the longing for release and the association with 
great souls. They are the results of divine grace. 
eer ) 4 2 7 
He who, having somehow obtained this rare human 
birth, and more than that, birth as.a male and with correct 
knowledge of gruti does not strive for liberation is a fool who 
kills his own soul. He kills himself by involvement in what 
is not real. bad em 
Who is a greater fool than this, who, having obtained | 
__ birth as a human ener and that as a male, is ee of his — 
-. own interests? a 
Let one read the Sastras, ‘sacrifice to the gods, perform me 
karmas or meditate on the divinities; liberation will not. arise |. 
even after hundreds of brahmakalpas without knowledge 
of the unity: of 4tman. : 
The éruti declares that there is no hope of immortality _ 
merely by worldly goods. Hence, it is clear that karma ¢ can- 
not be the cause of liberation. | _s 
Because birth as a male human being can be secured only, as a 
result of merit earned through many lives in the past, because a man 
should not be unconcerned about his own spiritual welfare, because 
liberation is of the nature of absolute bliss in which there is complete 
negation of all sorrow, because such liberation does not arise by 
‘mere study of the karmakanda portion of the Vedas and acting in 
14 VIVEKACOUDAMANI 
accordance with it and because Sruti itself conveys this truth by. say- 
ing ‘amrtatvasya nasiti vittena’ (Brh.), that immortality cannot be 
secured by worldly goods and as such karmas which produce them 
are discountenanced for the purpose of liberation, therefore, let the 
wise men strive truly and well for liberation. | 3 
8 
wat faaa sada fasta araeaarercgarage: wy 
art Agrd water ate aatafaccreearigetet wc 
ato vimuktyai prayateta vidvan 
samnyastabahydrthasukhasprhassan | 
santam mahantam samupetya desikam 
tenopadistarthasamahitatmaé | | 
Therefore, let a wise man strive earnestly for liberation 
giving up all desire for pleasures coming from external ob- 
jects. He must humbly approach a guru who, by his reali-. 
Sation, is to be equated with the sat and possesses super- 
lative virtues, and concentrate his mind on the significance of 
his teaching. | = 
_ By the word vidvan in the gloka is indicated the wise man who 
knows to discriminate between the eternal and the transient. The 
Gita says ye hi samsparsaja bhogad duhkhayonaya eva te | adyanta- 
vantah kaunteya na tesu ramate budhahi; “The. joys that come 
from sense-contact make for sorrow only.5 They have a beginning 
and an end. A wise man does not delight in them.” By this the 
Gita clearly indicates the meaning of the word ‘vidvan’ by the use 
Jeads to sorrow. Further, sense-pleasures are t in. ominnine Wut load: ‘gain at the ond. , Pp. : pleasent in the beginning, but lead to 
VIVEKACODAMANI 15 
world and of other worlds. Thereby it is emphasised that one should 
cultivate a mind which has been rendered completely pure by the 
performance, without attachment, of karmas prescribed. in the srutis 
and the smrtis. | | 
By the use of the word san (after ‘sukhasprha’ in the first line), 
Sri Bhagavatpada shows that in respect of a fool who is engrossed 
in sense objects, it is difficult to predicate that he even exists as a 
man.® | . | 
The éruti says: dcéryavan puruso veda, one obtains knowledg 
by instruction by a guru; dcarydddhaiva vidya vidité sddhistham 
prapayati: (Ch.) “knowledge obtained from a teacher has the greatest 
efficiency”. So, the lone reshlual reality of the atman which is 
super-sensuous cannot be understood except through a guru. Hence 
the need as stated before to approach.a mahapurusa, a great realised 
soul. : 
That (or he) which (or who) exists (for ever) is spoken of as 
‘san. That (or he) is referred to as santam in the expression santam 
mahantam. asti brahmeti cedveda santamenam tato viduh: (Ch.) 
“Tf a person knows that Brahman exists (ie., has realised the exist- 
ence of Brahman), he is called a san.” From the Sruti texts: sadeva 
somya idamagra Gsit: (Ch.) “Existence alone, dear one, was in the 
beginning”; yo vai bhima tadamrtam ato’nyadartam: (Taitt.) “What 
is (superlatively) big is immortal, what is otherwise is mortal”; 
satya jndnamanantam brahma: (Taitt.) ‘Brahman is of the nature 
of satyam, jfianam and anantam”; and from the Gita text: ndsato 
vidyate bhavah nibhavo vidyate satah | ubhayorapi drsto’ntastvana- 
yostattvadarsibhih 11 ‘Of the non-real there is no being; of the real 
there is no non-being; of both this is the truth seen by those who 
have realised it”, it is clear that being without the possibility of be- 
ing sublated in all the three periods of time can be stated only of 
Brahman. The éruti declares) brahmavid brahmaiva bheavoti: 
(Pragna) “the knower of Brahman is Brahman Itself, i.e., the knower® 
of Brahman (brahmavit) is non-different from Brahman.” The 
desika (the teacher of spiritual knowledge) being Brahmavit is there- 
fore non-different from Brahman, Like Brahman, the Brahmavit 
also-is spoken of as sat. In the second half of the Sloka Sri Bhaga- 
vatpada speaks of approaching such a brahmavit, i.e., who is sat (santam). Thereby is indicated the condition of a mind firmly esta- 
6 Not to speak of his qualification for Brahman. realisation. Vide ‘asanneva se 
bhavati asad brahmeti. veda cet’: “He himself becomes non-existent who thinks 
that Brahman does not exist’’. ; 
| 6a One who has realisational knowledzge of Brahman. 
16 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
_ blished in Brahman, completely withdrawn from whatever is non- 
&tman (andtman) and non-sat (asat). 
With reference to the prescription to seek a guru for Brahma- 
vidya, the Sruti declares: tadvijfianartham sa gurumevabhigacchet 
Samitpinih Ssrotriyam brahmanistham: (Katha) “For knowing it 
(Brahman), with due humility with the sacrificial twig in the hand, 
one should approach a guru who is well-versed in gruti and who has 
realised Brahman.” ananyaprokte gatiratra nasti aniyén hyatarkyam 
anupramanpat, (Katha) “As the ultimate Reality is infinitely subtle, 
not to be known by argument, and of infinitesimal dimension, when 
it is declared by one who has realised that there is nought beside it, 
then all ajiiina will vanish; he has nothing else to know and the 
flow of samsara will stop.” It is only a guru of this kind who can 
have knowledge. of the pure atman free from the blemishes of doubt 
etc. This is as it should be: for, in the world, the road to a place 
has to be learnt from one who knows it. Even if one tries to dis- 
cover it oneself unaided, doubt about it has to be dispelled only by 
reference to another who knows it already. In this matter, we 
have the authority of the dialogue between Suka and J anaka. In 
the Yoga Véasistha it is said that even though Suka had gained 
knowledge of whatever was to be known as a result of the merit 
which accrued to him from good actions done in previous births, and 
though he was well taught by his own father, Vyasa, his mind got 
firmly anchored in Brahman only after he listened to the words of 
the Videha King Janaka who was a. supremely realised soul. Even 
so, as the guru is non-different from Brahman which is of the nature 
of sat, he too is of the nature of sat. _ | 
As the guru is sat, he is spoken of in the next word as mahdan. 
Mahat here means not divided or confined within limits as a result 
of the discrimination of the five sheaths; The guru has realised that 
he (i.e., his dtman) is beyond the limitations of the five sheaths of 
which he is constituted. So, he is aparicchinna, undelimited, i.e., he 
is beyond limitations, a mahan. 
Or, the word mahan may be understood as referring to the guru 
who possesses all the virtues spoken of in Sastra. For, it will be 
_ Said infra: grotriyah, avrjinah, akémahatah, yo brahmaviduttamah , 
ahetukadaydsindhuh bandhuraénamatéth satam \ brahmanyuparatas- 
Santo nirindhana ivanalah 1: “The guru is well-versed in gruti, he is 
without blemish, is unaffected by desires; he is one who has realised 
Brahman; he is eminent and bestows his grace without the stimulus 
of any particular reason: he is the refuge of the good who make obei- 
VIVEKACUDAMANIL | 17. 
sance to him. Like a fire smouldering without fuel, he is self-sub- 
sistent finding his rest in Brahman. ” These are the virtues Pet are 
referred to here. , 
A desika is so called as he gives instruction oe aie to his dis- 
ciples: Sisyebhyo ji jranam digati iti desikah. 
tam samupetya: approaching him (such a guru) according to = 
tenopadistarthasamahitatma: with a mind which has well under- 
Stood. the nature of Brahman signified by the upadega of the guru 
and also the means of realising it. dtmaé here means antahkaranam, 
the internal organ. _— ee . * 
| vimuktyai prayateta: let him strive for liberation. As the en- 
deavour for liberation will not arise without the yearning for it, by 
this is implied mumuksutva, the desire for mukti.’ | 
_ ‘Sri Bhagavatpada says: upadistarthasamahitatma which means 
one whose mind is deeply concentrated in the meaning of the upa- 
deSa. Such a state of mind cannot arise without renouncing every 
_ kind of karma. Therefore the purport of this sloka is that a wise 
man who has renounced all pleasures and desire for them should, 
after giving up all karmas, meekly approach a guru who is firmly 
established in Brahman, and reflect on Brahman without intermis- 
sion. All this leads to the proposition that only a sarnnyadsin who 
has renounced everything and is a mumuksu, is competent for Brah- 
mavicira.® | 
SANTA yest meu 
uddharedatmanatmanarn magnam samsadravaridhay -; - 
yogaridhatvamidsdaya samyagdarsananisthaya in 
By. attaining toas tate of yogaridha by firm 
knowledge of Brahman, let one raise one’s impure. 
mind steeped in the ocean of sarnsara, by one’s pure mind. 
The purport conveyed in brief above i is elaborated by Sri Bhaga- 
vatpada in the following seven glokas. The: striving for liberation 
7 This is tivra-mumukgutve as will be explained later. 
® Such a sarhnyasa is called vividisd-samnyisa, as distinct from vidvat-sarnnyisa 
which is a sarhnyadsa or absolute renunciation characteristic of aparoksa andbhava 
or. intuitive realisation of the atman. 
VE.——3 
18 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
has for its final step samyagdarsana or right understanding of the 
nature of Brahman. By this $loka, it-is said that such samyagdar- 
Sananistha is the direct means to moksa and that for one being a 
yogaridha (to be explained presently) what is synonymous with it, 
namely, absolute detachment or vairagya is the chief means for such 
a nistha. Explaining the nature of one who may be said to be a 
-yogaridha, the Lord says in the Gita: yadahi nendriyarthesu na 
| karmasvanusaj jate | sarvasankalpasamnyadsi yogaridhastadocyate ; 
“One is said to be a yogariidha when one is not attracted by objects 
of senses and is not attached to actions (to secure them).” From this 
it follows that samyagdargananistha alone which is preceded: by sup- 
reme detachment is the means to salvage a person from the ocean of 
samsara. . 
features. The waves in this ocean are five i.e., klega (misery), 
avidyad (nescience), asmita (confounding the non-atman with the 
&tman), rdéga, (attachment) and abhinivesa (the fear of death even 
among the learned—vidusopi maranabhitih); delusion is the whirl- 
pool in that ocean: wife, friends, wealth and kinsmen are the aquatic 
monsters in it; anger is the fierce heat in its depth (badabagni): 
lust is the net in which one is caught. To the same effect Sri Bhaga- 
vatpada says in his Laksminrsimhastotra: “O Lord! Extend to me 
Thy helping hand to rescue me from the vast ocean of sarnsdra beset 
with the all-devouring monster of time, and from my being lost in 
the mounting waves of passions.” | 
Accordingly, sarnséra is compared to an ocean. It is the em- 
bodiment of avidya and its effects, and it cannot be crossed without 
the aid of samyagjfana (perfect wisdom): A person who thinks of 
his body which is non-Atman as the 4tman cannot know that when 
the body is born or dies, these, birth and death, which relate to 
it do not pertain to the a4tman, that hunger and thirst are features 
only of the prana (breath), that joy and sorrow relate to the antah- 
karana (the inner mental organ) and that these do not affect the 
atman. Thus nescience (avidya) confounding the atman with the 
non-atman, desire and aversion, attachment, etc., display themselves 
in a successive series. Hence the comparison of klega, etc. with 
waves in the ocean. Delusion itself is the great whirlpool which 
one is sucked into. Avarta is the idea of a thing in what is not that 
(atasmin tadbuddhih). 3 
2 On account of the operation of beginningless avidya, a person 
speaks of himself as aja (ignorant), karté (doer) and manusya 
VIVEKACUDAMANI | 19 
(man). The atman is unattached (asatga) and of the form of ex- 
istence, intelligence and bliss (saccidénandaripa). By non-realisa- 
tion of its true nature, it is mistaken as the karana (causal), siksma 
(subtle), and sthila (gross) bodies. Hence, the delusion as ajna, 
karta, and manusya. Such condition itself is being immersed in the - 
ocean of sarnsara. ? | | 
It is to be noted that one has no awareness of sarnsara in deep 
dreamless sleep (susupti) even though susupti is characterised by 
ajnana. The reason for this is that in deep sleep though there is 
- ajiana, the mind (manas) is not operative. The cause of sarnsara 
is to be traced to the combination of ajfiana and the mind. For it 
is said: “Mind alone is the cause for the bondage and the liberation 
of men. Attachment to objects of sense through the mind makes 
for bondage, while withdrawal from them leads to liberation.” 
mana eva manusydnim karanam bandhamoksayoh ) 
bandhaya visayasaktam muktyai nirvisayam smrtam 11 
—Manu. 
Hence, the attachment of an sndiserininating mind to the body 
itself is immersion of the aAtman (here, mind) in the ocean of sarh- 
sara. When it is cleansed and perfected by the processes of listen- 
ing (Sravana), reflection (manana), etc., then, it attains its true 
state devoid of delusion. This means that the non-discriminating 
- (deluded) mind must be raised up (salvaged) or drawn away from 
whatever is non-dtman, by the mind which has acquired discrimina- 
tion from the study of the Sastras. Even thus, the pee of salvag- 
ing (uddharana) is only metaphorical. It is an ‘as if’. For, the 
aétman is in reality always non-attached. But, by its habit of look- 
ing outward, it appears to be attached even as a crystal appears to be 
red by its proximity to a red object. When the red object which 
is the limiting adjunct (upadhi) is removed, the crystal is seen to 
be white as ever. Similarly, in respect of the atman, when it is 
turned inward freed from its connection with whatever is non- 
| &tman, ‘the Atman remains in its isolation and is said to be salvaged 
-(uddhrta). The sequence is that one should raise (salvage) the 
atman immersed in the ocean of sarnsara after attaining ysemanee 
by the atman established in samyagdarsana. 
| To clearly explain the condition of being a yogaridha, 611 Bhaga- 
vatpada deals in the next Sloka with the means to attain the state of 
samyagdarsananhistha namely Sravana, manana and nididhydsana 
which must be practised after one has adopted the sarnnyasa-asrama. 
20 .VIVEKACODAMANI 
10 
GAA TARA wreurafengeera 
axa ofergutz: arerreata safeaa: 11 qo tt 
samnyasya sarvakarmani bhavabandhavimuktaye | 
yatyatam panditairdhiraih adtmabhydsa upasthitath 11 
For release from the bonds of samsara, after having re- 
nounced all karmas, let the wise brave ones strive with un- 
ceasing cultivation of the knowledge of their atman. | 
sarvakarmani savmnyasya means completely giving up all karmas 
mentioned in the karmakanda of the Vedas. (That is, the desire for 
the fruits of karma and even the karma itself should be given up. ) 
bhavabandhavimuktaye: to be firmly established in samyag- 
darsana which is cause (means) for the disentanglement from 
Samsara. 
panditaih: by those who have acquired paroksajfiana i.e., 
knowledge from sacred books and from a teacher about the nature 
of the a4tman. d 
_ dhiraih: by those whose buddhi is under control. Vide the Sruti: 
paradnct khani vyatrnat svayambhuh tasmat pardn pasyati ngnta- 
ratman ; kascit dhirah pratyogdtmanamaiksat dvrttacaksuramrtat- 
vamicchan }) (Katha): “Brahma created the sense organs so as to 
go-out. Hence, a man sees only outward without turning his eyes 
inward to the antaratman. A rare dhira, desiring immortality, turn- 
ing his eyes inward, saw the atman, in the inmost recess of himself.” 
A person is called a “dhirah” because he controls his “dhth” (the 
buddhi). In the midst of the assemblage of the sthila and the 
suksma éariras,.when one is said to control the buddhi which is pri- 
‘mary, the control of the other sense-organs is self-evident. 
By this is.implied that one must be endowed with anti (mind 
control) and other virtues: (daénti, sense-control; uparati, detach- 
ment; titikesd, enduring of opposites without extraneous dids; and 
éraddha, faith). Hence, in respect of atmabhyasa or practice of. 
mind-control, Sri Vidyaranya Svimin has enumerated the following 
as the means:-taccintanam tatkathanam anyonyam tatprabedhanam | 
etadekaparatvam ca brahmabhydsam vidur budhah \; (Paticadasi): 
Always) thinking about it, speaking about it, conveying it to each 
other, being intent on it only are said by the wise to be the marks of 
Brahmabhyésa. This means that without involvement in any other 
activity, the words of the Upanisads should be carefully listened to 
VIVEKACUPAMANI es 
when taught by.a competent teacher, their meaning should be medi-_ 
tated on, the same should be expounded to others followed by a pro- 
cess of mutual enlightenment. Ideas of a contrary nature should 
not cloud the understanding and there must be a continuous flow of 
accordant ideas. Such a mental process is called by the wise 
nididhyadsana. One must strive with concentration by an earnest 
adoption of this process. By such sarvasankalpa-sarnnyasa, the 
giving up of all stimuli to every kind of action, yogarudhatva, which 
is synonymous with supreme and absolute detachment, is achieved by 
a person. | | 
11 
(From the foregoing it will be seen that for securing yogaru- 
dhatva, it is prescribed that all karmas, even nitya (obligatory) and 
naimittika (occasional) karmas prescribed in the karmakanda por- 
tion of the Vedas, not to speak of kamya (optional) karmas should 
be given up.) ea oO 
It may be objected: The Srutis command: 
yavajjivam agnihotram juhuyat; 
yavajjivam darsapirnamasabhyam yajeta; 
aharahassandhyam upiasita; (Taitt. ) 7 
kurvanneveha karmani jijiviset Satam samih: (184. 
“One should perform the agnihotra sacrifice as long as one is 
alive. _ ees = 
One should perform the darga and purnamisa sacrifices all 
through life. ee 7 
_ Every day the sandhya worship should be done.” tk 
“In this life ever doing karmas one must desire to live a hundred 
years.” — i a pe deg | | ut 
The sruti prescribes that karmas should be done all through life. 
Then, will not giving up all karmas (sarvakarma-samnyadsa) be a 
transgression of the command of the srutis? | | 
We reply: No; for, these commands are directed only to a per- 
son of impure mind, i.e., to a person who has not cultivated complete 
' detachment. A mantra of the [gavasyopanisad says: evam tvdyt 
nanyatheto’sti no karma lipyate nare. “For one who thinks of him- 
self as a mere man (without the awareness of the atman), there is 
no other go except to do the karmas. The performance by ‘you of 
the prescribed karmas will not taint you. No sin will attach to you. 
(But, for one in your position, because you are not a jnani, their 
non-performance will be a sin.)” | = ze 4 
22 | VIVEKACUDAMANI 
Again, it is said: na karmandaé na prajayéd dhanena tydgenaike 
amrtatvamdnasuh; samnydsayogadyatayassuddhasattvah | “Those rare 
spirits attained immortality, not by karmas, not by progeny, not by 
_ gifts, but these holy ones of pure nature did so by the force of their 
samnyasa.” 
plava hyete adrdha yajnaripa scelidictidiatehisinii yesu karma }| 
etacchreyo ye’bhinandanti midha jaramrtyum te punarevapi yanti 1| 
“Karmas relating to sacrifices with eighteen horses are inferior. 
They are weak boats. Those who consider them superior are entang- 
led in old age and death.” (Mundaka) _ 
kimartha vayamadhyesyamahe, kimartha vayam yaksyaémahe: 
“For what purpose need we learn the Vedas; for what purpose need 
we do sacrifices?” 
By these Srutis karmasarnnyasa, giving up of all kinds of karma, 
is prescribed and their performance is spoken of with contempt. 
One Ssruti declares: 
tametam vedénuvacanena brahmand vividisanti yajrena ddnena 
tapasd dnasakena (Brh.): “Brahmanas seek to know it by the dec- 
larations of the Vedas, by sacrifices, gifts and penance which is not 
_self-torturing, and yoginah karma kurvanti sangam tyaktva atma- 
Suddhaye (B. G.): Giving up all attachment, yogirs perform karmas 
for puriication of the mind” These Sruti and smrti texts indicate that 
these means are only vividisa sadhanas; they terminate with en- 
abling one to acquire purity of mind which is necessary to reflect on 
gruti and smrti texts. They are not life-long prescriptions. That 
being so, the texts like yadahareva virajet tedahareva pravrajet: 
“One should become a sarmnyasin the moment one gets vairagya”, 
which prescribe the adoption of samny4asa are in place here and they 
discountenance the performance of karmas. 
‘The same meaning is conveyed by the Brahma Sutras: “ata eva 
agnindhanddyanapeksa”: ‘For this very reason there is no need of 
the lighting of the fire and so on’, and “sarvapeksd ca yajnadisrute- 
rasvavat”: “And there is need of all (works) on account of the 
scriptural statement of sacrifices and the like, as in the case of the 
horse.” 
9 These Sitras are IIL. i iv.25 and 26. The context is the place of rituals in rela- 
tion to jana. “ata eva’’: ‘for that very reason’ stated in IIl.iv.1 which declared 
that knowledge: is the cause of liberation, the rituals prescribed’ for the other orders 
of life are not required for the samnyasin. But, while knowledge alone leads to 
liberation, yet, rituals are needed to produce purity of mind (cittasuddhi) which 
is a condition of the emergence of knowledge. “As in the case of the horse” means 
the horse is not employed for drawing a plough, but a chariot. So the rituals are 
neried not for the result of knownledge, but for the emergence of knowledge itself. 
VIVEKACUDAMANI | 23 
By the next sloka, it is stated that karmas do not secure the pre- 
eminent objective of moksa (liberation), that through the purifica- 
tion of the citta (mind), it is the external means to jnana. © : 
il 
farted Sa TH A T TET | 
acqtatataartn a fafa waatiefa: 199 Ut 
cittasya guddhaye karma na tu vastipalabdhaye | 
vastusiddhirvicarena na kimcit karmakotibhih 11 
Karma is intended for purification of the mind, not for 
understanding the nature of an object. Knowledge can be 
obtained only by reflection; not even a little bit of it can 
be known by performing even a crore of karmas. 
The meaning of this is clear.’ 
12 | 
That vicara or proper enquiry is the means to know a thing as it 
really is, is explained by an example. : | | 
aratiaara: fagt CSHATATTATTT 
— wreanlfaa-agrad-waeataartarat gq 
samyagvicaratah siddha rajjutattvavadharana | | 
bhrantyoditamahasarpa-bhavaduhkhavinasini |t 
By proper reasoning the conviction about the rea- 
lity of the rope is gained. This puts an end to the great .. 
misery of sarns’ra caused by the serpent which arose by ._ 
- delusion. : | | tee 
‘Tt is well known that a man filled with fear due to his thinking 
that the rope which he saw in the twilight was a serpent, gets rid 
of the fear and the trembling when he understands the truth about 
the object by proper examination by the light of a lamp. The ser-— 
pent that arose in the rope due to delusion, the grief (and fear) 
caused by such misapprehension—both these are destroyed by pro- 
per examination. That is called rajjutattvdvadhrtih, the conviction 
of the truth about the rope. In the same way samyagvicara is ap- 
plied to the destruction of the grief of repeated birth and death 
which is sarnsara produced by delusion. Such samyagvicara has for 
10 This.gloka is intended to convey that karmas do not possess the capacity. to | 
lead to the supreme objective of liberation and that, as means to purification of 
mind, they are external auxiliaries. | : ee, ee 
Mo VIVEKACUDAMANI 
jts effect the conviction about the truth of the atman which is the 
nature of the direct realisation of Brahman. Thus the analogy of 
the rope-serpent delusion is fulfilled in every respect. 
13 
The sloka is intended to convey that ‘the : means to obtain con- 
- vietion of truth can arise only by listening to the words of a bene- 
ficent person (apta) and then by self-inquiry based on that and not. 
by any other action. 
waeq farraat eset faarier facta: | 
eSATA ATT TTOTTATAT AT AT 3 
arthasya niscayo drsto vicdrena hitoktitah | 
na snanena na danena préndyaémasatena vd. Il 
The conviction of the truth is seen to arise only from 
inquiry and the trustworthy upadeéa, not by bath or gift or 
by hundreds of breathing exercises (breath-control). 
A man is saber to self-delusion due to the defect of ajiana. 
The means of rescue from such delusion by the words of a bene- 
ficent person are not available to him. Hence, he is subject to the 
evils of fear and trembling. In this condition, he is not in a fit state 
of mind to make an inquiry on his own. Hence, to start him on it, 
_ the words of a beneficent person are the means. Being beneficient 
(hitatva) indicates the utterance of the correct significance (yatar-— 
tha-vaktrtvam*. What is conveyed by this is this: Without mak- 
ing an inquiry in accord with the words of a beneficent person 
(hitokti), if a deluded person performs baths, makes gifts and does 
hundreds of, pranayamas, there will not be any direct perception 
which alone can remove the delusion. How then will the delusion 
which leads to.a number of undesirable effects ever disappear? : 
Vicara is a ‘mental operation which conduces to the conviction 
of the actual nature of an object. Therefore, it is inquiry arising 
out of listening to the words of a beneficent person which will lead 
to right understanding in respect of the object of delusion. That be- 
ing so, the teaching of Sri Bhagavatpada here is this in this context: 
Having inquired about the a4tman following the words of the sruti 
‘and the upadeSa of the guru, getting direct perception of its true 
nature, one should disentangle the 4tman from Samsara which is the 
non-atman which has been superimposed on it. 
VIVEKACUDAMANI _ 25 
14 
The effects of karmas will accrue only to one who is proficient 
in (who is qualified for) the performance of those specific karmas. 
They will not accrue to a person who is not thus proficient (quali- 
fied). Therefore the external features of deSa and kala in respect 
of karma are only auxiliaries to it. ‘To convey that internal (men- 
tal) qualification alone will be fruitful in this regard, Sri Bhagavat- 
péda says: 
afrmformme cofafefaied: 1 
SAAT SMHS: AKACAT AKHTTT: UA 
adhikarinamésaste phalasiddhirvisesatah | 
upayad degakaladyah santyasygm sahokarinah 11 
The fruitfulness (of such vicdra) specially depends on a 
qualified person: the means of place and time are only 
auxiliaries. 
Those who maintain that place and time are the chief deter- 
minants of the fruitfulness of a karma argue as follows: The effects 
of karma are invisible. The Vedas say: ‘yadahavaniye juhoti’, 
‘asvasya pade juhoti’, ‘pracinapravane vaisvadevena yajeta’, ‘siyam 
juhoti’, ‘pratarjuhoti’, ‘vasante vasante jyotisi yajeta’, ‘vasante 
brahmano’gninidadhita’: ‘One makes an offering in ahavaniya fire’, 
‘one makes homa at the foot of a horse’, ‘one shall make a vaisva- 
deva sacrifice at the inclination of east to west’, ‘one makes an offer- 
ing in the evening’, ‘one makes an offering in tne morning’, ‘one 
makes a jyotistoma sacrifice in every spring season’, ‘the Brahmana 
_ takes up the sacrificial fire in the spring’. In conformity with these 
Sastraic texts, it must be accepted that place and time are BBRIEDED: 
sable instruments of a (vaidika) karma. 
The following texts appear to be significant in eae of jnana 
also. 
‘yathddarge tathatmani yathad svapne tathaé pitrloke ; yathapsu 
pariva dadrge tatha gandharvaloke chaiyadtapayoriva brahmaloke’ ,| 
(Katha); ‘iha cedavedidatha satyamasti na cedihévedit mahati 
vinastih’ (Kena). . 
Speaking of the clarity with which atmajfna can be obtained, 
the Sruti says that A4tmajiana acquired in this world will be as clear 
as a reflection in a mirror, that. acquired in the pitrloka will be as 
elusive as a dream experience, that acquired in gandharvaloka will 
26 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
be as agitated as reflection in water, and that acquired in brahma- 
loka will be as distinct as the difference between sunshine and 
shadow. The other éruti says: tha cedavedi datha satyamasti na 
cedihdvedit mahati vinastih. “If one knows here, that makes for 
the realisation of the truth; if he does not know here, great is the 
loss”. Hence the richness and fullness of jfiana is affirmed only in > 
respect of what is acquired in the world of men and in Brahmaloka. 
Similarly, the Ssruti further says: rnatrayam apdkrtya mano 
mokse nivesayet | anapakrtya moksam tu sevamdno vrajatyadhah }1 
(Jabala): ‘One should turn one’s mind to thought of liberation only 
after having discharged the three debts (to pitrs or ancestors by 
raising progeny; to rsis or the sages by study of the Vedas and to 
the devas or gcds by making sacrifices). If one turns to liberation 
without doing so, one will fall down.’ 
Another éruti says: brahmacaryam samdpya grhi bhavet 
grhadvani bhitva pravrajet (Jabala): “After finishing the brahma- 
caryagrama, one should become a grhastha. From grhasthasrama 
cne should go to vanaprastha. Then, one should renounce the world 
(i.e., become a samnyasin).’”’ These srutis prescribe a time even for 
samnyasa which is the internal means to brahmajiiana (Thus the im- 
portance of place and time is established by the objector). 
To this, we reply: In respect of the efficacy of place, namely, 
brahmaloka for getting brahmajfiana, we see from the Chandogyo- 
panisad story that the raksasa king Virocana went to Brahmaloka 
for brahmajfiana and was taught by the best of teachers, Brahma 
Himself. Yet, he did not realise the 4tman as he was of impure 
mind. That shows that the qualification of the person, not the place 
of instruction, is the efficient means to 4tmajnana. 
Adverting to the need to go successively through the first three 
asramas to the final one of sarnnyasa, we quote the following text. 
‘samsarameva nisséram adrstva saradidrksaya | pravrajantyakrtod- 
vahih param vairdgyamasritah 11’ “Impelled by the desire to per- 
ceive the essence (the inmost truth), seeing that samsara is puerile, 
those who have not married acquire supreme renunciation (i.e. », they | 
become samnyasins from the brahmacaryasrama). | 
Moreover, in continuation of the text: brahmacaryam samapya 
grhi bhavet etc. it is said: Yyadivetaratha brahmacaryadeva prav- 
rajet grhddvaé vanadva yadahareva virajet tadahareva pravrajet: 
(Jabala) “Otherwise, one may renounce (become a samnyéasin) 
from brahmacarya or garhasthya or vanaprasthya. One should re- 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 27 
nounce the moment one attains detachment.” Therefore, that place 
and time are only auxiliaries is-declared because these are not pre- 
scribed for one who has acquired the fourfold qualification begin- 
ning with vairagya (for brahmajfiana) which will be explained later. 
Hence it is that it was stated in an earlier Sloka: vidvan 
samnnyasta-bihydrtha-sukhasprhassan. Viveka and vairagya have 
been laid down as the causes for the steadiness of mind for culti- 
vating samyagdarSana-nistha leading to realisation of Brahman, this 
samyagdarsgana being preceded by approaching a guru for his upa- 
dega on the means to liberation and meditating on it. Such steadi- 
ness of mind will not arise in the absence of the (mental) qualities 
of ama, dama, uparati, titiks& ‘and éraddha. When, therefore, there 
is no yearning for liberation, the effort for it too will not arise. So, 
very. properly in the gloka beginning with ato vimuktyai, indication | 
was given that the six qualifications, viveka, vairagya, Sama, etc.. 
are indispensable for the desire to obtain Brahmajnana to arise. 
Similarly, in accordance with the Srutis, ‘tarati Sokamétmavit’ 
(Chandogya) “The knower of the atman gets over all grief”, and 
‘tadvijndnartham sa gurumevabhigacchet’ (Mundaka): “For know- 
ing it let one approach a guru”; right knowledge which will destroy 
the bonds signified by Soka (grief) cannot arise by any other 
means than inquiry into the meaning of the upadesa of the guru 
who has realised Brahman (i.e., a sadguru). | 
asyam in santyasydm has the meaning of siddhau ie, they 
(place and time) function only as auxiliaries when adhikara is 
acquired. 
15 
sat frat: adem: formrerereraeat: | 
TATA qatar Te ia itil neque ar 
oe ot om 
hor dayasindhurn gururh brahmaviduttamam 1) 
Therefore earnest inquiry should be done by him who 
wishes to know the nature of the 4tman approaching in due 
form the guru who is eminent among those who know 
Brahman and who is an ocean of compassion.. 
jijiasoh means by one who wishes to know sorta and com- 
pletely the nature of the 4tman. atah: as inquiry into the nature _ 
of the 4tman has to be made and as such inquiry gives absolute con- 
28 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
viction about what will remove all evil effects (of ajnana). What 
has to be done in this behalf is stated subsequently in this gloka. The guru is called dayasindhu,.an ocean of compassion; because, by reason of himself having achieved his objective (of Brahmavidya), he has nothing to gain. Yet, like an ocean filled with water, he is 
filled with compassion that others should not be subject to the pains 
(of sarhséra), He is a reservoir of compassion as the ocean is of waters. | | 
The etymological derivation of the word guru is in the follow- 
ing Sloka in the Gurugité: gusabdastvandhakirassyat rugabdastan- 
nirodhakah | andhakaranirodhitvat gururityabhidhiyate 1). The root 
gu stands for darkness; ru for its removal. The removal of the 
darkness of ajfiana in the heart is indicated by the word guru.l! 
Ajiiana is compared to darkness because even as physical dark- 
ness covering the world is an obstacle to its clear perception, so 
too ajnana covers the atman and prevents clear understanding of its 
nature. Hence the words tamas etc. and used synonymously with 
ajiana, in tamo hydsit, tamasd gilhamagre: (R. V.) ‘verily dark- 
ness was’; ‘at first it was-concealed by darkness’, 
Where these two qualities exist in a person (i.e., being a brah- 
mavit and daydsindhu), he is called brahmaviduttama. Such per- 
sons know (have realised) Brahman; hence they are called brahma- 
vidah. The best among them is uttama, i.e., one who is a sthita- 
prajna, the man of steadfast wisdom. The érutis relating to this have 
been given earlier. . 
Samadsédya gurum: samasadana means duly approaching him as 
prescribed in the text: tamaradhya gurum bhaktyé prahvah pras- 
rayasevanaih: (infra) “having shown reverence to him with devo- 
tion, humility and single-minded service”. Vide also the Gitd in- 
junction: tadviddhi pranipatena pariprasnena sevaya: “Know It by 
obeisance (to the guru), by repeated questionings and by service”. 
samdsadanam therefore means so conducting oneself to gain the 
complete and gracious attention of the guru by sitting in front 
of him. | 
The word vimuktyai occurring earlier in dloka 8 has thus been 
explained in these glokas. , | 
I The meanings‘ of gu and ru are again to be traced to the Panini-sitras gu invarane and ru himsane, gu indicates concealment and ru its annulment.. By 
his upadesa the guru annuls the concealment of truth by ajfiana. 
VIVEKACUDAMANI : 29 
16 
Herat veal fags itive 
afireraterfaerrary sara fetagT: 11 9E Ul 
medhévi puruso vidvin uhipohavicaksanah | 
adhikaryatmavidyayam uktalaksanolaksitah 
One who is characterised by the said qualities, who is a 
medhavi* and vidvan* and who is skilled in uha* and 
apoha* is competent to embark on the pursuit of atmavidya. 
* (To be explained in the commentary) | | 
By the expression medhavi etc., Sri Bhagavatpada speaks of the 
person qualified for atmajfana for especial fructification of such 
knowledge. The dictionary says dhirdharanadvatit medhd, “the dhi 
or buddhi which has the capacity to properly retain the meaning of 
what has been heard is called medha.”” One who has medha is 
medhavi. vidvdén means one who has learnt the kavyas, the lexicon 
and grammar. 
uhépohavicakyanah:  (iha is positive reasoning, apoha is nega- 
tive reasoning. Uhapoha is full discussion considering the pros and 
cons. One who is an expert in such discussion is called ihapohavi- 
cakganah.) By this is understood possessing a mind which has. been 
well trained in tarka and mimamsd, The idea is that it is only he 
who has a good grounding in vyakarana, mimams& and tarka that 
can take up the study of Vedanta, i.e, one who has knowledge of 
words, sentences and canons of reasoning: padavakyapramanajnah. 
uktalaksanalaksitah: One characterised by the aforesaid quali- 
ties. The reference is to the qualities enumerated in conjunction 
and separately in the slokas 8 to 15. It means one who is endowed 
with the fourfold sadhanas (qualificational capacities) indicated 
above, namely, viveka, vairagya, the six features of Sama, etc., and 
mumuksutva. 
Such a person is atmavtdyiyam adhikari: he is setionn to 
learn atmavidya. 
YT _ 
faafent farcerea wenfarorenfe: | | 
ya fe sefeaeaakaa wat 1 qo tt 
vivekino viraktasya famadigunasalinah ! 
mumukgoreva hi brahmajijnasiyogyata matd |) 
30 , VIVEKACUDAMANI 
The qualification of the desire to know Brahman accrues 
only to a man of discrimination and detachment, who is 
endowed with the virtues of gama éte,, ane who yearns for 
liberation. 
Summarising the said qualities for their clear. understanding, 
Sri Bhagavatpada says in this loka vivekino viraktasya etc. In 
Sloka 15 it was said: ato vicérah kartavyah jijnasordtmavastunah. It 
is only the jijnasu, he who intensely desires to know and who is 
endowed with the virtues of being a medhavi etc., that can obtain 
the fruit of atmavidya. The question arises as to who is qualified 
to be a jijnasu. The answer is: he who possesses the sédhana-catus- 
taya the four-fold qualifications as indicated by the words of the 
eighth gloka: vidvdn, samnyastabahydartha-sukhasprhassan, upadig- 
fartha-saméhitatma and the word dhirath-in the tenth gloka. 
vivekinah: the nature of viveka etc. will be explained in the 
later Slokas of the text. 
jijnasd, the desire to know Brahman is brahmajijnasa. What is in- 
tended to be brought about by such iccha (desire), is jfana termi- 
nating only with complete comprehension (of Brahman). The fruit 
of the inquiry indicated by jijiadsa is the expansive or unlimited con- 
sciousness reflected (akhandakaravrtti) in the manas, because, even 
before inquiry one has a general (vague) idea of Brahman. If such 
® desired objective is to be secured, in accordance with the’ injunc- 
hich: dadyannévasaram kincit kimadinam managap | 4d suptera 
mrteh kala nayet vedantacinatya it : “One should not yield, all 
through one’s waking moments, even a little to the impulses of 
kama, etc. Till sleep or death overpowers, one should spend one’s 
time in Vedantic thought”, i.e., one should practise Vedantavicara 
at all. times. It. is said: dehatmajnanavajjaanam dehitmajnana- 
badhakam | atmanyeva bhavedyasya sa necchannapi mucyate: | 
(Sankara Bhasya): ‘He who attains in himself the knowledge 
which will annihilate the delusion that his body is his atman and 
endows it with the same conviction as that which in ordinary life 
_ governs his identification of his 4tman with the body, such a person 
is released from bondage even though he does not wish for it.” It 
is only a person who thus engages in Vedantavicara as detailed above oO 8 apa 
ledge. 
_ - yogyata: being qualified. This refers to the desire that stimu- 
lates this kind of inquiry. | : 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 31 
18 
' Yogyatd in the previous Sloka refers to the desire that leads to 
the inquiry of this kind only by one who possesses the four-fold 
qualification, not any other. This meaning conveyed by eva ‘only’ 
‘in $loka 17 is taught clearly by Sri Bhagavatpada by processes of 
anvaya and vyatireka: agreement by presence and agreement in ab- 
sence that possession of the fourfold means (sadhana-catustaya) only 
qualifies for enquiry into Brahman (Brahmavicara). The signi- 
ficance of ‘only’ eva in gloka 17 is brought out by these two forms.of 
reasoning. 
ARTA aa acatfe ataarfa satiate: | 
ag aaa afacet aaa 7 fazeafa 9c u 
sidhananyatra catvari kathitani manisibhih | 
yesu satsveva sannistha yadabhave na siddhyati |; 
‘In this, the wise have spoken of four preliminary re- 
quisites. The experience of the Real is possible only if they 
exist and impossible in their absence. 
[}2 In the world, if, when something sects there is the abhava - 
(non-existence) of something else, that something else cannot be 
the cause of that thing. To put it in another way, when, in the 
bhava of a thing, some other thing exists, the latter cannot be the 
‘cause of the former. When a cloth has come into existence in the 
absence of clay, that clay cannot be the cause of the cloth. Similarly, _ 
‘when ‘there is the absence of cloth and there is clay, that clay can- 
not be the cause of the cloth. The principle underlying this is stated 
in the dictum yatsattve yatsattvam; yadabhave yadabhévah:. What- 
ever exists when something exists and is absent when it is absent— 
that is the cause of that thing. When there is clay, there can be the 
pot. -So, the.clay is the cause of the pot. The threads exist even 
in the absence of the pot; the threads cannot be the cause of the 
pot. . The threads are absent; yet, the pot exists. Then too the 
threads are not the cause of the pot. ae ree: 
Applying this to-viveka etc., and to brahmajijiiasa “(the desire 
to know Brahman), where there is no jijfidsa, there will not be 
viveka etc. There may be other things than viveka. These other 
things will not be jijfiasa. When there are viveka etc., there is brah- 
12 What follows: in the commentary on the cause-effect relation is couched in 
technical nydya language. It is given here in a form understandable by the reader. 
32 : VIVEKACUDAMANI 
_Hence, viveka etc. are the cause of brahmajijfiasa. Therefore, because $6 8 at as 
brahmanistha.] 
manisibhih kathitani: manisitvam, the quality of being a 
manisin means having knowledge of the import of gruti. For, it is 
difficult to understand the significance of the virtues needed for 
an adhikarin without the support of the érutis. Wise persons (mani- 
sinah) of such kind are Badarayana and others. For, by the use of 
the word atha (then) in the sitra athaéto brahmajijiidsa (“then 
therefore the desire to know Brahman’), he it was who indicated 
that the qualification for brahmajijiasa follows the possession of the 
four means known as sadhanacatustaya. This is clearly understood 
in his commentary relating to the third varnaka (discussion) in 
the section on Brahmajijiiasa.!> The following are the éruti texts in 
support of the sadhanacatustaya. The ground of the requirement 
nityanityavastuviveka, the knowledge of the eternality of the A4tman 
and of the transcience of the non-dtman is taught by these érutis. 
yat krtam tadanityam: (Ch.) “Whatever is nroduced is non- 
eternal; tadyatheha karmacito lokah ksiyate evamevamutra punyacito 
lokah kstyate: (Mundaka) “As here on earth the effects of karma 
terminate, so too elsewhere (in the celestial worlds), the effects of 
punya also will decline and end”; yo vai bhiima tadamrtam ato’nya- 
dértam: (Mundaka) “What is big (all-inclusive) is immortal; all else 
is mortal; na jaiyate mriyate va vipascit : “The wise man is not born 
nor does he die.” | 
The. following Srutis indicate the ‘need for vairagya stated in 
ihamutra-phalabhoga-viragah: ‘pariksya lokan karmicitan ‘ brahmano 
nirvedamayat naistyakrtah krtena’ (Mundaka) “Examining the things 
secured by karmas let a brahmana acquire detachment; for what is 
never the effeci of an action cannot be secured by action”: the senten- 
ces. beginning with na va are patyuh kaémaya: (Brh.) “It is not in 
13 There are four points of discussion in respect of the sitra, athato brahma- 
jijiasa, They are as follows: (1) visaydivisaya-sambhavasambhavabhygim pratha- mam varnakam, ie., the discussion relating to the subject matter and the useful- ness of the topic; (2) gatarthagatarthabhyim dvitiyam varnakam, ie., the discussion 
whether Brahman is already known or not from the J aiminiya-mimamsa; (3) adhi- 
_karisambhavasambhavabhyam trtiyam varnakam, i.e, discussion about the avail- 
ability of the adhikarin, the person qualified to study the éastra; and (4) brah- 
manah . prasiddhyaprasiddhibhyam caturtham varnakam, i.e., discussion whether Brahman is generally known or not. : . 
VIVEKACUDAMANI , 33 
consideration of the husband’’, and ending with dtmanastu kaémaya 
sarvam priyam bhavati: “It is for the sake of one’s self that every- 
thing is dear”; the text Santo dadnta uparatastitiksuh saméhitassrad- 
‘dhavitto bhiitvad dtmanyevdtmanam pasyet: (Brh) “Let one see one’s 
atman in one’s own self by being a Santa, danta, uparata, titiksu, sa- 
m&hita and graddhavan”, extols the third requirement of Samadamadi- 
sadhanas which are sixfold. The text né sa punaravartate (Chand.) 
proclaims the eternality of release (moksa) and awakens the desire 
to achieve it. 
kathiténi: are said to be. In the view of the Karmamimamsa- 
kas, the meaning of the Upanisads is said to be mere arthavada, Le., 
of secondary import. Therefore, the impression may arise that the 
Upanisad texts do not have the meaning associated with them. But 
according to sage Vyasa, it is definite that Brahman ought to be 
known and that in respect of that, a person, who has these qualifi- 
cations is the adhikarin. Such knowledge being difficult to obtain, 
Sri Bhagavatpada says: ‘These have been enumerated by those who 
know the Sastra’. Therefore, the Upanisads convey knowledge of 
Brahman which is the Supreme object of human quest, which 
cannot be achieved by other instruments of knowledge and which 
cannot be sublated in any of the three periods of time. The pramana 
for this is to be sought only in the Srutivakyas. So, in accordance 
with the injunctions so’nvestavyah, sa vijijfasitavyah; (Chand). ‘It 
(Brahman) ought to be sought; it ought to be known’, it perfectly 
follows that the qualification for such jijiasa accrues only to one 
who has the qualities mentioned successively in vivekadi (viveka etc). 
19, 192 
Sri Bhagavatpada explains seriatim viveka: etc., mentioned in 
‘vivekino viraktasya’ in Sloka 17. 
arat frentacaacafaan: afore’ | 
 eeraa HTT TTARARTT nage 
marfeaenaata: qqaratata THEA UN 
‘ddau nityanityavastuviv ekah pariganyate | 
ithamutra phalabhogavirdgastadanantaram || 
Samadisatkasampattih mumuksutvamiti sphutam | 
First, discrimination between the everlasting and the- 
transient is mentioned. After that comes detachment from 
the enjoyment of :fruits (of karmas) here (on earth) and 
V.C.—4 
34 | VIVEKACODAMANI 
elsewhere (in Heaven): Then it is clear (that following this 
are) possession of the six virtues commencing with sama, and 
(lastly comes) the desire for release. 
Each of these virtues after viveka follows from its preceding 
one in consecution. What precedes is the ground of what succeeds. 
It is only he who knows, ‘this is eternal; this is transient’ that will 
withdraw his mind from what is transient. Because vairagya cannot 
be secured in the absence of discrimination between the eternal and 
the transient, viveka is said to be the cause of vairagya, 
It is only a person who has vairagya that can acquire Santi 
(mind-control) and danti (sense-control) which arise from controll- 
ing respectively the internal and the external organs. Moreover, 
danti external sense-control] (bahirindriyanirodha) can be effected 
only when there is control of the mind (the antarindriya or antah- 
karana); for, if they have no connection with the mind, the other 
sense organs cannot execute anything. To the question, if upon 
achieving gama, dama is automatically effected, why should it be 
included specifically among sddhanas, it is replied that as stated in 
the Gita: indriyani pramdathini haranti prasabharn manah: “the 
sense-organs going astray forcefully draw the mind”, if the external 
senses are not held in check, mind-control cannot be perfectly 
established. | 
samnydsa signified by uparati (withdrawal) will mark only him 
who has acquired mastery over his internal and external organs. — 
Such a sarnnyasin alone can have titiksa which is the ability to 
endure without concern the dualities like cold and heat. As his 
mind will not be distracted by anything outside of him, he alone 
can be said to have samadhi or concentration which is characterised 
by unswerving establishment in the thought of Brahman. In one 
thus qualified alone will arise Sraddha or faith in the teaching of 
the guru and of Vedanta that Brahman alone is real and that the 
jagat (the material world) is mithya. Thus it is clear that in the 
series beginning with sama, what succeeds depends on what precedes. 
A person so perfectly qualified as thus will not desire anything 
except release. He does not brook any delay respecting it. He is 
characterised by superlatively earnest desire for liberation 
(tivramumuksutva). Hence the reference to ‘in the beginning nitya- 
nitya etc.’ | | 
As vairagya is mentioned after viveka, in accordance with the 
rule ‘taduditassa hi yo yadanantarah’, what precedes is the cause of 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 35 
what follows’ it is implied that vairagya is the effect of viveka. The 
expression ‘tadanantaram’ is to be understood after each of the 
succeeding requirements upto mumuksutva. After vairagya will 
come sSamédisampattih; after this mumuksutva. | 
20% 
Sri Bhagavatpada elaborates in the next gloka the sadhanas that 
have been mentioned. 
qa aa wafaeacaaeql fataraa: | 
asa frenfteracafade: AAA: 11 Ro 
brahma satyam jaganmithyetyevamripo viniscayah | 
so’yam nitydnityavastuvivekah samudahrtah 41 
The firm understanding that Brahman is reality and that 
the material world (jagat) is mithya is spoken of as discrimi- 
nation between the eternal and the transient (nityanityavas- | 
_ tuviveka). 
| Sri Bhagavatpadda paraphrases nityanityavastuviveka as the 
knewledge that Brahman is satyam and jagat is mithyad. That is 
because, even if one has firm understanding that Brahman is nitya 
and jagat is anitya, absolute and uncompromising vairagya does not 
arise; for even transient pleasures are generally sought. But when 
the jagat is declared to be mithya, an object which is mithya (which 
has no substantiality) is not desired by any one. Those who wish 
to have a kingdom are not satisfied with a kingdom seen in the 
dream. Hence to stabilise vairagya, instead of saying ‘brahma nityam. 
jagat anityam’, Sri Bhagavatpada says brahma satyam jaganmithyd. 
viniscayah means visesena niscayah: strong conviction. By the 
word niscaya is signified not falling away (from truth) as a result 
of ideas which are not warranted by (absolute ) pramanas. 
so’yam: split into sah and ayam. Sah that which has best 
referred to as qualified by viveka; ayam means that this has been 
spoken of in the beginning as nityanityavastuvivekah. 
samudéhrtah (samyak udéhrtah) i.e., well explained. ‘The | pre- 
position sam has been affixed to show that this viveka alone will 
make for vairagya from the enjoyments of fruits of karmas here in 
this world and elsewhere (in heaven). | . 
_ After explaining viveka, Sri Bhagavatpada praca: to explain 
vairagya. 
36 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
| ait 
aera qreat at zeteraerefatar: 
aafaserad gine whreaacafa 1-29 0 
tad vairdgyam jugupsaé ya darsanasravanadibhih | 
dehddibroahmaparyante hyanitye bhogyavastuni || 
Vairagya (detachment) is revulsion from all things 
seen, heard, etc., from all transient objects of enjoyment 
beginning with the body and up to Brahman. 
darsanasravanidibhih: darsana refers to seeing the objects of 
sense-enjoyment, here on earth, of the body, etc. sravana refers to 
hearing about the objects of enjoyment in heaven including the 
celestial bodies ete.'4 | 
Gdi (in gravanadibhih): by inference about other things like 
those seen and heard about. 
vairdgya means revulsion as from the leavings of a crow, such 
a revulsion arising from a resolve that never again may there be 
a connection with all objects of enjoyment which range from one’s 
- own body to the body of Hiranyagarbha which includes lordship 
over the fourteen worlds, living for a hundred seers reckoned. by 
Brahma’s calendar." 
“What else is to be taught as reason for vairagya to a person 
who does not feel vairdgya after experiencing the pope (foul) 
smell of his own body?” 
. “Continuous are the sufferings of. bulls, horses, sonkces: 
elephants and buffaloes. They are subject to hunger and pain and 
they are worked to weariness. Their pains are indescribable.” 
“Even as here the joys earned by karma decline, so too else- 
where the joys earned by punya also decline”. 
“Whatever is not big (all-inclusive ) is inferior.” 
14 For, the latter cannot be seen with our physical. eyes. . So For ies 
about them we have to rely on what we hear when we are told about them. 
15 His Holiness here refers to a point of grammar. In the Sloka it is said ‘tad 
vairagyam jugupsa ya.’ Here ‘vairagyam’ is in the neuter gender and ‘jugupss’ is 
in the feminine gender. According to grammar, vairagyam — is ‘vidheyam’ 
jugupsa is the ‘uddesyam’. Vidheyam retains its primacy and so its neuter gender 
despite jugupsa being in the feminine gender, though generally, both should be in 
the same gender. An illustration is: saityam hi yat sa@ prakrtir jalasya: Though 
‘prakrti’ is in the feminine gender, *Saityam’ having the primacy, retains its neuter 
gender. Even so here in ‘tad vairagyam jugupsa ya’, ‘vairagyam’ having tthe pri- 
ed is used in its neuter gender and the neuter demonstrative tat is. used in the 
Slo 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 37 
“When the stock of punya (of those who have gone to the 
celestial worlds) decreases, they are born (on earth again ) as 
mortals”. ‘All those who go even fo the Brahmaloka are bound 
to come down to be born again on caret: . 
Thus the seventeenth chapter of Yajnavaibhavakanda of the 
Sita Samhita. 
The glokas in the Sarvavedantasiddhantasérasangraha beginning 
with ‘in the womb in the midst of his mother’s urine and faeces’ and 
ending with ‘who will not get vairagya thinking of those in heaven | 
who, on the exhaustion of their punya, with their limbs shattered 
are made to fall down in the form of stars’ and ‘in which world 
there is disproportion of position’, are all to be pondered over on 
the subject of vairagya. The idea is that revulsion in respect of all 
that is non-Atman is easy if one contemplates the subjection of men. 
and others to disease, the absolute dependence of animals etc. on 
others, disabilities like dumbness etc., the harassment of devas by 
the raksasas, the fact that sense objects like sound are productive 
of various kinds of evil as illustrated by the case of the stag etc. 
Sri Bhagavatpada makes this clear in a later Sloka beginning with 
‘Sabdadibhih paficabhireva’. 
It,may be objected: The eternality of the fruits of karma is 
inferred by seeing érutis like ‘apima somam amrté abhiima’: “We — 
drank the soma; we are immortal”, and ‘aksayyam ha vai céturmasya- 
yajinassukrtam bhavati’ (Taitt. Sam.) : “The effect of performing 
‘cAturmasya-sacrifice is permanent”. Yet, in accordance with the 
rule: yat krtakam tadanityam: “Whatever is effectuated by an action 
is impermanent” and éruti, yatheha karmacitah....etc. ‘as here what 
has ‘been gained by karma....etc.,’ the words amrta and aksayya — 
quoted by the objector are to be understood as referring only to 
an inevitably terminable duration, however long it may be. So_ 
these Srutis are not valid arguments against our position. (Even 
Hiranyagarbhaloka to which all creatures go is only inferior to 
Brahmanubhava, however eminent he may be otherwise. The im- 
mortality in Hiranyagarbha is only dpeksika, ie., it is relative 
immortality with reference to this world.) - 
aot 
‘By this Sloka the nature of Sama is explained. | 
farsa faguarara ataqseut qEAg: 
eaaeu frraaeal Aaa: WA Bead 122 hh 
330COt*w VIVEKACUDAMANI 
virajya visayavratat dosadrstya muhurmuhuh | 
svalaksye niyatavastha manasahgama ucyate }| 
Detaching the mind from manifold sense-pleasures again 
and. again Dertetwne their pernicious character, resting it 
permanently on one’s objective is said to be gama (mind- 
control). 
Some pleasures have a beginning and an end. They can be 
secured only by expenditure of much money and effort. They -are 
of limited duration and become insipid. Seeing all these defects 
again and again in sense-pleasures makes for lasting vairagya from 
them. When that vairagya arises, the mind is said to rest unmoved 
and unchanging in its objective whether it is saguna or nirguna. 
Thus vairagya is said to produce ‘Sama’ which is a condition of 
permanent resting of the mind.!6 
2343 
The nature of dama is explained in this sgloka. 
faqadra: Tea ITT TaTATION | | 
saaatafzarnt a aa: ofcatfaa: 23 
visayebhyah paravartya sthapanam svasvagolake , 
ubhayesamindriyanam sa damah parikirtitah | 
The retention of both kinds of senses in their respective 
orbs withdrawing them from senSe-objects is spoken of as 
—dama. 
With reference of gama or mind-control, as it can of itself go 
out to seek objects, self-withdrawal of the mind was spoken of as 
Sama., The external organs like the ear which are jfidnendriyas and 
like speech which are karmendriyas cannot go out to objects of their 
own accord. The mind is said to be.the reins; the external organs 
are said to be horses. pardvartya: turning away form. These 
should be withdrawn, i.e., turned back from the roads of sense- 
objects. They should be confined to their respective orbs like the 
ear and the mouth etc. sthapanam: The effectuation of the cessa- 
tion of their activities is called dama. This restraining of the mind 
etc., has been explained in the Kathopanisad in the vakyas : dtmainam 
rathinam viddhi Sariram rathameva tu | buddhim tu sdrathim — 
viddhi manah pragrahameva ca WW indriyani hayaénahuh visayams- 
16 His Holiness refers to a grammatical point here. As the suffix ‘lyap’ (ya) 
refers to a future state, the word ‘ virajya’ formed by it indicates the instrumentality 
of vairagya with reference to sama. 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 39 
tesu gocarén | “Know the self to be the owner of the chariot. The 
body is the chariot. Buddhi is the charioteer. The mind is the reins. 
The senses are the horses. The sense-objects are the roads.” 
24 
In this is explained uparati or self-withdrawal which is to be 
brought about by dama or the control of the external organs. 
AAMT TACHTTAEATAT VW RY 
bahydnalambanam urtteresoparatiruttama 
The pre-eminent uparati is the non-dependenee of the 
mind on anything external. 
Even as the water in a tank goes through its outlets and engulfs 
the fields etc., so too the mind which is inside comes out through. 
the openings of the ears etc., and is transformed into the shape 
of the objects like sound etc. This transformation is called mano- 
-vrtti (the mental mode). The idea is that when the mind which is 
inside is restrained from going out through the external organs, it 
does not get transformed into the shape of the external organs. | 
20 
USA AATATATAIATHTLTATA | 
| farafaerceigd at fafa fared 1 24 0 
~sahanam sarvaduhkhanam apratikdrapirvakam | 
cintavilaparahitam sé titiksa nigadyate |! 
Endurance of all afflictions without countering aids, and . 
without anxiety or lament is said to be titiksa. 
When the mind (citta) is unconnected with anything sceernat 
it is unaffected by the dualities of cold and heat. Even if these 
dualities occur in relation to a person by virtue of karma or kala 
etc., there will arise titiksa which makes for their endurance. 
It is common knowledge that woollen apparel and a fan are 
used to counter the afflictions of cold and heat. When these coun- 
tering aids are unavailable, people are prone to anxiety and lament: 
‘What is to be done by us who are helpless?’ By speaking of titiksa 
as endurarice without anxiety or lament and without external aids, — 
Sri Bhagavatpada refers to such titiksa as the means to inquiry gies 
Brahman). 
40 | : vive | 
duhkhaéném refers to cold, heat etc., which are the causes of 
Sitens! afflictions. 
The idea is that a mind which is subject to anxiety and jameut 
is as distant as ever from (is unfit for) inquiry. 
26 
Now Sri Bhagavatpada explains sraddhaé, the ie ae 
cause for knowledge of the truth about a thing. 7 
MTEACT TRAE AAAZEAISAMTT 
at tat ahaa aR: TAT TRTTSIAT EU 
Sastrasya guruvakyasya satyabuddhydvadharand | 
sa Sraddha kathita sadbhih yay&é vastipalabhyate 
_ Ascertainment of the scripture and of the words of the 
guru with conviction about their truth is called graddhé by _ 
the good and as that by which knowledge of Reality is 
obtained. | 
In the world too, in the absence of faith in the words of any 
apta (trustworthy person who has knowledge) no man acts in accor- 
_ dance with them in the matter of inquiry etc. When that is so with 
reference to objects of sense-perception, what needs to be said in 
the case of meaning of scripture which is beyond sense-perception? 
Hence sraddha is thé supreme means to inquiry about what is super- 
sensuous. As the Lord said in the Gita: asraddadhadnah purusa 
dharmasyasya parantapa aprépya mam nivartante mrtyu-samsdra- 
vartmani }| “Pxrrantapa! Persons without graddha in this dharma 
go back along the road of death and samsdra without attaining Me.” 
It is only he who is Santa, danta, uparata, and titiksu that obtains con- 
viction of a thing in the form ‘this is thus’ upon his having been taught 
by the guru and the texts of Vedanta: “Brahman alone is the reality; 
That thou art; all the rest is mithya”. He who does not possess this 
kind of sadhana will not get the conviction. So, to exclude one 
who has not that qualification, the first requisite is mentioned as 
sraddha with reference to the words of the guru and the Vedanta. 
Sastra is texts like ‘tattvamasi’: ‘That thou art’. In accord 
with that are the words of the guru in the form: ‘You are not a 
Samsarin; you are the Supreme Brahman which is ever intelligent 
and free. All else is mithya.’ 
“satyam : the truth: abadhitarthabodhakam ‘what conveys. a 
meaning which is not annulled.’ 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 4l 
avadhéirana: firm faith. 
That by which a thing is well understood is called sraddha cach 
the good, is the prose order. 
27 
samadhana is explained next to show that it accrues only to 
one who has such sraddha. 
aramMeaa Az: AS aerfot aden | 
arearaTerTa fares aq faded oTeay th ee 
samyagasthapanam buddheh suddhe brahmani sarvada | 
tat samadhainamityuktam na tu cittasya lalanam || 
The perfect establishment of the buddhi always in the 
pure (nirguna) Brahman is said to be samadhana, not the | 
indulgence of the mind. , 
There may appear to be no difference between this kind of 
samadhana and gama which is of the form of being firmly concent- 
rated in one’s objective. But as stated in the earlier Sloka (224): 
tathapi muhurmuhuh dosadrstya visayebhyo virajya svalaksye niya- 
tévastha and in the words of the Gita: yato yato niscarati manascaica- 
lamasthiram | _tatastato niyamyditat dtmanyeva vasarn nayet || : 
“From whatever cause the fickle mind wavers and is distracted, from 
that it must be restrained and brought under the control of the 
atman’”’; in the state of Sama, there is need for effort in respect: of 
steadying the mind characterised by sankalpa and vikalpa, determi- 
nation and doubt. Hence, here samadhana is described as_ the 
process of fixing the buddhi of firm conviction always.in the pure, 
ie, nirguna Brahman permanently. By this reference in this 
context is made to the antahkarana freed from every kind of determi- 
nation or doubt. That is why Sri Bhagavatpada used the word 
buddhi, the form of decision instead of the word manas. 
‘Even here, is is said ‘in the’ pure Brahman’ which means ‘in 
the nirguna Brahman which is free from all limitations or up&dhis. 
When explaining the nature gama it was spoken of as ‘svalaksye 
niyatavasthd, i.e., the state of being concentrated in one’s goal. This. 
_ (being endowed with gama) can happen also in respect of the saguna 
Brahman. Strictly speaking, sama is the means en Sami- 
dhana is its fruit, its culmination. | 
| lalanam: In the world, if children weep pavaisiently elders” 
pacify them by giving them what they want. This is popularly 
42 | VIVEKACUDAMANI 
known as lilanam. Similarly, here samadhana is not giving free rein 
to the mind to stray as it pleases. That is why Sri Bhagavatpada 
Says: na tu cittasya lalanam. The following slokas of the Yoga 
Vasistha are relevant here: 
Subhasubhabhydm margabhyam vahanti vasanasarit | 
paurusena prayatnena yojaniyd subhe pathi || 
asubhesu samavistam Subhesvevavatarayet | 
svamanah purusdrthena balena baliném vara \\ 
asubhaccalitam yati subham tasmadapitarat 
jantoscittam tu siguvat tasmattaccdlayet balat 1) 
samatasantvanendsu na dragiti sanaissanaih 
paurusena prayatnena laélayet cittabilakam || 
“The river of latent impressions (vasanas) carries a man along the 
good and evil paths. They all have to be turned to good paths by 
special manly effort. What inclines to the evil must be directed to — 
the good. The mind of a creature (here, man) is that of a baby. 
It must be forcibly directed to the good. This should be done gra- 
dually by the method of Jama, not precipitately. The mind of a 
creature is like that of a child and so, it must be coaxed with manly 
effort.” 
Thus, according to the Yoga Vdasistha coaxing and causing to 
act are pre-conditioning means to steadying the mind by. sama etc., 
not in the state of concentration which is fructification of the process. 
For, when that is attained, even without further effort, by the en- 
deavour put forth when Sama was acquired, by the wearing out of 
the outgoing tendencies, it is possible to shift the mind's: attention 
on the nirguna from the saguna Brahman... : 
28 
The next gloka shows that mumuksutva, the intense yearning 
for release will accrue only to him who has obtained this kind of 
samadhana, not to any other. 
HERTCAET ATT arerrararaterart | 
 eaeqerraalaa Atagftest TT WI’ 
ahankarédidehantén bandhan ajianakalpitan — 
svasvaripavabodhena moktumicchaéa mumuksuta |); - 
Mumuksuta is the desire to free the mind from the 
bonds extending from the ahamkara to the body created by 
ajnana, by means of knowledge of one’s real nature. fer 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 43 
ahamwkara may be understood in two senses. Either it is the 
reflection of the 4antahkarana in the body composed of the. eyes etc., 
producing the ego sense (aham iti abhimanah). Thus, aharmkara is 
the reflection of the caitanya (intelligence) in the mind (vide loka 
105 infra). Or, aharnkara may refer to the jiva who is the enjoyer 
in the 4nandamayakoSa. This is to be traced to what Sri Bhagavat- 
pada said in his work Svatmaniripana : suptigataih sukhalesath abhi- 
manute sukhi bhavamiti | dnandakosanémi sohamkérah katham 
bhaveditma 11 ‘the jiva speaks of himself as being happy by 
enjoying a bit of happiness in the state of dreamless sleep. In. that 
condition, he is in the anandamayakoga. That.is the aharhkara. 
How can that ahamkara be the atma?” Even that is the product 
of ajfidna.'"®’ They are all secondary as they are the products of 
mental activity. Hence, the bonds ‘beginning with anandamaya and 
including the vijnanamaya, manomaya, pranamaya and annamaya- 
kogas which make one think of them as Atman before the realisation 
of one’s true nature should all be broken asunder by perfect know- 
ledge of one’s real nature with such efficiency that the sense of the 
a4tman will never more attach to them. ‘The desire to thus get rid 
of these bonds is mumuksuté. The idea is that according to the 
text: yatra tvasya sarvam atmaivabhit tat kena kam pasyet: 
(Brh.) ‘Where everything is the 4tman, what can be seen and by 
what?”, at that stage as nothing other than the atman will be seen. 
one gets liberated from the bonds of the five kogas. That is the 
meaning of ahamkarddidehantan bandhan: the bonds extending from 
the ahamkara to the five koSas of the body. 
29 
_ This mumuksuta is of three kinds, viz., manda, madhyama, and 
pravrddha, the inferior, the middling and the well-developed. 
Even though moksa is of the nature of eternal bliss, this yearning 
for it is difficult to obtain for persons whose antahkarana is filled 
with the residual impressions of sarnsara. The mere desire (for 
liberation) that arises in the mind when listening to the exposition 
of Vedantic scriptures is sterile of any effect. This is purely man- 
‘damumuksuta. When a man, by reason of the discrimination that he 
attains while devoutly listening to the texts of the scriptures, re- 
peatedly sees the futility of the sense-objects of sarnsdra, obtains 
detachment from them, gives up all karmas in the prescribed manner 
18 For, bachiva’ (acting) and bhoktrtva (enjoying) are both to be traced to 
ajfiana. The former relates to the koSas (sheaths) other than ‘anandamaya while 
the latter has reference to the anandamayakoga. 
44 | VIVEKACUDAMANI 
and approaches a guru for earnest inquiry, a mumuksuta (desire for 
liberation) arises while listening to the spiritual texts. Such desire 
will last only for the time being. Then what. was, in a previous 
stage called mandamumuksuta becomes madhyama.. When uncom- 
promising detachment arises in the mind which comes to a state 
of being at peace, and the guru too dowers him with his grace that 
he should soon cross the ocean of sarnsara, then the man does not 
desire anyenlng other than moksa which is a state of eternal bliss. 
He su--.;s no delay thereafter. Becoming a pravrddha-mumuksu, 
he eens pre-eminently qualified and quickly attains the fruit (of 
liberation). 
HATCTATSTAT TEAM MATAAT | 
WANA TW: AA TIST AAA BHA UR Ut 
mandamadhyamaripaipi vairdgyena Samadina | 
prasadena gurohseyam pravyddha siiyate phalam 3| 
| Eventhough it is inferior and middling, if this mumuk- 
siita grows into the well-developed state by detachment and 
control of the mind etc., with the grace of the guru, it bears 
fruit. ) | 
This means that though mumuksa is of the form of desire for 
liberation, when it becomes. well-developed, it immediately bears 
fruit. For its development, one must strive for securing detach- 
ment from all. ae the. six-fold disciplines and the grace of 
the guru. 
| . ’ 30 | | 
Amidst the sadhanacatustaya, the four-fold means to. moksa, if 
the second.and the. fourth exist, everything is. provided; not. other- 
wise.. .This is explained. in the next Sloka : - 
ard = rae ate ser g fae t 
afensardard: Qi HSA: WTA: th Z0 Ui 
vairagyain ca mumuksutvarn tivram yasya tu vidyate | . 
_tasminnevarthavantah syuh phalavantah sSamaédayah 
‘ It is only-in the case of one who is determined in his 
detachment and yearns for liberation that Sama ete. pers 
| meaningful and fruitful. . 
When it is. said arthavantassamadayah, sama etc. become mean- 
- ingful, the reference is to the words gama etc. One can meaning- 
fully say that gama etc., exist in him. The idea is: This person 
VIVEKACOPAMANI «45 
is one to whom the words santa, danta apply; that he is charac- 
terised by rigorous detachment on the one side and that he has ab-- 
solute desire for liberation on the other. For sama etc. become fruit- 
ful only in the case of tivramumuksutva, supremely earnest desire 
for liberation.” If a ‘person has this absolute mumuksuta, then, be- 
cause an effect cannot arise without a cause, from this effect (tivra- 
mumuksuta), the cause, possessing gama etc., is inferred. It goes 
without saying that he has Sama etc. Similarly, when the means to 
gama etc., namely tivravairagya (rigorous detachment) arises in a © 
person, as when the cause functions the effect inevitably follows, 
gama etc. will surely be secured. Thus, the series Sama etc., occupy 
a middle place between vairagya and mumuksuta.. They are the 
effect of tivravairagya and, in their turn, they lead to mumuksuti. 
Sama etc., become meaningful in tivravairagya and they become 
fruitful in mumuksuta. 
‘With reference to the minds of persons outside of us, it is im- 
possible for one who merely looks at them externally. to know if they 
have cultivated gama etc. This can be done only by inferring the 
cause which is invisible from the effect which is. visible. So, if a 
person exhibits mumuksuta, one. may infer that he has cultivated 
gama etc. If it is asked how can a person know that he has him- 
self got Sama etc., he has to examine himself and ascertain if he 
has the cause, ttvravairagya in full and if he experiences the pre- 
eminent fruit, the intense yearning for liberation, tivramumuksa. 
What is intermediate between them as the effect of the former and 
the cause of the latter is established. Speaking about tivravairagya, 
a loka in the Sarva Vedanta Siddhanta Sara Sangraha says: kakasya 
visthivad asahyabuddhiL bhogyesu sa tivraviraktirigyate , virak- 
titivratvanidinamahuh bhogyesu doseksanameva santah \1 “Re- 
garding all objects of sense-pleasure as contemptible as the leavings _ 
of a crow is said to be tivravirakti. The cause of such persistent 
virakti is to see all such objects as sinful: (in their nature and in 
their effects)”. 
tivratvam (intensity) i in mumuksuta is that it is sweliaevaloped. 
That has been explained earlier.. 
ae: 2 31 
| Uaulieay. Ta facaneayqerat: | | 
AU afaaada Warsalaraar 134 
etayormandatad yatra viraktatvamumuksayoh | 
_marau salilavattatra samaderbhanamatrata 11 
46 | VIVEKACUDAMANI 
Where detachment and desire for release are dull, gama 
etc., are unreal like water in a mirage. 
If viraktata and mumuksa are not intense, then they are tran- 
sient appearances like water in a mirage. | When the sun is very 
hot in a desert by the contact of its blazing rays, there arises in a 
man seeing it from a distance an illusion that there is water there. 
Going near, no water is obtained nor is thirst quenched. On the 
other hand, the weary man who has reached the spot in quest of 
water only suffers more intense pain. Even so, in the absence of 
tivravairagya and mumuksuta, gama etc., are only illusory appear- 
ances like water in a mirage; such a one does not reap the fruits of 
Sama etc., nor is he described by others as santa etc. | 
32 
Thus, having explained viveka etc., (the sadhanacatustaya), 
which constitute the qualifications of the adhikarin for Brahma- 
vicara which means devoutly listening to the passages relating to 
Brahman without a second, which is non-different from one’s atman 
and which is eternally pure, intelligent and free, Sri Bhagavatpada 
proceeds to speak of bhakti which is the direct (internal) means 
(antarangasadhana) to realisation of. the 4tman and which is what 
is to be achieved by the aforesaid inquiry. 
Terareramaat afeata aaa 
taeqeqrarandt Hlaattafiedtad 132 01 
_ moksakéranasimagrydém bhaktireva gariyasi | 
| ~Svasvarupanusandhanam bhaktirityabhidhiyate |, 
Among the material aids for achieving moksa, bhakti is . 
the greatest. Continuous contemplation of one’s essential 
nature (svarupa) is said to be bhakti. 
By svasvaripdnusandhina contemplation on one’s essential 
nature, nididhyasana (profound repeated meditation) is meant. 
That alone can serve as the immediate means to direct realisation. 
The continuous contemplation of the sruti text and the upadesa of 
the guru: sa atma tattvamasi (Thai is the atman; That thou art): 
“Thy essential nature is Brahman; thou art. That only”, is the in- 
dispensable means (asadharana karana) of such realisation. This 
contemplation (anusandhana) is of the form of the exclusion of :con- 
trary ideas and is marked by a continuous flow of accordant ideas. 
Sama etc., are the cause of. jnana mediated by vicdra and nididhya- 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 47 
sana. But nididhyasana is the immediate cause for it. Because it 
produces direct realisation, it is said to be the greatest among the 
sadhanas that make for jana which is revelatory of one’s true nature 
which is synonymous with moksa.'? Among the means for nidi- 
dhyasana, bhakti is the greatest, because it is direct and internal 
means. 
The samagri (resources) referred to here is of those beginning , 
wate viveka and ending with nididhyasana. 
| 323 
A view of bhakti held by certain others is referred to here. 
careaarararand wieai erat HT: 1 BRI. U1 
-svatmatattvanusandhanamn bhaktirityapare jaguh tH 
Others. say that the continuous contemplation of. the 
truth of one’s a4tman is bhakti. 
svatmanah means of one’s own jivatman. The truth about its 
nature means the Paramatman indicated by the word ‘That’. Its 
anusandhana means though really there is difference (between the 
jiva and the Paramatman) for the nonce, contemplation of the ‘That’ 
as oneself in the manner of ahamgrahopdsana or meditation on the 
jiva as non-different from the Paramatman."* Others say, that is 
bhakti. Sri Bhagavatpada implies by the words apare jaguh— 
‘others say’, that this is not mukhyabhakti, as it is PERcetee by a 
sense of difference and is a delusion. 
333 
What is to be done by one endowed with the. aforesaid quali- 
fying means is described. | 
THTATTAAPTR: aeafaargerert: 
Balay TE Tat AeaTgearfaatarne 1 331/. ne 
uktasadhanasompannah tattvajijnasurdtmanah | | 
upasided gurum prajiam yasmaéd bandhavimoksanam — 
19 The idea is that jfiana does not produce mokga as a thing to be effectuated 
like a pot. it is not cause in that sense. The jivatman is ever Brahman. This 
knowledge was hidden. It is revealed by such jnana. 
92 updsana is of three kinds: 1. aigdvabodhopdsana in which some person or 
thing is worshipped or meditated as a limb of a rite as where a kirca of. sacred 
grass is thought as a deity invoked on it (asmin_ kir-e brahmanamavahayami); 2. pratikopasana as where an idol or picture is worshipped as a god; 3. ahatngraho- 
epee in which the eee himself is equated with a ay as in: Sivo"ham or 
So’ham. | 
48 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
‘Let a person who is endowed with aforesaid qualifica- 
_ tion and who wants to realise the truth about the atman 
humbly approach the guru who has achieved 4tmajiiana, and 
fron: whom alone can accrue release from bondage. 
uktasidhanasampannah refers to the sadhanas for vicara, name- 
ly viveka etc.; ‘a person so endowed’ is to be understood after this. 
Gtmanah tattvajijadsuh. means one who desires to know one’s 
self essentially. He should approach; whom? A guru who will in- — 
struct. Of what kind? One who is a prdajiia: prajfia means peer- 
less knowledge; prakrsté niratisaya jaa avagatih prajid; Brahma- 
_ Saksatkara. For, as will be said in Sloka 428 infra: brahmatmanos- 
Sodhitayor ekabhavavagahini | nirvikalpad ca cinmatra vrttih prajieti 
‘kathyate \\ : “The modification (of the antahkarana) which is of 
form of apprehension of the oneness of Brahman and atman after 
analysing them, and which is of the nature of pure cit is said to be 
prajna’”’. 
One who has this prajfia is a prajiia. Prajfam means brah- 
- manistham, one who is firmly estannened in Brahman. 
“yasmat: by nearness to such a guru. The benefit of approach- 
ing a guru is stated. By proximity to such a guru the bonds ima- 
gined by ajfiana commencing from ahamkara to the body are com- 
pletely given up. By approaching him, by knowledge of one’s true 
self arising from his upadeSa, moksa which is freedom from bond- 
age is accomplished. 
343 
_. The characteristics of such a guru are explained in this loka: 
atfaaisafartismrrgat at agrfagan: | 
megraenray frtvrt gars: ae, 
| Srotriyo’vrjino’kamahato yo brahmaviduttamah i 
brahmanyuparatassanto nirindhana ivanalah 1 
The guru is well-versed in the Vedas; he is sinless; he 
is not smitten by desire; he is a knower of ‘Brahman; he is 
_ super-eminent; withdrawing himself into Brahman, he is 
_ ever at peace; he is like a smouldering fire unfed by fuel. 
‘Srotriyah: one who has studied the Upanisads. Vide the Panini-sutra: arneripencene We For, it is only he who has in- 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 49 
quired into Brahman after the study of the Upanisads that can 
quality for direct realisation. of Brahman. 
. avrjinak: one who is alee The Sruti says: _navirato dus- 
caritat nasdnto nasamahitah, nasantamanaso. vapt prajndnenainam > 
apnuyat (Katha): ‘Not by him who has not desisted from evil con- 
duct, who does not possess $ama, etc., who is not collected, who does 
not have a mind at peace with itself can this be attained merely by 
prajna alone.” 
The reason for saying that one should be an avrjinah sinless, is 
given by the next quality akdmahatah: one who is not subjected to 
kama, the promptings of desire for external objects. One who is 
foiled by. kama (desire): is kamahatah, one to whom his real nature 
does not shine. One not so foiled is akamahatah He who has no idea 
of bliss of self-realisation is drawn to external pleasures and may 
sometimes even commit sin in the process of getting them. The 
brahmaviduttama, the eminent knower of Brahman on the other 
hand has direct enjoyment of the bliss of self-realisation. In accord- 
ance with the Gita Sloka: visaya vinivartante niraharasya dehinah 1 
rasavarjam, raso’pyasya param drstva nivartate 4, ‘“‘Sense-objects 
withdraw from an abstemious person. But the taste for them may re- 
main. Even this is annulled when the Supreme Brahman is seen (rea- 
-lised).”’ So, such a person has no worldly desires and he is said to 
be akamahatah, i.e, one who is not hatah (struck) by kama and is 
sinless. For kama alone is the inducement to sin. That is declared — 
by the Lord in reply to the query of Arjuna in the Gita in the fol- 
lowing and other glokas: atha kena prayukto’yam pdpam caratt 
pirusah | anicchannapi varsneya baladiva niyojitah. 1, | ‘“Compelled 
by what, scion of the Vrsnis, does a man indulge in sin though un- 
intentionally, as if constrained to do it by force?” To this the Lord 
replies: kama esa krodha esa rajogunasamudbhavah ; mahasano 
Méihaipipma viddhyenamiha vairinam i; “It is desire, it: is anger 
born of rajoguna which is all-devouring and asus Know thou, 
that is the foe here.” 3 , _, 
brienanupantidl: One whose mind has found its rest in 
‘Brahman. Hence, one is at peace like a fire without fuel. A fire 
not fed by fuel is without flame. It is Sénta, contained in itself, So, 
one who is withdrawn. into Brahman’ is not attached to 
any external activity and is established in the  nirguna 
Brahman. Hence he is spoken: of as santah i.e. aS one who is not 
affected by kama etc. . 
V.C.—5 
50 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
Srotriyatva etc.: enumerated here are not alternative qualities! 
For, not being versed in the Vedas, being sinful or being subject to 
desire cannot pertain to the eminent knower of Brahman. Their 
opposites are all essential qualities of a guru, and by their cumula- 
tive existence, they remind one of his nature and are to be considered 
as his essential qualities (svaripa-laksana). 
35 
ASA RAN Aa UTA AAA 1 Fe Ut 
ahetukadaydsindhuh bandhurénamatam satém 11 
The guru is an ocean of Spontaneous compassion that 
asks for no reason. He is a friend to the pure who make 
Obeisance to him. | | 
| ahetuka: that for which there is no reason. 
The guru’s compassion is unmotivated by anything else than the 
urge to destroy the affliction of another. Others may strive to help 
people out of their own mental distress to get rid of the sense of 
pain that they themselves experience at the sight of other’s dis- 
tress. To show that the guru’s compassion is not of this kind, Sri 
_Bhagavatpada uses the word ‘ahetuka’. By the eminence of his 
Brahmajnana, no pain can touch him whether it emanates from others 
or from himself. His only desire is that men should cross the ocean 
of sarnsdra. The desire arises in him when he comes out of his 
samadhi to world-consciousness. 
bandhuh: means one who destroys afflictions of the mind. 
(bandhuh duhkhaharakah. ) 
Whose bandhu i is the guru? dnamatam: of hese who make obei- 
sance to him. dnamatam satém means the good who are endowed 
with humility. By this it is indicated that upadega is given only 
after carefully examining the qualification of the pupil. For, it is 
Sald: nastiyakdydnrjave sathiya: “Not for the jealous, not for the 
_ crooked, not for the roguish (should this knowledge be communi- 
cated); idamasisyéya ‘no deyam: “This is not to be imparted to one 
who is not a fit disciple’. In the Gita it is said: idam te natapas- 
kaya nabhaktaya kadacana, na casusrisave vacyam na ca math yo’- 
bhyasiyati: “This (which has been taught to thee) is never to be 
taught to one who is devoid of austerities or to one who has no devo- 
tion, or to one who does not do service or to one who speaks ill of Me.” 
idam means upasadanam or samipagamanam: going near. v 
VIVEKACUDAMANI - 51 
36 
Sri Bhagtvatpada goes en to mention with great tenderness what 
a pupil should do after approaching a guru. 
AMET TE WATT TA: TATATT: 
TAA ATTN TSOsHAEAATEAA: 113g I 
tamairadhya gurum bhaktya prahvah prasrayasevanaih | 
prasannam tam anuprapya prechet jratavyamatmanah 
Worshipping that guru with devotion and approaching 
him, when he is pleased, with speech and action betokening 
humility, he should beseech him to tell him what has to be 
learnt. | 7 
_ Bhakti is attachment to thos¢ who deserve to be worshipped. 
It is a mental quality. Prostration of the body and the joining of 
palms are expressive of this bhakti. prasraya is speaking with 
humility. sevana is prostrating in such a manner that all eight parts 
of the body touch the ground: (sdstanga-namaskara). It also in- 
cludes touching the guru's feet, and executing his behests. The guru 
is served by these ways. He is pleased by this straightforward 
service. | 
tamanuprépya: going near him so that he is in front of the 
Sisya; standing in his presence in the prescribed manner waiting for 
the appropriate time. 
 prechet jnatavyamatmanah: What is required to be learnt and 
desired to be learnt in the matter of the essential character of the 
self should be queried about. 
By the expressions bhaktya, prahvah, prasrayasevanath, purity 
of mind, speech ard action in the mprSINpper are inaicated: That 
is, he peaonee have trikarana-suddhi. | | 
(BT : 
- To those who yearn for spiritual knowledge, in the following 
Slokas 37 to 42 Sri Bhagavatpada is pleased to explain with tender- 
ness the manner of worshipping ‘the guru ey appropriate words 
issuing out of true devotion. 
talfaaned AaetHaay 
aTesgfacay fad warzat 1 
ATTA ATHEIST AT 
sreearshrsTecagenfrgeTt tt a0 1 
52 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
svaminnamaste natalokabandho 
kérunyasindho patitam bhavabdhau 
mamuddharatmiyakataksadrstya 
rjvyatikarunyasudhabhivrstyd || 
My master! I bow to you. You are friend to those 
who make obeisance to you. You are the ocean of compas- 
sion. I have fallen into the sea of sarhnséra. Bathe me in 
the nectar of your straight and compassionate look and save 
me from the deeps of this ocean. 
natalokabandhu means the annihilator of the afflictions of those 
who bow to him. As you are the dispeller of the sorrow of those 
who seek refuge in you, I bow to you seeking relief from sorrow. 
By apostrophising him as ocean of compassion (karunyasindhu), the 
reason which impels the gisya to seek refuge in him is indicated. 
This has been explained already with reference to the expression 
ahetukadayasindhu. | 
By the expression patitam bhavabdhau the Sisya submits to the 
guru the nature of the sorrow by which he is afflicted. The mean- 
ing is: I who have sunk into the samsara-samudra which is filled 
with the malefics of birth, old age, disease and death. 
mam uddhara: rescue me. The Sisya prays for release oe all 
this. Make me free from the bonds of birth etc. 
He seeks the means of such liberation by saying dtmiyakatak- 
sadrstya: by your compassionate look, i.e, with a mere glance of 
your eyes. By the fact of your having realised Brahman, you are 
absolutely free from all impurities. Your glance so full of compas- 
sion is both pure and purifying. Released by it from all sins, I shall 
cross the ocean of sarnsara. It is said: yasyanubhavaparyanta bud- 
dhih sattve pravartate, taddrstigocardssarve mucyante sarvakilbi- 
saith |; “All persons on whom falls the glance of those whose buddhi 
is directed to the Reality till it becomes a fact of realisation, are saved 
from every kind of sin.” By this the form of humility also has been 
shown that the Sisya should not stand face to face before the guru. 
Even by a glance there will arise complete beholding by the guru. 
Hence the gisya is said to make the request for such a glance. The 
idea is: I shall become free from affliction completely purified when 
the grace of one who is immersed in the bliss of the ever-pure Brah- 
man falls on me emanating in full from his side-long glance. Or, 
dtmiyakataksadrstya may mean: by your gracious look directly fall- 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 53 
ing’ on me [This is stated as an alternative to ‘your looking on me 
through your side-long glance’). 
. pjvya: by what is by nature straight. As a person who has 
fallen into deep waters comes up catching hold of a straight rope or 
a stick, so too I shall come out of the ocean of samsara clasping the 
‘rope continuously by my hands. Even as the rays of light issuing 
from the sun or from a lamp gather together in the form of a rope, 
so too the rays of light coming out of the eye which is effulgent 
save a person as they emanate from the mind of a Brahmanistha. 
 atik@runyasudhabhivrstya: by showering on me the nectar of 
your supreme ccmpassion. atyantam karunyam atikadrunyam: ut- 
most compassion. tadeva sudha: that itself is sudha (nectar). It is 
called sudha as it removes all afflictions. sudhé nama amrtam: 
sudha-means amrtam, nectar. tasyah sudhayah abhito vrstih yasyam 
drstyamsa atikérunyasudhabhivrstih: That glance by which there is 
all-round downpour of the nectar of infinite compassion is atikarun- 
yasudhabhivrstih. taya by: it: atikarunyasudhabhivrstya. It is well- 
known that, by the showering of nectar on him, a person becomes 
free from the ills of old age, death etc. In the Ramayana too, we 
read that the vanaras who were slain in battle were restored to life 
by Indra showering amrta on them. When that amrta itself is of 
that nature, the implication is that the glance pouring forth out of 
the amrta of compassion of a Brahmanistha will bestow measureless 
freedom from old age and death. * ee 
. 38 
In the next gloka, the Sisya submits to the guru his tivramumuk- 
sutva, intense longing for liberation impatient of any delay in his 
redemption. = = | aa 
gatedarezanfiaerad Aaa FTECTATA: 
vita saat ofeatig weal: aeeMAA Tag A BT was 
durvarasamséradavignitaptam 
dodhiyamanam duradrstavataih | 
bhitam prapannam paripahi mrtyoh 
garanyamanyam yadaham na jane }I 
I am scorched by the inextinguishable forest-fire of sam- 
sara. I am deeply afflicted (shaken) by the winds of mis- 
fortune. I am overcome by intense fear. I fall at your 
feet. Save me from death. I have none else in whom I 
can seek refuge. 7 . : 
54 | VIVEKACUDAMANI 
| Sarhsara itself is a forest-fire as it spreads in all directions and 
scorches. It is inextinguishable except by the jnana springing from 
the guru’s upadega. When the forest-fire is aided by the wind, the 
flames spread out and scorch in all directions. The winds here are 
said to be duradrstavataih, i.e., winds of misfortune: sins. They are 
unfavourable winds. dodhtiyamanam: trembling greatly again and 
again. If the wind is favourable, it carries the person away from 
the flames. If it is unfavourable, either it carries him into the fire 
or blows the fire on him. It is with the idea that the man suffering 
from the heat of the forest-fire will be rescued from it by the down- 
pour of the nectar that reference is made in the previous Sloka to the 
shower of the amrta of guru’s compassion by the expression atika- 
runyasudhabhivrstyad making it an adjective of drstyA and the whole 
being taken as a bahuvrihi-compound. Instead, it may -also be 
taken as a tatpurusa-compound. drstyd: by your glance, atikdrunya- 
sudhabhivystya : by the downpour of infinite compassion through it. 
The purport of the Sisya’s appeal is: “If I obtain atmajiiana by 
your grace, death in the form of the exit of the vital airs from mv 
body will not happen to me”. The Sruti also says: na tasya pran 
utkramanti atraiva samavaniyante (Brh.): His (atmajnanin’s 
pranas do not go away; they get stilled (acquire laya) here itself. 
(That is, the man does not die as ordinary people do by their vital 
airs. going out of the body at death.) As whatever is dead must 
be born again ‘dhruvam janma mrtasya ca), and as the atma 
jnanin does not die in the usual sense of the word, it is clear that 
in the absence of death (by the ordinary way), there will be no 
birth again. And so, the sisya prays: ‘By your grace I shall be 
rescued from the succession of birth and death which is sarnsara’. 
By saying ‘I know none else in whom to seek refuge’, the gisya _ 
submits to the guru that he is without any such other refuge.. ‘Apart 
from you, I know none else who can protect me. I have no other 
refuge; so I must not be treated with indifference.’ 
39, 40. 
By the following two Slokas, it is shown that the compassion 
of the guru towards the Sisya is absolutely unmotivated. 
Wren Hardt fraata aeat aarracctafedt aera: 
antead aaa sarsararala aaa: 1388 
HY TAWITARAT CA ATTAIN AAA | 
quinta taqanaarrafaacaaata fata fra vou 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 55 
Santa mahanto nivasanti santo vasantavallokahitam carantah | 
tirndssvayam bhimabhavarnavam janan ahetuninymanapi 
tdrayantah 1) 
ayam svabhavassvata eva yatparasramapanodapravanamn 
mahdtmanam | 
sudhamsuresa svayamarkakarkasaprabhabhitaptam 
avati ksitimn kila 4) 
There exist great and good persons who, like the spring 
season, are ever given to doing good to the world. Having © 
themselves crossed the ocean of samsara, they help others to_ 
do so for no reason of their own. | 
The assuaging of the ills of others is natural to the 
great. Does not the moon cool the surface of the earth 
scorched by the rays of the sun? | 
vasantavat lokahitarn carantah: given to doing good to people 
like the spring season. Among the six seasons of the year, in the 
varsartu men are afflicted by heavy rain. In the grismartu there is 
severe heat. The beginning of the garadrtu is pleasant, but not the 
entire two months: for, towards the end of the kartika month, it 
is said that Death stalks the land. The hemanta and sisirartus are 
very cold. But the vasantartu which is marked by an abundance 
of fragrant flowers fills the entire world with joy. During this 
season, there is no trouble by rain, heat, cold or disease. As this 
rtu gives joy alone, so too do the sSantapurusas, those of unagitated 
mind, give peace and happiness’ to all people. | 
éantah : nirvikara-manaskah : those whose minds are not subject 
to the sway of kama etc. That is why they are said to be great: 
mahantah. | _ | es | 
santah: According to the sruti: brahmavit brahmaiva bhavati 
(Prasna): ‘The knower cf Brahman becomes Brahman’, they live 
in continuous consciousness of the infinite Brahman. Hence they 
live with an experience of non-difference from Brahman. That is 
why they are said to be santah: those who have realised the 
sadvastu. 
bhimabhavarnavam: The ocean of samsara is frightful. tirnah: 
Those who have crossed the ccean of -samsara, i.e., those unaffected 
by sarhsara, asamhsarinah. | 7 
ahetuna: Such people have no desires for themselves; they 
have nc wants. Hence, whatever they do is not for any persona! 
56 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
gain. Without any motive, they lift up people who are immersed 
in the ocean. of sarhnséra. It may be asked: ‘How do they save. 
others without a motive? For, there can be no action which is 
unmotivated.” It is replied: This is natural to them. No reason 
can be sought for what is natural. One cannot ask why sugar is 
sweet. Sweetness is natural to sugar. parasramapanoda-pravanam: 
should strictly be prévanyam indicating abstract quality of removal. 
But the expression in the Sloka is used in the sense of bhavapra- 
dhano nirdesah : the concrete act for the abstract quality. pravanam, 
that is nivaranam (removal) is used in the sense of pravanabhavah 
or pravanata or being wholly characterised by.it. Removing the . 
afflictions of others is natural to them. It does not require an 
external stimulus. The moon is given as. an example. By its 
ambrosial rays, the moon cools the earth that hes been scorched by 
the flaming rays of the sun without being told to do so, by any other. 
Kila: signifies what is well-known 
41 
Thus, in the next Sloka, the gisya prays with confidence to the 
_ eminent guru for liberation from his bonds seeing that the guru sits 
facing him and purifies him by his (guru’s) gracious glance telling 
himself that the Sisya deserves in every way to be protected by 
reason of his hur.ble deportment, his accordant speech and by his 
devotion signified by them, and that he has no other refuge. 
aIATS-TATTH fa-w hea: aa: axita: faa: 
ARs aaa: stag: alaaad: Faz 
VACA AaaaIaaagasaoraed TAT 
Wea Waalernanna: qalKat: calsat: i wF 
brahmananda-rasénubhiti-kalitaih putath susitaih sitaih 
yusmadvikkalasojjhitaih srutisukhath vakyamrtaih secaya 
_ Santaptam bhavatipaddvadahanajvalabhirenam prabho 
dhanyaste bhavadiksanaksanagateh patrikrtah svikrtah |) 
O Lord! I am tormented by worldly woes as by the 
tongues of a forest-fire. Your speech sweetened by the 
ambrosial bliss of Brahman is.immensely cooling. It issues 
out from your lips as from the mouth of a pitcher. It is 
delightful to the ear. Sprinkle your cool words on my head. 
Blessed are those on whom falls your passing glance: accept- 
ing them as your own. 
VIVEKACUDAMANI : 37 
- prabho: sarvasakta, all powerful One! Those persons who by 
the contact of your caksurindriya, by your gracious lock, by the 
conferment of your kataksa even for.a moment, are annexed to 
yourself are fortunate indeed: Hence, I too, having received the 
benefit of your glance; have bécome pure and saved from the dark- 
ness of ignorance. The sisya speaks thus to secure the quick. sub- 
sidence of the heat of samsara. 
The suffix gateh in ksanagateh is to be understood in two senses. 
gati may. mean prapti: attaining, or sarnyoga: connection. Both 
are appropriate here: either getting your compassionate look or 
being connected with it, that is, connected with your Brace even for 
a moment. af | 
patrikrtah: aspadibhitah: those on whom the.saving glance 
may fall. 
svikrtah: atmiyatvena krtah: taken as own Kith and Kin. 
Such persons are fortunate: krtarthah. Hence I too freed from the 
darkness of ignorance by your saving glance am fortunate. He 
indicates thus: very quickly I wish to be rescued from the fires 
of sarnsara’. 
Sreyasi kena trpyate? “In the matter of spiritual wealth, by 
what will one be contented?” So, in addition to the extinguishing 
of the samnsara-fires, the Sisya asks for the rain of supreme knowledge 
which will dower him with the enjoyment of Brahmananda. That 
alone will remove all stains from his mind. .The Gita says: na hi jna- 
nena sadrsam pavitramiha vidyate: ‘‘There is nothing here so puri-— 
fying as jana.” As the words embody such jnana. the words which 
are of the form of instruction in jnana which ery all. sins them- 
selves are.said to: be: purifying. 
susitaih: ‘by the very cool waters which quench the fires, or 
tapas—ddhydtmika, ddhidaivika and ddhibhautika—torments which 
are to be traced to the mind, gods and to the body or fate or natural 
causes. 
sitath: nirmalaih: pure as they lead to the sattvamarga with- 
drawing the mind from the rajo-marga and tamo-marga. 
yusmadvakkalasojjhitath : emanating from the internal Manigs 
of your speech, or from your mouth: 
brahmarandarasénubhatikalitaih: ; characterised by the ex 
perience of the ambrosia of the experiencé of Brahman: This is the 
reason for saying that they are pitah, pure. © 2 | 
38 | VIVEKACUDAMANI 
Srutisukhaih : which give delight to the ear. Being pure, being 
cool, being of the nature of sattva-guna, issuing out of the jar of 
the mouth, being ambrosial are all spoken of as features of the guru’s 
words. When the words themselves delight the ear when they are 
heard, how much more delightful will they be when their emeaine 
is understood! 
42 
The nature of the fear that has overtaken the pupil referred 
to earlier is explained in the next Sloka for the pee bestowal of 
the guru’s grace on him. 
wa ata wafergad a at faa —_— 
att 7 finfaepransa ai sat darcgraetfaaraasa kcal 
katham tareyarn bhavasindhumetam 
kaé va gatirme katamo’styupdyah | 
jane na kificit krpaya’va mam prabho 
samsaraduhkhaksatimatanusva | 
How shali I cross this ocean of sarnsdra? What is to — 
be my fate? What are the means? I know nothing. O! 
great One! Save me by your grace. Vouchsafe to me the 
liquidation of the scrrow of samsara. 
_ How shall I cross this ocean of satnsdra beset with diverse 
insurmountable afflictions? If it is to be like this for ever, what is. 
to be my fate? What is it then that is to be attained by me? The 
idea is: If I am not saved from this, I shall be subject to endless 
misery. Therefore, for crossing this ocean of samsdra, what are 
the means to be adopted? I do not know anything myself. I am 
terribly afraid. Pray, save me. Completely uproot the grief of 
sarnsara that afflicts me. Thus saying ‘samsdraduhkhaksatimata- 
nugva,’ the gisya clearly prays for Prec On 
43, 44 
Now is explained in the next two Slokas what the guru should 
do when he is approached thus. 
TAT ATT UCN Tl AATCATATA ATTA | 
fatter aregzenigsrar zarawiia agat ARAT es 
fagra a emt saaferiad yaad ata caleaaritt 
wiratanta waka aati sia gata use i 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 59 
tatha vadantam saranigatam svam — 
samsafadavanalatapataptam | 
niriksya kdrunyarasardradrstya 
dadyaid abhitim sahasé mahatma ti 
vidvan sa tasma upasattimiyuse | 
mumuksave sidhu yathoktakdrine |: 
prasantacittaya samdnvitaiya | 
tattvopadesam krpayaiva kuryat 11 
- Seeing the pupil, scorched by the forest-fire of sarsara 
and beseeching the guru°’to give him refuge, looking at him 
with eyes of compassion, the great One should quscky assure. 
him of succour. | 
He should mercifully initiate into Truth the sisya who 
approaches him in a proper manner, who longs for release, 
who duly practises the prescribed austerities, whose mind is 
peaceful and who has acquired the qualities of Sama etc. 
tatha vadantam: him who speaks thus: Because it is possible 
tc know the mind of an adhikarin by his speech, it is implied that 
a.guru should give the assurance of freedom from fear only after 
he makes sure that the Sisya is a proper adhikarin. 
samsaradavanala-tipataptam: who is scorched by the forest- 
fire of samsara. a ee 
evamn Saraniigatam: one who has approached him in | the belief 
that the guru will protect. — , 
karunya-rasdrdra-drstya niriksya : seeing him with tender eyes 
of mercy. 7 
mahdtma: a person of uncrooked buddhi, one who is broad. 
minded—not meanminded: that is, the guru. 
sahasé. abhitim dadyat : Immediately promise of succour sheuta 
be vouchsafed. By this is implied that the fear of frightened ones 
should be immediately dispelled. For, it is only those whese feat 
has been removed by the gift of abhaya that can receive the Mpagess 
of the guru with a calm, collected mind. | 
sahasé : immediately, without a moment's delay. It is implied. 
that the man in. fear should not be left in that state for long. 
The abhayadana should first be given to the frightened person, 
and then cnly should upadeSa be made. By the expressions vidvan 
60 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
etc., it is conveyed that after freedom from fear for one subject to 
it ae been vouchsafed, next upadesa pnouls be given. consistént 
with qualification to receive it. | 
vidvdan: the eminent knower of Brahman; the preceptor. 
upasattimiyuse : who has approached the guru in due form. 
mumuksave: to him who longs for release. - 
sddhu yathoktakadrine : to him who observes the prescribed 
austerities. By this is conveyed that Sisya should be a Sista, one 
qualified to be instructed. For, it is said: nédvirato duScaritat 
nasanto ndsaméhitah. naisdntamanaso vapi prajidnenainamgpnuyat 
(Katha): “Not by mere prajna intelligence, can -this be obtained 
by one who does not desist from bad conduct, who is not good, who 
has not controlled the mind.” The idea is that the guru should 
make sure that the Sisya has learnt the Srutis (that he isa srotriya), 
that he is free from sin, that he has no desires except the desire for 
- moksa. 
| prasantacittaya : to him who. has firmly set his mind on his goal 
detaching himself from all objects of sense-pleasure from the body 
to the (lower) Brahman. 
. Samanvitdya: to him who has controlled his external senses. 
By this is stated the quality of being an adhik&rin, possessing the 
six virtues beginning with Sama. 
tasmai: to him who has this assemblage of virtues, cane 
vairagya etc. | 3 : 
To such a person only who has no earthly desire, and who has 
all these qualities, tattvopadesa should be made out of compassion, 
out of desire to remove his duhkha. Fer one who has achieved this 
desire, there is no other desire. In tattvopadesar krpayaiva kur- 
yat, eva may go with tattvopadesam or with krpayd. When the 
adhikarin appears before a guru, the latter should not be indifferent. _ 
For, if the instruction of Brahmavidya is given to a fit and proper 
person, it makes for general welfare. When the apt Sisya is taught 
thus, he in turn teaches to a proper adhikarin and so on continuously 
a succession of gurus and Sisyas dedicated to Brahmavidya which 
annuls the avidya which is the cause of all misery is ensured. In 
addition, the upadega brings about the liberation of one’s own Sisya. 
The catechetical form of the treatise is intended to facilitate the 
easy comprehension of the truth. That is-why the érutis adopt the 
anecdotal form in several places. By that it is easy for us to 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 6 
understand the qualities of the ea of the Sisya and. what has to 
be asked etc. | 
45 
The compassionate guru, wishing to quickly dispel the fear of 
the gisya who exclaims: “How shall I cross this ocean?”, says: 
at asx fadeaa arecaata: darefaratercotsecaaa: | 
aaa ala waaisey ot aaa ATT aa fatentia wy 
ma bhaista vidvamstava nastyapayah 
samsdrasindhostarane’styupayah | 
yenaiva yata yatayo’sya param 
‘tameva margamn tava nirdigémi 1) 
Fear not, O! learned One! There is no danger to you. . 
There is a means to cross the ocean of samsara. I shall 
show to you the way by which those who have striven in . 
the past have reached the other shore. 7 
By saying ‘vidvan, do not fear’, freedom from fear has been 
vouchsafed immediately. By calling him ‘vidvan’, learned one, 
_ the guru means that, having acquired viveka etc., he has learnt that 
sorrow cannot be surmounted without the grace of the guru. 
Therefore, it is indicated that having taken refuge in him, the Sisya 
will learn what is to be learnt. ‘For you, who have. done thus there 
is no danger.’ For the Gita says: na hi kalydnakrt kascit durgatim 
tata gacchati—‘For, dear one, none who does good verily comes by 
an evil fate.” Therefore, do not be afraid saying: ‘How shall I cross 
this ocean? What is to be my fate,’ etc. Having thus comforted and 
assured him that he need not fear, that there is no adverse fate for 
the one who does good, the guru in answer to the Sisya’s query: what 
is the means?, says that there is a means to cross the ocean of sarn- 
sara To create confidence in the mind of Sisya, he conveys the 
means supported by what will produce belief. He says: I shall 
teach you that way itself by which those who have striven before, 
namely the sarnnyasins, have reached the other shore. 
yatéyah : prayatnasilah : those who: are given to effort; 
sarnnyasins. ans 
46 
To bring about intense eagerness in listening to that method, 
the guru speaks of it again in general terms. 
62 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
MRAM Re Heat aareaaaaa: | 
aa ateat warewila qvaraezarceafa ii we at 
astyupayo mahdn kascit samsdérabhayanasanah 
tena tirtva bhavambhodhim paramadnandamapsyasi 
There is a great means which will destroy the dread 
of sarnsara. You can secure supreme bliss by crossing that 
ocean by it. | 
“There is a means which will destroy the dread of samsara. It 
is mahan great, for it has to be adopted with much exertion. 
Crossing the ocean of sarnsdra, which is otherwise difficult to cross, 
by the means which I shali teach you, destroying ajidna which is 
its cause, you will secure endless permanent joy.” The idea is that 
the Sisya desires only the cessation of his sorrow; by the means 
that the guru will teach him, every kind of his grief will be anni- 
hilated and he will obtain eternal and peerless bliss. It will ‘secure 
not merely negation of the sorrow of sarnsara, but will endow him 
with positive bliss. Being told this, the Sisya feels immensely 
assured. | 
ce a, 47 
That means is taught in greater detail. 
— -Bareardfaarte aradt arr aRT | | 
AACAPARAANS-SAM WATT tt vio Ul 
_ wedantarthavicarena jayate jianamuttamam | 
 tenatyantikasamsdraduhkhanaso bhavatyanu | 
: _ The supreme wisdom arises from inquiry into the | 
meaning of the Vedanta texts. Following it arises the — 
‘complete destruction of the sorrow of samsara. 
_ veddntah: the Upanisads which are at the end of the Vedas: 
their meanings Veddntarthah. | 
 vieéra: of the Vedatarthas; vicarena; nirnayanukila-manasa- 
vydparena: by the mental process conducive to determination. The 
Supreme Reality is eternal purity, intelligence and freedom. It is 
free of all differences of like kind, of different kind and of internal 
differences. It is understood from the Vedanta texts by the six 
criteria for determining the meaning like upakrama and upasamhara 
—the way in which the work begins and the way in which it ends.” 
2 The other criteria are: abhydsa, repetition; upurvaté, novelty of conclusion; 
phala, fruit; arthadpatti, implication and upapatti, being in accord with reason. 
VIVEKACUDAMANI : 63 
By such means, supreme knowledge free of all defects like doubt etc. . 
arises. By its determination sarnsaraduhkha is annihilated for ever. 
His Holiness says that atyantika-samsaraduhkhanaéa, i.e., the com- 
plete liquidation of the sorrow of samsira arises, i.e., when this 
samsaraduhkha is once destroyed, there is no possibility of any other 
_duhkha following it. 3 
anu: after its determination. 
48 
Now Sri Bhagavatpada ‘enumerates the essential means for 
arriving at that kind of determination. 
meTaeaearaaiiny Waal: HRSA Alaa araroatt: 1 
at at vacaa favscanen sieitsfarerefeaaTegarengy we i 
$raddhabhaktidhyanayogan mumuksoh 
mukterhetiun vakti sdksat ‘Srutergih | 
yo va etesveva tisthatyamusya | 
mokso’vidydkalpitid dehabandhat rT 
The words of the Sruti declare that S§raddha (faith), 
bhakti (devotion), dhyana (meditation) and yoga (mind- 
control) are the direct means to liberation. To him who | 
practises them, release is secured from the bondage of the 
body caused by ajiana. 
fraddha : faith is unquestioning acceptance of the words of 
the guru and the texts of the Upanisads. This is indicated by the 
words sdstrasya guruvdkyasya etc. in the definition of sraddha in 
4]. 26. bhakti: devotion is continuous contemplation of one’s own 
real nature or nididhyasanam. dhydnam: The Yoga Sutra says: 
tatra pratyayaikatanata dhydnam: flowing cr uninterrupted contem- 
plation. As explained earlier, it is firm establishment of the mind 
always on the pure Brahman. The Yoga Sitra defines yoga as 
control of the activities of the mind. Sraddha is the basic condition 
for all these. Among bhakti, dhyana and yoga, the earlier is the 
cause of the later. When the activities of the mind are controlled 
- samédhana (concentration) arises. Upon that, and following the 
upadega of scriptures and of the guru, nididhy&sana in the form of 
contemplation of one’s own nature takes place. 
Or, the root dhyai is used in the sense of contemplation or cinta. 
Dhyanam will then mean reflection by the mind with cogent reasons. 
64. | VIVEKACUDAMANI 
So, by the word dhyana is signified realisation by continuou: 
reflection. Or, it may mean dhyana ‘on the Sagunabrahman which 
wards off all hindrances to getting jnana. In either case, there is 
the ground of yoga:of the form of control of the mental activities. 
Or, yoga may be understood in the sense of what unites, Or 
makes for union by realisation of the atman. The expression 
bhaktidhyanayogan in the Sloka may be taken to mean: bhaktis- 
cdsau Yogasca, and dhydnam cisau yogasca, i.e., bhaktiyoga and 
dhyanayoga. 
mukteh: for the annulment of bondage. 
vakti saksét Sruter gih2! The Kaivalyopanisad says: Sraddhé- 
bhaktidhyanayogad avehi: “Know by sraddha, bhakti, dhyana and 
yoga. »? 
Or, it may mean shal these are direct means to ‘jBiina which is 
the cause of liberation. | 
tisthatyamusya: That person wits stands established in 
Sraddha, bhakti and dhyana yogas, i.e., who is graddhaluh, pbhakti- 
man, dhyata and yogi. By the word amusya is indicated that such 
an adhikarin is extremely rare. 
To such a person surely arises release from the bondage ‘of the 
body wrought by avidya whose source is ajfana. 
va in yo va etesveva in the last line of the Sloka (split nt yo 
vai etesveva, etc.,) is intended to draw attention. It has also to be 
understood at the end of the Sloka as conveying emphasis. » Sah is 
to be added at the end. etesveva: in these only. The idea is that 
these are the only means, none else. 
49 
Now the gurt briefly instructs the gisya with reasons about the 
cause of sarnsara’ where it resides and the means of its removal. 
TATA TCATATATA a euenareeddt Gt data: 
aitfadatfacdteate: stared i ak Use: 
ajnanayogat paramatmanastava 
hyanatmabandhastata eva samsrtih | 
tayorvivekoditabodhavanhih DO 
ajnanakaryam pradahet samilam \\ 
. 21 Srutis are said:to be .of two kinds: sdksdt-érutis and anumita-grutis. The 
former are gruti texts found in the extant Upanisads; the latter are not. so 
traceable, but inferred to pertain to an Upanisad. 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 65 
_ For you who are the Paramatm.an in reality, association 
_ with ajnana produces bondage with the anatman whence 
_ arises sarnsara. The fire of knowledge of their distinctness 
will completely burn away the effect of the ajfana with its 
roots. | | 
You are the Paramatman in reality. By connection with the 
beginningless avidyS, anétmabandhah: bondage by the non-atman; 
you identify your 4tman with your gross, subtle and causal bodies. 
From that arises samsara which is of the form of superimposition — 
of qualities cf sukha, duhkha etc., on the Atman. The fire of the 
knowledge of their separateness burns away the roots of bonds of 
_ the body produced by ajfana and the resulting sarnsdra with its 
| birth, old age and death, and destroys it completely. 
Thus, it is clear that the bondage with the anatman is the cause of 
Samsara; the cause of that bondage is your association with ajnana. 
The means to getting rid of it is the knowledge of the Paramatman. 
That is effected by discrimination between the atman and the anat- 
man. This in brief is the upadesga. By this is shown that Jere 
which springs from Vedantavicara is the instrument to. destapy the — 
sorrows of samsara. It means that bondage arises from ajnana and | 
can be destroyed only by jana, not by any other means. 
Thus desiring to be fully immersed in the ambrosial waters of 
the pure speech coming out from the jar of his guru’s mouth, the 
Sisya enjoying these waters, questions his guru with due ela 
_ to get rid of every doubt in his mind. 
Ferex SaTst 1 | 
BINT waAat eartaa SENSE faut a7 | 
AATHE AAT HATA: TAT H4rAalT i 4° ul 
Sisya uvaca: | 
krpaya sriyatim svamin prasno’yam kriyate maya | 
yaduttaramaham srutva krtarthah syam bhavanmukhat 41 
The Sisya said : 
My master, condescend to listen. I wish to submit a 
question by getting a reply to which from your lips I shall 
feel gratified. 
By this is conveyed the duty of a Sisya that he should not put 
a question to a guru without muy, drawing his attention first. By 
V.C.-—6 
66. | VIVEKACUDAMANI 
invoking the guru’s condescension (krpaya Sriyatam) first and then 
putting the question to him, the guru’s compassion and gentleness 
are ensured and the earnest desire of the Sisya for quickly attaining 
knowledge is also indicated. The insistence on ‘from your lips’ 
shows that the Sisya has no other person to go to. 
ol 
RAT ara: RAAT ATT: 
wer Mfawsrsear aay fareyet: | 
— PUSATAATAT, ATA: BH SIKAT 
aatiqas: BAAATEAATA 147 Ue 
ko nama bandhah kathamesa dgatah 
| katham pratistha’sya katham vimoksah | 
ko’savanatma, paramah ka @tm@ 
tayorvivekah katham etaducyatam 1) __ 
The Ssisya asks: 
What is bondage? How did it arise? How does it 
continue to exist? How is one to get rid of it? What is this 
anatma? Who is the Paramatma? How is one to distin; 
guish between the two? Pray, vouchsafe all this to me. 
First the Sisya questions on the nature of bondage, because if | 
that is known, release from it by appropriate means will be easy. 
By asking how it arose, he asks about the cause of that bondage. 
He further asks how it continues to exist for a long time. pratistha: 
existence since a long time. katham: wherefore? by what reason? | 
vimoksah : cessation. The guru referred in the previous gloka to_ 
paramatmanah tava and anétmabandha: you who are the Paramat- 
man and bondage by the non-datman. So the Sisya asks: What is 
this andatman and what is the Paramatman? Because it was said | 
in §loka 49, tayorvivekodita ‘arising by discrimination between 
them.’ He asks how does knowledge of the distinction between the 
two arise? He implores that instruction about all this may be kindly 
imparted to him at length. 
From the brief statement of the guru, the Sisya has a vague 
idea that he is really the Paramatman and that his association with 
the anatman is due to ajiana. He has also some idea of how it arose. 
Aprat from the little knowledge that he has acquired by hearing 
the words that the fire of discrimination will burn away the effects 
of ajfiana completely, he has not obtained full knowledge free from 
VIVEKACUDAMANI - 67 
doubt. The indication of these questions is that this helpless person 
must be helped to obtain such perfect knowledge which will help 
him to realise his purpose. _ | | 
. 92 
By this series of questions, and by his earlier knowledge that 
the Sisya is pure in mind, speech and action and so is fully quali- 
fied for Brahmajiiana, to lead him quickly to Brahmavicira, the guru 
praises him in the words of this Sloka. The idea is that thus praised 
by a pre-eminent Brahmavit,. abandoning all the anxieties of his 
heart, inquiring into Brahman with concentration, he should become 
one who has realised his purpose. 7 
ATSRATT | 
Srigururuvica: The beneficent guru said. 
Sri guru means a guru who is endowed with Sri.- The éruti 
Says: Rk, Saman and Yajus are the Sri, nectar for the good which 
make for prosperity: rcassémani yajiimsi sa hi srir amrta satim 
(Taitt. Samhita). If the mere sound-symbols of these Vedas are of. 
the form of nectar of prosperity, what needs to be said in the matter 
of being endowed with Sri in respect of the guru who has learnt the 
entire Vedanta passages and realised their meanings? It - means 
that he is endowed with the Justre of Brahman which is the cause 
of the lustre of the sun.and other. resplendent objects. ‘ The guru, 
who is thus able to dispel by his light of knowledge the darkness 
of ignorance in the mind of his Sisya, proceeds to answer his Sisya’s 
question. ae gS | | GE 
First he praises him for the unfoldment of his mind : 
wasta gagertsfa ofaa a Hat aa t 
aateerararq aay agitafaafassta 4g 
dhanyo’si krtakrtyo’si pavitam te kulam tvaya , 
yadavidyabandhamuktya brahmibhavitumicchasi NH 
Blessed are you. You have done all your duties. Your 
family has been sanctified by you as you wish to attain 
Brahmanhood by cutting asunder the bonds of avidyi. 
dhanyah: one who deserved dhana. It does not indicate the 
class (jati) of.dhana or dhanatvam. What is dear to a person is 
called the dhana of. that person (that is, a thing becomes dhana 
68 | VIVEKACUDAMANI 
to a person only if he considers it valuable and so desirable). Ordi- 
nary people look on this and that as dhana. But for the wise 
vairagya indicated by non-possession is the true dhana: na khalu 
dhanatvam jatih; yasya yadistam tadeva tasya dhanam | tattadiva 
pamardniém dakincanuam dhanam_ vidusam i (Sri Nilakantha 
Diksita). The idea is: ‘You share in the riches of vairagya etc., 
equated by the wise with dhana’. .The reason for calling the Sisya 
‘dhanyah’ (here being endcwed with vairagya) is given next. 
krtakrtyo’st: your mind has been purified by the performance of 
duties prescribed in the Sastras. In its absence, detachment 
vairagya from sarnsara will not arise. You are a mumuksu who 
has obtained tivra vairdgya, uncompromising detachment by purify- 
ing your mind by duly performing the observances pertaining to 
your varna and asrama prescribed in the Sastras. 
By being thus, your family and your ince Seite has 
been sanctified. For, it has been said: kulam pavitram janani 
krtdrtha visvambharad punyavati ca tena | apdrasaccitsukhasagare’s- 
min linam pare brahmani yasya cetah 1\ “The lineage is purified, 
the mother has attained her purpose, the world has become meri- 
torious by him whose mind is ever immersed in the deep ocean of 
saccidananda Brahman,” and, sndtam tena samastatirthasalile sarvdpi — 
dattavani yajnénaém ca sahasramistam akhila devasca sampujitah | 
- samsaracca samuddhrtassvapitarastratlokyapujyo’pyasau, yasya 
brahmavicadrane ksanamapi sthairyam manah prapnuydt 1\ “He 
whose mind has been steadied even for a moment by Brahmavicara 
has bathed in the waters of all holy rivers; he has gifted (i.e., has 
obtained merit of the dana of) the entire world; he has performed 
thousands of sacrifices; all his gods. have been duly worshipped; his 
ancestors have been lifted from the slough of samsara; he himself 
is deserving of worship by the three worlds.” | 
Though jfana has not yet accrued to the disya; as he is a supe- 
rior adhikarin he may be, considered as one who has attained jfiana | 
immediately after listening to the words of the guru. Sri Bhagavat- 
pada is quoted in Madhaviya Sankara Vijaya as saying: ‘“paripa- 
kvamateh sakrt Srutam janayedétmadhiyam srutervacah”: “In a 
man of ripe nature, Sruti texts, produce atmajnana even if they are 
heard but once.” It will also be said infra (sloka 376) : “atyanta- 
vairigyavatah samadhih”: “Being prouy established in Brahman 
accrues to one who has intense vairagya.” The idea is that quickly 
getting a mind which is absorbed in Brahman, he will sanctify his 
family and the world. It has been said: xa visayabhogo bhaigyath 
yogyan khalu yatra jantumatramapi | brahmendrarudramrgyath 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 69 
bhagyam visayesu vairagyam |, “Ordinary mortals consider it their 
- supreme fortune to enjoy the pleasures of sense-objects. That is not 
true good fortune. It is vairagya from sense-objects which is 
sought even by Brahma, Indra and Rudra.” Accordingly, as such 
a Sisya has acquired this vairagya and is meritorious, even now he 
possesses the quality of sanctifying his lineage. 
The reason for this is explained: “You desire to be of the 
nature of Brahman by giving up the bonds beginning with aharhkara | 
and ending with the body resulting from avidya”. Hence, it is said 
that closely following this strong detachment, intense yearning for 
release will arise. Such a one sanctifies his lineage and the world, 
realising the supreme Brahman in this life itself. That is the idea. 
It may be objected that by the rule: “abhitatadbhave cvih”’, 
the “bhavitum” in “brahmibhavitumicchasi” indicates that the re- 
ference is to a future state of Brahmabhava which does not pre-exist. 
_ So Brahmabhava is in the future; it is to be produced. By the dictum 
that whatever is produced is impermanent (yat janyam tadanityam), 
the moksa that is of its form is also impermanent (anityam). 
It is not so. Though it is Brahman that exists in the form of 
the jiva and this Brahmabhava is ever-existent, yet this is not known 
now. Hence the cvi-pratyaya is used in relation to getting to know 
what is unknown. Until now he was Brahman without knowing it; 
after attaining jfana he is consciously in the experience of Brah- 
manhood. By this is dispelled the doubt that Brahmabhava is a 
future state. 
m ¢ 
a3 
For bringing about release from the bonds of sarnsara for 
every one, to confer his benediction on all men, the guru instructs 
that such release can be secured only by one’s own individual effort. 
In this is also implied that men should not be indifferent and waste 
the opportunity of this life obtained by divine grace and should not 
be subject to the sorrows coming one after the other. 
moaaraatt: fracaia garea: t 
qenlaanal qf carAeat A HAT 142 Uh 
rnamocanakartarah pitussanti sutadayah | 
bandhamocanakarté tu svasmadanyo na kascana 
There are sons and others to discharge the debts of the 
father. But there is none other oe oneself to free one 
from the bondage of samsara. 
(| VIVEKACUPAMANI 
In the world, there are sons, grandsons and others who will free. 
a person from his debts. ‘By begetting sons, by acting up to the 
father’s words, by bestowing wealth, they release the father from 
Sastraic or from worldly debts. But, another person cannot release 
one from sarnsaric bondage, i.e., the bondage that begins with the 
ahamkara and includes: the body. The superimposition that one has 
made on the anatman like the antahkarana etc., has to be dispelled 
only by the person who has made it. None else can bring it about. 
54 
The perceptual delusion that one is under has to be removed 
only by one’s own right perception. When a father mistakes in 
twilight a rope for a serpent, and gets frightened, if his son sees it 
properly as a rope, his right perception cannot remove his father’s 
_ fright. Similarly, a bondage which one has got into has to be re- 
_moved only by oneself, not by another. This is clearly explained 
by Sri Bhagavatpada giving a number of illustrations with the view 
that, understanding this truth, men may quickly endeavour towards | 
their liberation. 
WEAR UT ATT: z aHeatrarac | 
| « arfagag-a 7 fant eda a. Safer ay u 
mastakanye stabh aradeh duhkham anyairnivaryate 1 
ksudhadikrtaduhkham tu vind svena na kenacit 1) : 
The pain caused by the heavy load laid on the head etc., 
can be removed by others (taking the load off their heads). 
But the pain of hunger etc., cannot be assuaged by anyone ex- 
cept oneself. 
adi here refers to other causes of pain like those produced by | 
chaining hands and feet. Oe 
| anyairnivaryate: is removed by others, by taking the load off 
from the head and putting it down etc., or by breaking the chains. 
ksudhadi etc. The grief caused by hunger etc., is not relieved | 
by another than oneself. If a son eats food or drinks water, the 
hunger or thirst of the father is not removed. 
55 
Sri Bhagavatpada gives another example: 
— eaateeda a feat dar TTT 1 | 
anatatadeatsen area feeawar 14 
VIVEKACUDAMANI | 71 
pathyamausadhaseva ca kriyare yena rogina | 
arogyasiddhirdrsta'sya ninyanusthitakarmané 11 
A man regains his health by himself taking medicine 
and observing diet. But any action done by anoles can- 
not help him (to get rid of his disease). 
To get rid of his disease, it is the sick man himself that must. 
take medicine and observe the diet. If another man does this, the 
sick man’s disease will not be cured. Sri Bhagavatpada mentions 
here both diet and medicine. It is implied that in the matter of 
release from sarnsara, the former stands for the discipline of sadhana- 
catustaya, and the latter for listening to the words of sruti and that 
both these are means to jiana. 
06 
ARTETTT egal cata aa Tq alee 
GREASY frsraeraa araemTataaea ATW 4s VU 
 -vastusvaripam sphutabodhacaksusa 
svenaiva veduam na tu panditena | 
- candrasvaripam nijacaksusaiva 
jnatavyamanyairavagamyate kim 1 
The nature of an object should be apprehended by one-— 
self only through the eye of clear knowledge, but not from — 
another though he may bea scholar. The nature of the — 
moon should be known by seeing it with one’s own eyes. 
Is it known through others? 
a sphutah: undefiled by doubt etc; a 1 knowledge that has risen 
from. hearing, meditation and firm reflection (Sravana, manana and 
nididhyasana ) and which is free from every kind of imperfection. 
vastusvariipam: the nature of the atman as it is, i.e., that it 
is non-different from the Paramatman. 
svenaiva vedyam: must become the object of one’s own com- 
prehension; not to be learnt by a scholar ( pandita) who is other 
than oneself. Suka and Vamadeva had direct realisation. of Brah- 
man and became liberated. But of what benefit was it to others? 
Sri Bhagavatpada gives an apposite example. The nature of the 
moon which removes heat and generates joy must be known through 
one’s own eyes. Can it be known by others bereft of eyes? Or, 
if it is seen by others who have eyes, can that remove the heat of 
this person or give him joy? Like that here. 
nN VIVEKACUDAMANI 
D7 
Another can remove the well-known bonds, noose ete. of a per- 
son, ‘but not those which exist from time without peeinning: 
—afaarearnatfzaraed fantfad | 
eeMaatigasseard weqatleraes 4s tt 
: avidyakamakarmadipasabandham vimocitum 
kassaknuyad vindtmanam kalpakotisatairapi || 
Even after the lapse of hundreds of crores of eras, who 
except oneself can bring about release from the bonds of 
-avidya, ‘kama and karma?. | 
avidya-kama-karmadi: Each preceding item is the cause of the 
succeeding one. Due to ajfiana of one’s real nature, desire for ex- 
ternal objects first arises. That stimulates action. He who has rea- 
lised the 4tman has no desire for anything. The Sruti says: krtat- 
manastvihaiva sarve praviliyanti, kamah (Mundaka): All desires 
are extinguished (find their laya) in the realised persons. The Gita 
says: raso’pyasya param. drstva nivartate: “The desire of a per- 
son who has seen the Supreme turns back’. When there is no 
‘kama, whence can karma arise? yadyat kurute jantuh tattat 
kamasya cestitam (Manu Smrti): ‘Whatever a creature does is the 
product of kama”. So too, without realisation of the dtman, the 
bonds of nature arising from ajfiana, desire, dharma, adharma can- 
not be got rid of. Even in hundreds of crores of eons they cannot 
be removed without atmajnana. As stated in the previous Sloka, a 
person has to realise his atman himself alone. If ajfiana is not re- 
“moved, kama and karma (its effects) cannot ee removed. This : is 
the idea. | | : 
adi, ete. ? includes birth, old age, death, joy, sorrow etc. 
08 
Now ih accordance with the earlier Sloka vadantu Sdstrani . 
and with the Srutis: tameva viditvatimrtyumeti nanyah pantha 
vidyate’yandya (Purusa Sukta): “One conquers death by realising 
That only; there is no other road to salvation”, and jnanddeva kai- 
valyam: “Final emancipation (perfect isolation from the andtman) 
arises only from jfana”, in this work which is of a catechetical 
form of discourse between the guru and the Sisya, Sri Bhagavat- 
pada negates the possibility of any means other than the knowledge 
of the oneness of Brahman and the atman for liberation. — 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 73 — 
a awa a ateaia Hao al a fagat 
aaa aaa Aeafeageala AAA US UN 
na yogena na simkhyena karmana no na vidyaya | 
brahmatmaikatvabodhena moksassiddhyati nanyatha j1 
Not by yoga, not by sarnkhya, not by karma nor by upa- 
sana is liberation achieved. It is only by understanding of 
the oneness of Brahman and the atman. Not otherwise. 
‘moksa: being of the nature of Brahman is the mark of moksa. 
brahmatmaikatvabodhah: the realisation of the oneness of, Le., 
non-difference between Brahman and the atman. 
siddhyati: is revealed (i.e., a fact which was always there, but 
remained concealed by ajfiana is now revealed). 
_ nanyatha: not revealed by any other mode. That is made clear. 
_ Moksa is not realised by the knowledge produced by yoga- 
Sastras. For, that is only dualistic knowledge. Moksa does not 
arise merely by the control of the activities of the mind (The idea 
is that according to the Yoga system there is plurality of jivas and _ 
persisting duality of jiva and Brahman). The same is true of the 
Samkhya system propounded by the sage Kapila. The Samkhya 
system postulates plurality of jivas. Nor can it arise by the sacri- 
ficial activities described in the early part of the Vedas. na vidyaya: 
Knowledge which relates to the several updsanas of the Saguna 
Brahman prescribed in the Upanisads, even that will not lead to the 
realisation of kaivalya. Knowledge derived from Yoga and Samkhya 
Sastras relate only to a predicament of duality. In accordance with © 
the Sruti: yadahyevaisa etasminnudaramantaram kurute, atha tasya 
bhayam bhavati (Taitt.): ‘To him who sees difference here, there 
‘arises fear’; they do not contribute to the production of fearless- 
ness, because, fear arises only where there is another to be afraid 
of. [Where there is no other, all being Brahman, there can be no 
fear.]|; The Sruti again, says: nastyakrtah krtena, amrtatvasya © 
 nasadsti vittena (Brh.): ‘Moksa which is not a product (being ever- 
existent) cannot be produced by action; there is no hope of immor- 
tality by wealth”. From this it is seen that karma does nut have 
the capacity to reveal the. ever-existing state of moksa (which is 
hidden by the upadhi of ajfidna). The eternality of moksa is under- 
stood from the erate na sa punardvartate (Chandogya): “He does 
not return again”, i.e., he who is a worshipper of Saguna Brahman 
reaches Brahmaloka and does not come back again, i.e., does not be- 
‘74 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
come a samsarin, does not get a janma. The reason for that is be- 
ing liberated. (i.e., he will be eventually liberated by the acquisi- 
tion of Brahmajfiana.) Being liberated means being as Brahman. 
yo vai bhiima tadamrtam (Chandogya): ‘What is superlatively ex- 
pansive is immortal”; satyam jianamanantam brahma (Taitt.): 
“Brahman is of the nature of existence, intelligence and infinitude”’ 
nityo nityindm (Katha): “the eternal among the eternals”. These 
and hundred other Srutis declare the eternality of Brahman. So it 
follows that liberation too which is of the nature of Brahman is also 
eternal. In his commentary on the last section of the Sitra Bhasya, 
Sri Bhagavatpada has said: Non-return is an established fact for 
those whose darkness of ajfiana has been removed and who have ac- 
quired realisation. On that basis non-return becomes a fact even 
for the worshippers of Saguna Brahman (by reason of their having 
acquired Brahmajfiana by the preponderance of sattva-guna when 
they reach Hiranyagarbhaloka). So those who have reached the 
_ world of Brahman, and who attained realisation there itself achieve 
kaivalyamoksa. This is seen from the following Srutis: te brahma- 
loke tu parantakéle paraémrtaét parimucyanti sarve: “In the Brahma- 
loka, after the completion or Hiranyagarbha’s period, they are all 
released by the jfiana produced by the realisation of the meaning of 
the Upanisadic and smrti texts. brahmand saha te sarve samprapte 
pratisaficare | parasyante krtétmainah pravisanti’ param padam it 
“Those who have reached Brahmaloka by upasana which gives kra- 
mamukti attain Brahmasaksatkara there and when the great deluge 
which is the final stage of Brahma arises, they attain liberation along 
with Brahma”. Here paraémrtét means by the superior knowledge 
produced by Vedantavicara. Krtétmanah means those who have 
achieved realisation of the atman. 
Every person is inherently Brahman. He is free as a matter of 
fact. He forgets it due to overpowering ajfana. When one’s ajfiana 
is removed by the guru’s upadesa and atmavicara, he recognises that 
he is the Brahman which he has ever been. So this Brahman-rea- 
lisation is not an. effect produced by Brahmajiiana in the same way 
as non-pre-existing effect is produced de novo by a conditioning 
cause. Brahmajfiana is not productive of Brahmanhood, but is only 
revelatory (abhivyavijaka) of it. It is saksatkara realisation by the 
upadeSa, instruction by the guru of mahavakyas like Tattvamasi. It 
is revelatory of an existent fact, that one is and ever has been Brah- 
man. The recognition of this fact is itself moksa or liberation from 
the bonds of ajnana. This is illustrated by three examples: (1) A 
‘person has a gold chain round his neck. It is hidden by a cloth or 
VIVEKACODAMANI 75 
some such thing which he is wearing. Thinking that it has been lost, 
he searches everywhere for the to-him-los. ornament. A friend 
looking at him says: ‘It is there round your neck’. He feels that he 
‘got it back’. By his ignorance, he thought that he lost it. It has 
always been round his neck. His ‘getting it back’ is really his re- 
cognition of the fact of its ever having been round his neck. 
(2) Karna was Kunti’s son. But from his childhood he was brought 
up by Radha. So, he thought he was Radheya; he did not know he 
was Kaunteya. But when later Kunti told him that he was really 
her son, he realised he was Kaunteya. He did not acquire the nature 
of being Kunti’s son (Kaunteyatva) afresh; he was Kaunteya al- 
ways, previously as now. What was not known previously is now 
known by Kunti’s words. (3) In the Ramayana, before the assem- 
bled gods who praised Him after the killing of Ravana and Sita’s 
fire-ordeai, Sri Rama disclaimed that He was divine as the gods pro- 
claimed Him and said that He thought of himself only as a mere man: 
dtmanam mainusam manye. But, when He was told by the gods: 
You are the Ekagrnga Varaha, you are Mahavisnu. He remembered 
His true nature. It is not that a non-existent Mahavisnutva was 
acquired by Him; but what was previously a fact revealed to Him 
by the words of.the gods. It must be understood similarly in this 
context also. | 
Karma (action) has one of four kinds of effects: (a) It is utpa- 
dyam: the production of something. in a form which did not exist 
previously. (b) It is dpyam: It refers to something new or else- 
where which has to be attained. (c) It is samskaryam: It relates 
to the purification or sanctification of what is impure or unsacred. 
(d) It is vikaryam: effective of change of form. The examples for 
these respectively are: (a) the generation of union with svarga by 
performance of yajfias, (b) the attaining of skill of Vedic recitation 
which ‘is a combination of several sound-forms, (c) the sanctifica- 
tion of a thing by scattering purified grains on it, and (d) the re- 
moval of the shell from the grains by crushing or grinding them. 
The atman is ever-existing, nitya. So there is no question of its be- 
ing produced anew. A person is Brahman already; so there can be 
no talk of attaining it as a new state. It is nityasuddha brahmas- 
varipa; it is of the nature of the eternal, pure Brahman. So it does 
not stand in need of purification or sanctification. It is unchanging; 
so it cannot be altered in its constitution. All this has been elabo- 
rated by Sri Bhagavatpada in his commentary on the Samanvayadhi- 
karana of the Siitra Bhasya. So, it is clear that the 4tman cannot 
be realised by karma which has for its effect production etc. In the 
76 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
sruti: “vidyam caividyain ca, vidyaya tadérohanti........ ', by vidya 
upasana is to be understood. It means it is lower knowledes other 
than atmavidya. Moksa which is of the nature of being established 
In one’s true self cannot be secured directly by it. That is the 
meaning. | 3 
59 
Sri Bhagavatpada further Ce by an example that moksa - 
results by realisational awareness (saksatkara ) of Brahman and not 
otherwise. - 
ftorat waaay areitaraaeites aA | 
TASHA TA ATATATA BETA U4s 
vindyG ripasaundaryam tantrividanasausthavam | 
prajaranjanamatrarm tanna simrajyaya kalpate |; 
The beauty of a vina and the skill in playing on its 
chords serve only to please other persons; but it does not 
-help to confer sovereignty. an 
A raja is so called as he pleases his subj ects (raja prakrtirafjanat). 
Tifa vainika brings a nice-looking vina and plays on its chords ex- 
quisitely, people are pleased (rafjyante) by the beauty of the instru- 
ment and the exquisiteness of the music emanating from it; yet this 
ranjanam, will not make him a raja. Similarly, without realisational 
knowledge of the &4tman, the knowledge produced by Yoga Sastra or _ 
_ karma or upasana will not help to effect direct moksa. The beauty 
of the vina’s form refers only to its appearance. Skill in playing 
on it only causes satisfaction to people; it does not make for sove- 
reignty. (The distinction here is between rafijana and samrajya). 
60 
Having said that mere sound: noueue: pleasing to the mind, 
will not produce moksa, Sri Bhagavatpada proceeds to point out that 
the same will be the case with those who please the ‘mind by the 
substance of their words without producing the aforesaid know- 
ledge. 
ANG Wea UleasaTEATATR TTT | 
aged fagat aaa yaaa AY WATT go Ut 
vagvaikhari Sabdajhari Sastravyékhydnakausalam | 
vaidusyam vidusém tadvad bhuktaye na tu muktaye 
VIVEKACUDAMANI | | 77 
ev Skill in fluent speech, the proficiency in explaining the | 
_ §astras, the scholarship of the learned, all make omy. for per- 
- sonal enjoyment but not for liberation. 
vagvaikhari means speech made up of easy words. 
Sabdajhari means fluent speech. Skill in the use of words and 
flow of sound. 
tae vyakhydna-kauéalam: proficiency in explaining the Sastras: ex-_ 
planation includes the five elements: padacchedah: the splitting of 
words; padarthoktih: giving the meaning of words; vigrahah: split-_ 
ting of compounds; vdkyayojand: giving the connection of sentences 
and dksepasya samddhinam: answering objections. This kind of 
scholarship of the learned too, like playing on the vind, serves only 
to bring about fame. It does not lead to moksa. For moksa, the 
direct realisation mentioned earlier is the only means. 
61 
it.may be objected that there is no comparison between the 
momentary joy produced by playing on the vina and the happiness 
of the scholarship of the learned which enters into one’s being afte: _ 
it is heard. It is replied, even though there is this difference, yet, 
it is affirmed that in the absence of the realisation of the 4tman, the 
learning of the sastras and the skill which it gives: are IHERECHIVE | 
to produce the aforesaid result (of moksa). : page? 
afaand ot ava mearatiacy frenet 
- fasrdsfa at aca arearet fated faesot eq 
avijnite pare tattve sdstradhitistu nisphala | 
vijndte’pi pare tattve sastrddhitistu nisphala || 
If the supreme Truth is not known (realised , learning 
the sastras is of no use. If it is known (realised) ane 
too) learning the sastras is of no use. _* 
pare tattve: If the superior or Sracemninent ‘Truth or - Reality 
which is the foundation of everything; which is incapable of being 
sublated in any of the three periods of time, which is self-effulgent 
and compacted of bliss, which is vastly superior to all effected things 
from the body onwards which are all inert and only make for misery, 
which is known as nirguna Brahman is not realised, study of the. 
_ S4stras including inquiry into their meaning is futile. In the ab- 
sence of the goal of the éastra-vicira being achieved, till it is attain- 
ed, it is clear that the vicira has not borne fruit. 
78 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
By reason of the sadhanas that he went through in previous 
births, the sage Vamadeva (for example) realised the supreme Truth 
even when he was in his mother’s womb. As there was no purpose 
to be achieved thereafter, there was no need for him to study the 
Sastras. 
62 
A man who has got lost in the forest wanders about in bewilder- 
ment without knowing the direction. So too, as mere Sastra may — 
be confounding, one should give up taking one’s stand on that alone, 
and must try to realise one’s 4tman from a guru who nas: himself 
realised the Paramatman. 
Wea ARITA FATAATHITAA | 
AA: MASA ATA ACAATACAATCAAT: 1 GU 
§abdajalam maharanyam citiabhramanakaranam | 
atah prayatnat jndtavyam tattvajnat tattvamatmanah | 
| The concourse of words (constituting scripture) is a — 
great forest which will confound the mind. Therefore, by 
special effort, one must learn the truth about the atman from 
him who has known it. 
The truth has to be known by upadesa of the acarya acca on 
the astra in the form of the Upanisads. Yet, one ought not to rest 
merely on the abundance of the words of the Sastra. For, the men- 
tal impression left by them (laying emphasis on the mere letter of 
the texts) may be an obstruction to the dawn of jana. Vide Sloka 
72 infra. 
63 
Jiiana alone can remove ajfiana; not anything else. 
waTTTeaaczey agarilad frat 
feq dara mreara far ara: fart: 1 &3 it 
ajidnasarpadastasija brahmajhinausadham vind | 
kimu vedaisca sastraiica kimu mantraih kimausadhaih 11 
To a person who has been bitten by the serpent of 
 ajfidna, the only remedy is Brahmajiiana. To such a one 
_. What can Vedas, Sastras, mantras and medicines avail? 
- Ajfiana itself is the serpent as it is the cause of infinite evils. 
Being bitten by it produces the twofold.effects of dvarana: conceal- 
VIVEKACUDAMANI i = 79. 
ment of the true, and viksepa: projection of the false. For a per-. 
son thus bitten (deluded), Brahmajhana alone is the medicine. Of. 
what use are the Vedas like the Rk and the Sastras like Vyakarana | 
(grammar)? Of what avail are mantras chanted even seven crores 
of times? Nor can medicines like the safjivini help. Because none 
cf them can help the man stricken by the serpent of ajfiana to get rid 
of the delusion wrought by ajfiana. 
64 | 
That mere sound cannot be the means to moksa. is ews by an 
example. | 
a neofa faat ot sariaclaermesa: | 
faaisqcletaia agimeta ATAA th EY I 
na gacchati vind pina vyddhirausadhasabdatah | 
vind paroksinubhavan. brahmasgabdair na mucyate i 
If a person merely repeats the name of a medicine with- 
out drinking it, he is not cured of his disease. So too a per- 
son is not released by merely uttering the word Brahman 
without direct realisation of it. 
aparoksénubhava: the direct experience of the atman. 
_brahmasabdaih means by the mere words relating to Brahman 
contained in the Upanisads. 
65 
The same idea is expressed differently through the statement of 
the supreme means to the realisational knowledge of the Truth. 
HEA TVAATAT AACAT ATAATEAA: | 
argretea: HAY qfanefenarana toe egy Ut 
akrtva drsyavilayam ajidtva tattvamatmanah | | 
bahyasabdaih kuto muktiruktimdtraphalairnrndm i 
How can moksa arise merely by repetition of words 
without effecting the dissolution of whatever is drsya* and 
without knowing the truth of the a4tman? | 
drsya is what is cognisable either through the senses of per- 
ception or through the mind. It excludes what is ‘not: cognisable, 
the self. The absolute asat like the horns of a hare is not cognis- 
_ * Explained in the commentary. 
80  VIVEKACUDAMANI 
able as it does not exist at all. Brahman is not cognisable as it is 
not the object of cognition. Vide yato vaco nivartante aprapya: 
manasa saha, ‘that from which speech returns along with the mind 
without cognising it’. The word drgya excludes these two. When Sri 
Bhagavatpada speaks of drsyavilayam, reference is to the negation 
of the prapafica excluding Brahman and Sasasraga. Hence, without 
= having brought about the negation of everything beginning with the 
inert body and ending with ajfiana which are all other than Brah- 
man, and without understanding the truth of the atman which is 
devoid of all differences of like or unlike kinds or of internal differ- 
ences, and is self-luminous and blissful, by the mere repetition of the 
_word Brahman like ‘I am Brahman’, without inner experience, moksa 
of men cannot be secured. : 
_ kutah: kutah sambhavati: whence does it arise? ie., it does not. 
arise at all. (kim) kutah indicates negation. , , | 
66 
Thus, by adopting the negative method, it is conveyed that the 
final means (to moksa) is the residual 4tmatattva-jfiiana preceded 
by the liquidation of everything which is drSyam. When the drsyam 
is liquidated, ipso facto atmatattva-jfiana arises, not otherwise. 
| The means to mukti has been defined negatively, i.e., by refer- 
ence to what will not effect it. An appropriate example is given 
for it. 3 
MARAT Wag scateldiain 
cresgiafa weaiat wat ufaqrgit gs uu 
akrtvd éatrusamharam agatvdkhilabhisriyam | 
rajdhamiti sabdanno raja. bhavitumarhati 11 
| A person cannot become a king merely by saying ‘I am 
king’ if he has not killed his enemies and if he has not ae- 
quired the wealth of the whole earth. 
One does not deserve to be a king merely by s saying 1 am king’ 
if one has not liquidated the enemies who are obstructions. to one’s 
enjoyment of sovereignty and if one has not acquired lordship over 
the entire world. As in the matter of. kingship conquest of one’s 
enemies is. necessary, so too in relation to moksga all sense of reality. 
of seen objects must disappear. Similarly acquisition of dtmatat- 
tvajfiana, the knowledge (realisation) of the truth about the atman 
VIVEKACUDAMAN 81 
corresponds to obtaining possession of the entire earth. In each case 
the former precedes the latter. | _ 
«67 
That moksa cannot arise merely by external sounds, but that it 
should be obtained with effort from a knower of the Truth aaa 
is conveyed elaborately through an example. 
sated, Gad, amafcins arate, eatata 
fata: ardad a fe afgsmeceg fateofa 1 
SEC wefaatrerarrearrtatyet sat - | 
| ararerafaatga cana aed A qafeata: ge Ut 
aptoktim khananam tathoparistlapakarsanam svikrtim 
niksepah samapeksate na hi bahth sabdaistu nirgacchati 
tadvad brahmavidopadesamananadhydnadibhirlabhyate — 
maiyakaryatirohitam svamamalam tattvam na 
duryuktibhih, 7 
_ A treasure buried underground requires (in order to be 
obtained and possessed) the words of a reliable person, dig- 
ging, removal of the slab covering it and actual assumption 
_ of.possession. Merely calling out to it making sounds does 
not bring it out. | | : 
- So too, the pure Truth that is hidden by the agency | of 
maya can be obtained only by the upadeSa of those who have .— 
realised Brahman, by meditation and concentration etc., on | 
it; not by Specious reasoning. ie 
In the world, if a treasure of gold etc., soneeated under the 
ground should be secured, one should first learn about it from a_ 
reliable person who has actually seen it placed there or who is able 
to affirm its existence by means of unguent etc. He must dig into 
the earth and bring it to light. Then the slab covering it from view 
must be removed and then the treasure must be actually taken pus- 
-session of. Merely uttering the word ‘treasure’ does not bring it out. 
na Sabdaistu nirgacchati: tu indicates naiva: does not at all. 
Similarly, the awareness of the identity of the atman. and Brah- | 
man is like the treasure hidden by maya, ignorance and its effects 
the sheaths ranging from ahamkara to. the body. ‘Hidden’ here 
means prevented from being clearly realised. The awareness of this 
is obtained by br alimenmapadert; manana and dhyana. 
VC mT 
82 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
Brahmavidopadesa, i.e., competent, comprehensive upadega. 
Upadega by a Brahmavit is referred to as BrahmavidopadeSa, i.e., it 
is Brahmavidah opadesa. Here the word Brahmavidopadega is a 
compound. The addition of @ to u in upadesa makes it Brahmavido- 
padega. 4 signifies samantaét: completely. Or, it may be taken to 
be in.the instrumental case as vyastapada when, it will become Brah- 
mavida upadeSa i.e., Brahmavidopadesah i.e., instruction by a Brah- 
mavit. The distinction is only in compounding of words either as 
Brahmavid opadesa or Brahmavidé upadesa. There is no difference 
in meaning. 
Here, mananam, meditation means thinking about a thing again 
and again with appropriate reasons (yuktibhir anucintanam). 
Dhyana is nididhyasana. The word adi (etc.) is to include nirvi- 
kalpa-samadhi, i.e., being firmly established in the contemplation of 
the nirguna Brahman. 7 
Brahmalabhah here means direct realisational perception of one’s . 
atman; for, there is nothing other than itself, as there is no obtain- 
ing of anything external to it. When labha, obtaining, is spoken of 
as in the examples of the ornament round the neck etc., it has to be 
similarly understood. 
na duryuktibhir labhyate: it is not to be obtained by specious 
reasonings; for the Sruti says naisa tarkena matirapaneyd (Katha). 
“This (moksa) is not to be obtained by mere reasoning”. Reasoning 
in accord with sruti must be resorted to. In the Chandogyopanisad | 
illustration of the man who has lost his. way in the forest away from 
the Gandharadesa to which he belonged, the Sruti says: pandito 
medhavi gindhaéranevopasampadyate indicating the necessity of sat- 
tarka (reasoning in accord with sruti) as opposed to dustarka. Sruti 
declares the unattached character of the 4atman by the examples of 
mahamatsya etc., by the abandoning (non-consciousness) of the 
world in dreamless sleep the pure atman being free of (the taint 
of) the world, by the illustration of the lump of clay etc., the non- 
difference between the cause and the effect, the possibility of know- 
ing everything through the knowledge of one and the non-distinct- 
ness of the universe (prapafica) from Brahman by the illustration 
of the spider’s web etc., that Brahman is both the instrumental and | 
material cause of the world: by the example of the thief, liberation 
of him who is attached to the Real and the bondage of him who is 
attached to what is mithya and such other series of reasonings. 
These are examples of Sdat-tarka, proper reasoning. This is the | 
reason for the expression duryuktibhik in the Sloka. 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 83 
68 
arrears waaetaareaa | 
aaaaq aed: waeal Vimratea Afosa: gc Ul 
tasmitsarvaprayatnena bhavabandhavimuktaye | 
-svenaiva yatnah kartavyo rogaderiva punditath 11 
- Hence the wise must themselves strive by every means 
for release from the bonds of sarhsara as from disease, etc. 
tasmat: therefore: that is, because a person’s bondage cannot be 
got rid of by another, so, he himself must strive for it by the follow-: 
ing means: acquiring the sidhanacatustaya qualification, humbly ap- 
proaching his guru, listening. to the vedanta texts which he teaches, 
meditating on their meaning, concentrating on the same to the ex- 
clusion of all other ideas, and comprehending the truth of Brahman 
in the state of nirvikalpa nistha and then attain moksa. Merely by 
uttering the word Brahman liberation cannot be secured. _ a 
sarvaprayatnena: by every means, by the effort of gravana etc., 
mentioned earlier. ae By Pg ee 
; ‘bhavabandhavimuktaye: for the liberation from the bonds of 
3amsara commencing from avidya and ending with the body. 
 gvenaiva: by themselves, by those who are caught up in the sam- 
sarabandha, shackles of samsara. | ear ee eG 
panditaih: by the wise. 
: rogadeh: from disease etc., i.e., from disease, hunger, thirst ete. 
As medicine, food and water have to be taken by oneself to get. rid 
of disease, hunger and thirst respectively, so, by oneself should the 
effort be made to get rid of bhavabandha. ss 
The idea is that having very firmly acquired the sidhanacatus- 
taya made up of viveka and-the rest, a sadguru, one who has rea- 
lised the Sadvastu i.e., Brahman, should be sought and approached. 
The appropriateness of this meaning is evident from the insist- 
ence twice already that one must endeavour by every means to ob- 
tain liberation. | | | | - a 
a 6S | | 
_ Having thus eulogised the sisya who has acquired intense long- 
ing for liberation (tivra mumuksa) the guru applauds his question 
84 : | -VIVEKACODAMANI 
—-aeaate Fa: wet qa wears: | 
qamat farrerat TAIT aT: 1 gS V9 @ 
yastvayadya krtah pragno variyan sastravinmatah i 
_ stitraprayo nigidhartho jnatavyasca mumuksubhilh 11 
The question that you have.asked is excellent; it is ap- 
proved by those who know Sastra. It is brief like a sutra, 
pregnant with meaning. The answer to it must be known 
by the seekers of liberation. 
7 ‘The guru eulogises the Sisya saying: You are a superior adhi- 
‘karin not only by your possessing tivra-mumuksi, but also by reason 
of your having condensed in your question what must be known by 
a mumuksu, without omission or overstatement. That shows you 
are intelligent, medhavi, a scholar, vidvan, adept in the understand- 
ing of words in their proper context, thapohavicaksanah. You show 
the way to mumuksus ‘in respect of what must be learnt. So praised 
_ by the guru, the gisya endowed with devotion and earnestness will 
quickly receive and comprehend what is taught to him. This is sup- 
ported by the Sruti (Svetdisvatara): yasya deve para bhaktih, yatha 
deve tatha gurau / tasyaite kathité hyarthah prakasante mahaitmanah: 
“Hé who is supremely devoted to God, and to his guru as to his God, 
to such a mahatmi, all that is imparted (by the guru) becomes efful- 
gent”. Now, the question of the form: ‘what is bondage etc.,” is 
excellent, variydn; absolutely superior. Because it can be put only 
by those who are adepts in the Sastras. : 
sutraprayah: Another reason stated is that the question is of 
the form of a siitra. Everything that has to be asked in the matter 
of release from bondage has been abridged in the question in an 
aphoristic form in a minimum of words. 
nigiidharthah: The words are few; but everything that must t be 
known i is imbedded in it. That is why it is appropriate. | 
| It is meant that the sisya has anticipated the whole of the cur- 
rent treatise which is the answer to this question. | 
Thus by the words ajidnayogat etc., the guru conveys eiiowledae 
_ to be acquired by the mumuksus, of the moksa in the form of the 
destruction of the causes of bondage. This is to be achieved by 
realisation springing from discrimination between the 4atman and the 
anatman. As the Sisya questions the guru so comprehensively with- 
out omitting anything, the guru tr his neenne and 
praised him greatly. : 
VIVEKACUDAMANI- | 85 
70 
To enable him to receive and understand his words properly, 
the guru specially calls for the concentrated attention of the Sisya 
who considers himself very fortunate to receive such praise from the 
great one. 
~~ syoearatzat faga aerat ania 
= AATHH AMT WATE fartend igo i 
Srnusvavahito vidvan yanmaya samudiryate | 
tadetacchravanat sadyo bhavabandhad vimoksyase H 
| Oh learned one! listen. attentively to what I say. Bye 
listening to it you will be immediatery released from the 
bonds of samsara. : 3 
Learned one! as you are intelligent, you are endowed with the 
qualification for receiving the aforesaid atmavidya: listen attentive-. 
ly, without distraction, without allowing your mind to stray into 
other subjects, to what I shall impart to you in brief and at length 
for right understanding. By listening in the prescribed manner to. 
what I say, immediately after hearing my words, you will acquire 
realisation of the atman and you will be released from the bonds of 
samsara in the forms of agency (of action), enjoyment. a the fruits 
of action), birth, old age and death. | 
vimoksyase: ‘You will be completely released: 
| | 71 
Now desiring to tell the Sisya the answer to his Aaésiione: first ” 
the guru gives ee answer to the question: How is liberation | 
attained? | 
| But it may be. biiecied: The Sisya “asked seriatim: ‘What is 
bondage? How did it arise? How does it stay?’ Without answer- 
ing these three questions put earlier, it is inappropriate to take up © 
the fourth question first. | | 
It is not so. If a house is enveloped by a raging fire, to refrain. 
from immediately putting it out by throwing water on it, but to ask: 
‘Where did the fire first begin? How did it begin’ ete., and to waste 
time on these questions is improper. For, by the time these ques- 
- tions are answered, the house would be completely burnt down. _ 
Similarly, all samsarins are intensely subject to the ills ‘of sam- 
sara. For their destruction, efforts should be taken immediately. It 
86 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
is said: ‘The sastras are unending (numerous); what is to be learnt 
is enormous, the time at one’s disposal is. brief; the hindrances are 
many. Hence, what is most essential must be acquired within the 
shortest possible time even as a swan separates the milk from the 
mixture of water’. anantasdstram bahu veditavyam alpasca kalo 
bahavasca vighnah ; yat sdrabhiitam tadupdsitavyam hamso yathi 
ksiramivimbumisram |; With the idea that understanding quickly 
the means to moksa, adopting it, let the Sisya, released from bond- 
age, experience eternal bliss, the guru says in this Sloka: moksasya 
hetuh etc. It is in keeping with this that the guru took upon him- 
self to answer the fourth question first. Moreover, without know- 
ledge of the distinction between the atman and the anatman, the 
nature of bondage which is to be explained cannot be understood. 
Intending to explain all that later, the guru first answers the ques- 
tion: How shall I be liberated? 
atetea 2 aq: Saat fanaa acramementrersegy ) 
aarerrrarta aateataen sare: pera WAZ 1 04 uv 
‘moksasya hetuh prathamo nigadyate 
vairdgyamatyantamanityavastusu | 
tatassamascapi ‘damastitiksa 
nydsah prasaktakhilakarmanam bhréam {1 | 
The means to moksa is taught first as total absence of 
desires for all impermanent things. Then come sama, 
dama and titiksA and the giving up of all kinds of karmas. 
_ The meaning is clear. 
| 72 
aa: alread aacacaa fat freafreat aa: | 
_aaitsferned ara fagia sea fratrag qyTofa Woz IU 
tatassrutistanmananam satattva- 
dhyadnam ciram nityanirantaram muneh | 
tato’vikalpam parametya. vidvan 
ihaiva nirvanasukham samrcchati || 
Then comes (listening to) éruti; after that, daily unin- 
terrupted long meditation on that truth by one given to stich 
meditation (munih). Then the wise one attaining the > 
hae State, experiences the oe of liberation here 
itself. | a | 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 87 
Uncompromising detachment from ail transient things from the 
body to Brahma is said to be the first means to liberation. That is 
because it is only the mind: devoid of all desires which will render 
it unsteady that can acquire the qualities of Sama etc., in respect of 
its objective. | 
‘tatassamasca: the nature of sama has been explained already. 
ca in ‘tatassamasgca’ indicates conjunction which has been explained 
already. All the preliminary qualifications of detachment and the 
rest are necessary and essential even at the time of the acquisition 
of jana as internal sadhanas. Though they are stated in an order 
of earlier and later, the last alone, like the potter’s father, is not to 
be taken as the means, but all of them collectively are the means. 
This is expressed by the words ca, and api also. [The cause of a 
pot is the potter. The cause of the potter is his father. The cause 
of that father is his father and so on ad infinitum. To avoid this 
infinite regress, it is usual to confine the cause of a thing to its imme- 
diate and necessary antecedent (anyathasiddhantyatapurvavyttt). 
Here the cause of the pot is said to be the potter alone, and not his 
father. Even so, it may be argued that in the series of causes for 
jiana which effect liberation, namely vairagya. Sama, dama etc., all 
these do nct go into the cause; but on the analogy of the potter's 
father, the last of the series may be called the only necessary means. 
His Holiness points out that it is not so, but that all the items enu- 
merated in the series collectively constitute the means of jnana. 
By the words ca and api collectively is indicated.*! | 
In the same way, dama, titiksa and all other karmas are pres- 
cribed by the rules of varnas and asramas. They should be observed | 
till the dawn of vairagya. When once tivravairagya has arisen, they 
must all be totally given up. Previously, it was said that, for 
attaining vairagya which is synonymous with purity of mind, 
karmas should be observed in a spirit of dedication to God without 
thought of desire for their fruits. Now that the purpose of the’ 
karmas (cittasuddhi, purity of mind, and vairagya, detachment) 
has been attained, they (the karmas) are to be completely aban- 
doned. nydsa means giving up the karmas even in their performance - 
(which is different from doing them without desire for their fruits. 
‘It is a total karma-samnyasa, not merely karmaphala-samnyasa). 
21a A similar example is: The cause of butter is curd. the cause of curd is milk 
and the cause of milk is the grass that the cow eats. According to the anyatha- 
siddha rule, all these, the curd, milk and grass are not the cause of the butter, but 
only the curd. His Holiness says: Not so here. Vairadgya, Sama. dama etc.. all 
together are causes of jhana. | 
g8 : VIVEKACUDAMANI 
tatah: after that, ie. after the giving up of all karmas. 
Srutih: listening to the words of Vedanta from the lips of a 
guru with the awareness of their meaning. It is action which will 
facilitate the determination of the meaning of the Vedanta texts. 
_ tanmananam: reflecting on the meaning of the texts that have 
been heard with awareness of logical coherence for acquiring deep- 
seated conviction. | 
satattvadhyanam: After non-comprehension and doubt. have 
been got rid of by hearing and reflection, meditation on that 
supreme truth. 
ciram: This has to be done for long; this is intended to banish 
from the mind the long-standing tendencies making for mistaking 
the anatman for the a4tman. 
nityanirantaram: Though practised for a long time, if it is 
done with interruptions, the impressions during the broken intervals 
would spoil the Atman-consciousness. Therefore, nididhyadsana 
(contemplation) itself will not be effective. Hence the need to 
practise continuously and without interruption: nityam and niran- 
taram. Speaking of nididhydsana, the Yoga Sutra says: sa tu dir- 
ghakélanairantarya-satkaérasevito drdhabhiimih: “Its foundation is — 
what is done witn earnestness for long without interruption.” One 
_ should not hope that nididhydsana will be accomplished in a few 
_ days or months. To think like that’ will be as foolish as the thought 
of a father who says to himself: “The Vedas are only four in | 
number. My son has gone to learn them. It is ndW five days since - 
he went, and yet he has not returned after studying them.” To 
_ Show that it will require years and even several lives to accomplish 
it, the words ciram and nirantaram have been used. The Gita also 
says: anekajanmasamsiddhastato yati parém gatim: “Having 
become a siddha after a number of lives, one attains the supreme 
goal’, 
_ vidvin: dtmasaksatkaravén: one who has realised one’s atman. 
_ thaiva nirvinasukham samrcchati: If nididhyasana is perfected — 
by continuous and unbroken practice, then ihaiva, in this life itself, 
the vidvan who has realised the a4tman enjoys in full the bliss of 
liberation. param: utkrstam: pre-eminent, . ‘Superior. savikalpat 
param. He attains nirvikalpa samadhi which is superior to the 
| savikalpa. Having attained it, he enjoys unalloyed bliss of nirvana. 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 39 
73 
Having told in brief what has to be conveyed in respect of 
obtaining liberation in this life itself, Sri Bhagavatpada said that the 
vidvan, the wise one attains the bliss of liberation here itself. When 
it is said that the wealthy man (dhani) is happy, the effect of 
wealth is reflected in happiness. In an expression what refers to 
the known is uddesyam. That which refers to what is unknown 
in that context is vidheyam. In dhani sukhi a wealthy man is 
happy, dhani is uddesyam and sukhi is vidheyam. It is well known 
that despite exceptions, in the case of uddesya and vidheya, the 
effect of the uddesya appears in the vidheya. So too, being wise 
which is the adjective (visesana) of the wise man, is reflected in 
the joy of nirvana or liberation. As realisation of the discrimination 
between the atman and the andtman is born of vidya, it i is first made 
clear in this sloka. 
agreed atariterenarenfadany 7 
ACVAT AAT ALAR CATHEAANTTA 11 93 1 
yad boddhavyam tavedinim dtmanadtmavivecanam | 
taducyate maya samyak srutvatmanyavadharaya jj 
| That which you must know in the matter of the discri- 
mination between the atman and the anatman, that is now © 
told to you. Listen to it, and get decisive paw see about , 
it in your mind. 
By this Sloka is given the reply to the Sisya’s question: | “What | 
is this anatman? What is the Paramatman?” | 
yad boddhavyam: Before you attain the jfiana- nee will 
produce moksa, you must. learn to discriminate between the atman 
and the andtman, which discrimination will lead to the aforesaid 
jmana. Hence it is well explained in the sequel. Having heard 
it, decide about it firmly in your mind. | 
avadharaya: niscinuhi: decide. 
74, 75} 
It is through the anatman that the 4tman is to be known. The 
anatman is first known as it is gross (sthiilatvena). When that is 
known, the knowledge of the subtle 4tman becomes easy. There- 
fore, from this, loka to gioka 126 Sri Bhagavatpada elucidates’ the | 
nature of anatman. At first, in this Sloka, he. speaks of ‘the gross: 
90 | VIVEKACUDAMANI 
body which every one knows about; for everyone refers to it as 
the ‘I’. 
asstley-Aa :-T-Taa-AA-F ecarganigiettiretae L 
ATA EAAAT-AATS-AETH LF OMG OTTATATT U1 9 U1 
ag wafer staat aett rigreta exestreitaat qa: 1 
maj jjasthi-medah-pala-rakta-carma- 
tvagadhvayair dhatubhiebhiranvitam 
padoruvakso-bhuja-prstha-m astakair | 
angairupangairupayuktametat ir 
aham mameti prathitam gariram 
mohaspadam sthiilamitiry¢ te budhath || 
Marrow, bone, fat, flesh, ‘blood, skin and the cuticle are 
the seven substances of which the body is composed. It also 
consists of the limbs and their subsidiary parts, the legs, 
thighs, chest, arms, back and the head. This body which 
is the basis of the delusion of | IP and ‘Mine’ is called by the 
wise the gross body. . 
In respect of all the items listed here, the transformation of 
whatever is eaten into the gross, the middling and the subtle is to 
be understood. Of the ghee etc., that is eaten which is of the nature 
of tejas, the middle is the marrow, its grossest part is the bone, its 
earlier transformation is the fat. The flesh is the middle part of 
the food that is eaten. The red blood is the middle part of the 
water that is drunk. The skin is the gross covering. The cutaneous 
sense is the subtle covering. Seven coverings encase the internal 
substances and the nadis. The division between the gross and the 
subtle is based on what is outside and what is inside. 
The six limbs are the feet, the thighs, the chest, the arms and 
the shoulder and the head. By implication the hands also are in- 
cluded. The upangas are the forelegs, ne ankles, the knees. All 
this is clear. 
aham mameti: These aie referred to as ‘T’ an as ‘my’. A 
man says: I go; I stand; I jump; I:take. These words are the 
basis of the ‘I’ sense in respect of these organs. The body is refer- 
red to as ‘my foot, my hand, my head’ etc. Though it. consists of 
various kinds of defects; it is. the object of extreme attachment and 
delusion as being the 4tman. This body is referred to by the wise 
-as the gross. It is made up of many and varied components. Even 
as a house’built of pillars and walls indicates that it-is for its owner, 
VIVEKACUDAMANI | 91 
so too the body is for. its owner. It is to remind one of this that 
the catalogue of its components, marrow, bone, etc., is enumerated. 
By this it is indicated that the gross body is different from the atman. 
For, the Atman is the svamin of the sarira, the owner of the body. 
The body is for the atman; it is never the atman itself. To the 
atman alone pertains ownership, the body being for it (the 4tman). 
Sri Bhagavatpada gives the reason for considering the gross 
body as not of the nature of the eternal atman also because it is 
anitya, impermanent. | 
aaa eaeeTEA TAT: qari Heth wae ATE | 
qrercivifateartt eat Creat ST CaTTAEATA: 1 0% u 
nabhonabhassvaddahanambubhiimayah 
siksmani dhitani bhavanti tani | 
parasparaémsairmilitani bhitva 
sthulani ca sthilagarirahetavah |) | 
The sky, air, fire, water, earth, being subtle sisments 
combine with one another, become gross and are the cause of 
the gross body. 
The five elements, namely, the sky, the air, fire, water and 
earth first originate in a subtle form. Then by the will of the 
Creator who determined to divide them three-fold or five-fold, each 
of them is split into five parts. Says Sri Bhagavatpada: “Each 
of the five elements is divided into two equal parts. One half is 
reserved for that element. The other half is again split into four 
parts and associated with each of the rest. That is pancikarana. 
This is compactly conveyed in-:a Sloka of Sri Vidyaranya Svamin: 
dvidha vidhaiya caikaikam caturdha prathamam punah | svasvetarad- 
vitiryamsaih yojanat pafica pafica te 1; Thus, in each of the five ele-— 
ments, its own part is one half of it and the other part is one eighth 
of each of the other four. Thus made up of the combination of one 
another’s elements, the gross elements like the sky, air etc., are 
so spoken of. That is, they become the cause of the gross body. 
16 
Sri Bhagavatpada explains the respective objects of the gross 
elements to arouse vairagya towards them. — 
_ 22 The Taittiriya Upanigad speaks of pafcikarana, five-old division; the Chan- 
dogya speaks of trivrtkarana, three-fold division; but the two omitted in the latter 
are to be presupposed from the former and added to the list, — 
92 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
Araceae favor waft weatea: TST FATT wlAa: 1g tt 
matrastadiya visayd bhavanti sabdddayah paca sukhaya 
bhoktuh 
These five essences of sound etc., become objects of 
sense-perception for the plezsure of the enjoyer. | 
matrah: so-called because of the root-form miyante, i.e., they 
are made objects of sense or because they are enjoyed. They refer 
to five objects of sense-perception, sound, touch, vision, taste and 
smell. Sabda, sparSa. riipa, rasa, and gandha. 
visaydh: from the root sinj; sinj with vi meaning to bind. They 
are so called as they bind strongly. 
bhoktuh: to the samsarin, to the jiva. 
sukhaya: really means sukhabhdsaya: for the semblance of 
pleasure. | | 
In the Sastra sound ete. are referred to as the five tanmatras. 
The use of the expression mitrastadiyah is pursuant to the éastra. 
77 
Now their binding character is explained. — 
— 2 aq aat fasae ag oTteqia qeeaa | ee 
aha frateae peaqea: capaeda waa ata: 1 oo tt 
ya esu miidha visayesu baddha | 
ragortipasena sudurdamena | 
afyanti niryantyadha tirdhavamuccaih 
svakarmaditena javena nitéh 11 
Those who are bound to the sense-objects by the chord 
of attachment whichis difficult so snap, come, depart, go ‘ip 
and down led quickly by their own actions which act as 
emissSaries. | 
midhah: persons devoid of discrimination. 
These fools are bound to the sense-objects of sound etc., by 
the chord of attachment difficult to sunder like animals tied to a 
pillar with a rope. It means: men over-powered by extreme desires. 
As animals tied to a pillar cannot get away from the pillar, so too 
these persons, once tied to the sense-objects cannot get rid of them 
and are expelled from the path of salvation. | 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 93 
- One’s own karma in the form of dharma or adharma is the cause 
of one’s going up or coming down like a court peon taking a witness 
to the court-room upstairs and then downstairs. A. man tries to 
gather merit in the hope that Sabda etc., generate pleasure. Then, 
to enable him to enjoy celestial pleasure relating to sound, meri- 
torious deeds lead him up and make him attain svarga etc. Thence, 
when the stock of merit is exhausted, surely there is coming down 
to the earth. When this is so with reference to dharmic deeds, 
what needs be said in respect of adharmic (sinful) deeds? They 
always lead to going down. ‘They yo up’ means by virtue of the 
good deeds done in a previous life they are born as men. Then, by 
excessive attachment, they go down. The idea is that, by reason of 
his liability to forget his duties, to the man attached to pre aedacre 
there is no chance of liberation. 
18 
When amidst Sabda etc., animals which are attached to each one 
of them meet with death, i.e., bondage, then what needs be said 
of him who desires all of them together? This is a with 
the aid of an illustration to effect their abandonment. 
weafafa: qsafata Isa TSMAATT: cat TST: | 
HCH-AAHAAS-AA-A ST AT: asufatisad: fry NN we Wo 
Sabdddibhih parcabhireva panca 
pancatvamapuh svagunena baddhah ! 
kuranga-matanga-patanga-mina-bhrngah 
narah pancabhirancitah kim }| 
The deer, the elephant, the moth, the fish and the 
blackbee meet with death, each by one of these five senses. 
What then needs to be said of man in whom all the five are 
active? | , | 
Respectively by the sound, touch, vision, taste, and smell, each 
one of these, the deer, the elephant, the moth, the fish and the 
blackbee meet with death bound by the rope of their native ten- 
dencies. When that is so with respect to these creatures which are 
each seduced by one only of these senses, man who has all of them 
in combination is sure to meet with a grievous fate. 
- Those who wish to catch a deer though it runs a great distance 
entice it attracting it by the sweet sound of the flute etc., and they 
catch it when it stands motionless entranced by that sound forgetting 
94 _ VIVEKACUDAMANI 
itself. Thus sound by itself is known to be the ruse to bind the deer. 
A mighty elephant wandering at will in the midst of a forest, is, 
caught by tempting it with the touch of a. cow-elephant. That 
shows that touch alone is the means whereby elephants are caught. 
A moth is attracted to a flame by its brightness and goes to it to eat 
it. It falls into it not knowing that it will burn. But it is quickly 
burnt by it which shows that vision is the cause of its death. A 
fisherman wishing to catch fish uses a hook to which a piece of flesh 
is attached. Attracted by it and wanting to taste it, the fish takes 
the bait and is caught by the fisherman. The bee is attracted to 
the smell of campaka flower, and dies in the process of enjoying 
that fragrance. Thus each of gabda etc. leads these creatures to. a 
fatal end. And, to infra-human creatures there is no question of sin 
(for, they have no obligatory duties). Yet, a great calamity over-. 
takes such animals. By being a slave of these five senses, man fails 
_ to do his duty, and does what is prohibited for him. So, he comes 
to grief both in this warld and in the next. | 
19 | 
Apart from sense-experience being a cause of death, the sense- 
Objects kill when you simply see them and, as such, they are more 
GCeady than the poison of a king cobra. That is stated in this 
Sloka. | | | ae | 
alan atat faaq: seoradfaereta | 
fag fagica wtrare weert waqeTsCTy 11 08 11 
dosena tivro visayah krsnasarpavisddapi | | 
visam nihanti bhoktaram drastéram caksiisipyayam || 
A sense-object is more virulent than the poison of a king 
cobra. The latter kills only him who swallows it: the 
former brings about the death of him who merely looks 
at it. 
visayah: sense-object: from ete. The poison of a king cobra 
can bring about the death of a person. But more fatal than that 
are the sense-objects which are more virulent. If a person is bitten 
in the leg or any other part of the body by a king cobra, the poison 
quickly travels thence to the tongue through the bloodvessels mix- 
. ing with the blood in them. -Hence the expression bhoktd. That is 
why in some cases, though bitten by a cobra on the leg, if a tight 
bandage is made at the spot, man does not die; because, there is no 
connection of that poison with the tongue through the nadis. Thus, 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 95 
the poison kills a man who is affected internally by it; ie., it 
makes him non-existent. 7 
But, this poison of the sense-object kills him who merely 
perceives it. For it is well known that men quarrel among them- 
selves when they perceive beautiful objects etc., and die as a result. 
Even though there is no quarrel, their minds being enticed by - 
those objects, they are disabled to realise their 4atman; they are | 
rendered incapable of perceiving the effulgence of their own atman. 
So nihanti here means either being as good as non-existent or not 
being effulgent and so not known. The meaning is to be. adopted 
according to the context. Whatever is non-existent will not be efful- 
gent; will not be known. | : : 
In fact, a person attached to sense-objects, though he is existent, 
will not attain his proper objective of moksa. . So, he is as good as 
non-existent. | | | 
80 
Thus, on account of lack of right discrimination, a person gets 
firmly attached to sense-objects though they are fraught with great 
dangers. Due to his: foolishness, he is not aware of the defects in 
them. So, he fails to attain his purusartha (here, moksa). So, he 
who seeks liberation must completely cast out of his mind the 
desire for sense-objects. Else, though he may be an adept in the 
six éastras, he cannot gain mukti. . 3 _ 
— fagorm-agrararen faa: qeRaare | 
aaa werd WR Ara: qevorradaa Ui co Ul 
visayasé mahapasadyo vimuktah sudustyajat | | 
sa eva kalpate muktyai nanyah satcchastravedyapi 1 
It is only he who is free from the chord of sense-attach- 
ment so difficult to discard, that has the capacity for 
‘liberation; not.any other though he may be a scholar in six 
‘Sastras. _ 7 | | : 
: sudustyajat: very difficult to relinquish. On account of long 
association with it, impossible to get rid of except by deep and 
steadfast inquiry. | - - * 7 7 
visayasamahapasat: the desire for sense-objects is itself the 
_great binding chord., | | 
vimuktah: completely freed from connection with it. A per- 
96 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
son bound by the chords of desire is not fit for mukti though he may 
be learned in the six Sastras. 
sa eva kalpate muktyai: That person alone has the capacity 
(qualification) for liberation. 
81 
The baneful consequence of the absence of perce detachment 
from sense-objects is declared here. 
MMTA-ACTKAAAT ARTA Harlarqe stfat MARTA | | 
aaa AETaaAa FEI ws fatract amg ued tt 
apatavairigyavato mumuksiin | 
bhavabdhiparam prati yatum Moura 
asagraho majjayate’ntarale 
nigrhya kanthe vinivartya vegat 
The sea monster of desire catches hold of those who, 
what arises in the mind when one, being subject to the sufferings 
of life, condemns samsara. That is, those whose vairagya is neither 
total ror everlasting. 
apatavairagyavatah: of those of superficial enigenca which is 
what arises in the mind when one is subject to the sufferings of. 
life and so condemns samsara. That is, those whose vairagya is 
neither total nor everlasting. | ee Aa TG, | 
The effort to attain the other shore of the ocean of samsiara 
stands for the effort to attain jana. In respect of such persons 
who, wishing to attain liberation, are anxious to attain jiana, the 
great crocodile of desire effectively catches them by the throat in 
mid-ocean (of samsara), turns them forcibly back from their objec- 
tive to get to the other shore of samsara. 
majjayate: drowns them, ie., involves heii again in the 
process of performing karmas, as they are caught up in the ocean of 
samsara. . 
He, however, who is completely detached from sense-objects, 
who is endowed with the qualities of gama, etc., goes to a sadguru. 
He approches him with due humility. He learns about the atman 
from Guru’s lips and then is freed from samsara. This man whose 
vairagya is merely superficial is bereft of the firm virtues of gama 
etc.. Even if he tries for liberation, he is tormented by desire ‘half. 
Vv IVEKACUDAMANI | . 97 
way and made to fall down from his auieeeven of liberation. That 
is, he does not become fit for Jnana. ) 
82 
The same idea as in the previous Sloka is conveyed in an oppo- 
site way. 
faqureqagt a — gait 
@ weal warrata: are seqgataa: Wl 
visayakhya graho yena suviraktyasina hatah | — 
sa Gacchets bhavambhodheh param pratyuha varjitah Me 
| “He who has killed the monster (crocodile) of visaya 
with the sword of vairagya reaches the other shore of sam- 
sara freed from all obstacles. 7 
The monster of visaya: the huge crocodile, that is seat 
objects. | ebay 7 
SU pH aictyasne: the steqetast vairagya is itself the s sword: by 
it. | | 
 pratyihavarjitah: without any dbstacle i in the matter of ¢ cross- 
ing the ocean of samsara fraught with the waves of birth, death 
etc. 7 
param: The: other shore Le, ‘Brahman. vider the pa 
gdh oandl: pdramapnoti tadvisnoh paramam padam: (Katha). “He 
attains the supreme state of Visnu, the other end of the path”. 
gacchati: prapnoti: attains: saksatkaroti: i.e., is released by the 
intuitive i eek aaah (saksatkarana ) of Brahman. | : 
83 
Sri Bhagavatpada puts together in this Sloka the substance of 
the previous two slokas and the meaning conveyed in Kathopanisad 
text: yastvavijndnavan bhavati amanaskah sadd@’sucih’na sa tatpadam 
apnoti. samséram cadhigacchati 1 yastu vijndnavan bhavati samans- 
kah sada Sucih; sa tu tatpadamapnoti yasmad bhiyo na jayate: * “He 
who is unlearned, unmindful, always impure, he does not attain that 
state; he does not cross over samsara. He who is learned, mindful, 
always pure, he, however, reaches that state; oe is not born eealn 
— fawafaecart TEBalsreoas: 
ofaqanfeerrat Reqweag ‘fag: \ 
V.C.——3% 
8 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
fgqgqMaAMTERal Weed: cae WRIT 
swafa nofafe: acafaedta fate 23 it 
visamavisayamarge gacchato’nacchabuddheh 
pratipadamabhighato mrtyurapyesa siddhah | 
hitasujanaguriktyd gaccatah svasya yuktya 
prabhavati phalasiddhih satvamityeva viddhi We 
Know that obstacle and death haunt at every step a 
man of impure mind who travels on the road of sense- 
pleasure beset with the dangers and difficulties. But, he 
who leads his life by the advice of well-meaning friends 
and of the guru and by his own reasoning, attains the fruition 
7 of his purpose. Know this to be the truth. 
visama: fraught with various distractions of the mind; ‘making 
for infinite sorrow. 
visayamarge: The road of the sense-objects. vide visayamstesu 
gocaran in the Kathopanisad. 
anaccha buddheh: Of one whose mind is impure. For, if the 
mind is pure and accustomed to proper reasoning, it will withdraw 
from sense-objects. As it is enveloped by rajas and tamas, it 
becomes incapable of reasoning. In accord with the saying: Asa 
frog in the mouth of a snake looks out for something to eat, so does 
a man caught in the coils of death seek impermanent sense-pleasures. 
The man without discrimination becomes addicted to these 
pleasures. A man of such impure mind has to confront sorrow at 
every step. 
mrtyuh: death is samsara ehich makes for death (and birtk 
again). siddhah: esatblished by experience. It has already been 
explained that the mind alone is the cause of bondage and release 
of men; attachment to pleasures causes bondage; liberation comes 
from non-attachment to them. The Bhagavad Gita also says: 
“When men think of sense-objects, association with them arises in 
their minds. From such association arises desire for them. From 
desire arises anger. Anger begets delusion and delusion produces 
loss of memory. By loss of memory, the intellect is destroyed and 
by it the man himself is destroyed”. 
The word for destruction here is “‘pranaéyati’, The word comes 
from the root nas which means ‘not seeing’ “nasa adargane’”’. So, 
not realising (not directly seeing one’s own real atman) is itself 
pranasa. That is death. 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 9 
abhighatah: A man whose desire is thwarted everywhere gene- 
rally becomes angry. In the world it is not always possible to 
acquire what one desires. Then, when his desires are thwarted, 
the unreasoning man gets anger and other things which follow 
from it. 
Having spoken about what happens to one who has not culti- 
vated vairagya, Sri Bhagavatpada proceeds to convey what will 
happen to one who is a virakta. 
_hitajanaguriktya: hitajanah: those who are intent on the 
spiritual welfare of others: ‘sreyaskaéminah’; hence, good men, 
friends and others. | | 
The beneficence of the guru and his goodness are well-known. 
Until. one has discovered one’s guru, the words of hitajanas 
should be listened to. Once the guru is obtained, his words should 
be listened to. 
Or, the two may not be taken in succession, but together; then, 
the meaning will be: the words of hitajanas and of the guru should 
be listened to.. | 
. Aman should go about his life by their words and by his reason- 
ing which will help him to understand those words in their proper 
setting, in accord with aha and apoha. vide the Chandogya éruti: 
pandito medhavi gandharanevopasampadyate evamevehdcaryavan 
puruso veda: ‘The learned man who is clever ultimately reaches the 
_G&ndhara country; so too here he who is guided by a preceptor 
is able to realise the Supreme”. Mukti which is the*highest objec- 
tive of human endeavour accrues only to him who treads the path 
of Sreyas (spiritual welfare) without any disturbance whatsoever. 
prabhavati: surely arises without any hindrance. 
satyamityeva vidahi: Know this to be the truth; do not have 
even a particle of doubt in this matter. 
84 
Starting with ‘matrastadiyah’ (sl. 76) up to this sloka, Sri Bhaga- 
vatpada explains that action in relation to sense-objects results in 
bondage. In this Sloka he explains what must be taken and what re- 
jected by the seeker after liberation. | 
arg area afe a aaried | 
eaATETTS fasara fag zwar 
100 ss vivexACoDAMANT 
Gaeeete-ereresta- 
senfearettin Frere i cx tt 
moksasya kanksa yodi-vai tavasti 
tyajatidirdd visayan visam yatha | 
piytsavattosa dayadksamarjava- | 
prasdntiddntirbhaja nityamadarat 1 
If you ever desire liberation, fling away all desires 
as. if they were poison. Drink daily with great eagerness 
the nectar of contentment, compassion, forbearance, truth, . 
straightforwardness, calmness and self-control (control of 
the mind and the external senses). | 
First what has to be discarded is referred to. | 
yadi. vai tavasti: The ‘vai’ here is for exclusive emphasis. It. 
‘means: your desire must be only for moksa. 
_ kanksa: desire. 
The visayas, sense-objects must bi abandoned absolutely as if 
they were halihala visam, dreadful poison, atidtirdt tyaja means do 
not. think of them even with the mind. The Sutasamhita says: 
akurvannapi vidhyuktam nisiddham parivarjayet. - nisiddha ‘pari- 
hérena vihite labhate matim |; which means: Even if a man does 
” not do what is prescribed, let him desist from what is prohibited. 
By thus desisting, his mind will get inclined to do what is prescrib- 
ed. The idea of desisting from the prohibited is that the man, hav- 
ing “nothing | to do, will engage himself in prescribed actions. = 2 
Then what are to be acquired are given. tosa is the joy of con- 
tentment; dayad is compassion; ksamé is titiksa; ability to bear the 
opposites; a@rjavam is an uncrooked mind, ie., straightforwardness; | 
prasantil i is supreme calmness; déntih is restraint of external senses. 
Here, in prasanti, the preposition pra is prefixed to Santi to show | 
that as the virtues of tos3 etc. are qualities of the antahkarana, and 
as, in. accordance with the Gita dictum-asdntasya kutassukham: 
“how can peace and happiness accrue to one who has no Santi”, and 
as in the absence of Sama there can be no ae So everything is de- 
pendent on sama. a at 
nityam: everyday and always. 
piyiisavat: like amrta, the heavenly nectar. 
ddarat: with supreme faith. 
bhaja: sevasva i.e., adopt. 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 101 
| — BO 
‘Thus Sri Bhagavatpada confirms detachment from sense-plea- 
sures as the means to moksa. He then shows that the non-attach- 
ment should begin with the gross body. The idea is that if attach- 
ment to the gross body is given up, vairagya from sense-objects will 
be easy. | a | 
aaa aeaicger Hea TATA AAT HAAHTATTA | 
38: qaatsamaea Trot a: AeA a CAAA PAT Cy UL 
anuksanam yatparihrtya krtyam 
anadyavidyakrtabandhamoksanam | 
dehah pardrtho’yam amusya posane 
yassajate sa svamanena hanti ti 
He who gives up what should continuously be done, 
namely, getting release from the bondage wrought by begin- 
ningless avidya, and indulges in gratifying the body which 
is ever for others, slays himself. = = | pee yee’ 3 
yat: the gross body. | 
parthrtya: completely abandoning the superimposition of the 
anatman which is the body on the &tman. This false identification | 
extends from the ahamkara to the body. 
anddyavidya: mulaividyé: beginningless primeval nescience 
which is the cause of the concealment of Brahman and the projec- 
tion of the world. — | | 
anuksanam: sarvada: nityam: must be done every moment, ie., 
always and continuously. | a 7 a 
First the reference is made to the abandonment of the body 
which is gross; for, the abandonment of the-sense of the atman on 
the breath (prana) ete. will follow only thereafter. gan < 
That the body is anatman is shown by speaking of it as parartha, 
j.e., intended for another. This has been explained. in the. com- 
mentary to gloka 74. 
The body is composed of many diverse components. It is the 
anatman in the sense that as a house made up of roofs, walls, pillars, 
etc., is intended for the owner of the house, this body too as com- 
pacted of many parts is for another who is the atman. By itself, 
it is the anatman. He who thinks of this body as his atman for-. 
getting his true nature, indulges in gratifying the body being deep- 
102, VIVEKACt!DAMANI 
ly attached to it, and is very much intent on preserving it, kills his 
own self by this gross body, i.e., prevents his true nature from shin- 
ing forth. A man is released by the effulgent experience of his true 
nature. But, by his attachment to his gross body which is hindrance 
to that experience, he thinks of it which is subject to birth, death, 7 
ete., as his 4tman and is always subject to grief. 
—«BE 
It is well known that those who wish to cross a river, use a 
raft which will float on water and cross the river with its aid. But 
they do not do so on the back of a crocodile. For, they are sure to 
die swallowed by the monster. So too, for one who indulges in the 
body, realisation of the a4tman never arises. By the strong attach~ 
ment to it, they are drowned in the ocean of samsira. 
adteaterorredt aq a arn fegerat | 
ue atefaar acat at ad a eof ce 
Sariraposanarthi san ya dtminam didrksate 1 
graham darudhiya dhrtva nadim tartum sa icchati 4; 
He who wishes to realise the atman through the indulg- 
ence of the body is one who wishes to cross a river on the © 
back of a crocodile thinking it is a log of wood. 
The meaning is clear. To such a one atmadarsanam, realisation 
of the atman is impossible like crossing a river by one who clings to 
a crocodile thinking it is a log of wood. 
87 
Therefore, says Sri Bhagavadpada, the wise man seeing libera- 
tion should give up attachment for the body. 
aig Ga Rare: AR MAgTfeg | 
—oatgt faftaat aa a a feaqangia i cio tt 
~ moha'eva mahamrtyuh mumuksorvapurddisu 
— moho vinirjito yena sa muktipadamarhati 1} 
For the seeker of liberation, attachment to the body is 
_ the great death. He alone deserves liberation who is free 
from this attachment. ti 
vapurddisu: in the body etc., in the body, sons, wife, etc. 
mohah: the feeling of ‘I’ and ‘my’ i.e., carers this body is T, 
that the'son, wife etc., are ‘my’, | 
VIVEKACIttDAMANI 103 
‘mahamrtyuh: even as one dead cannot do anything, so too one 
subject to this moha cannot strive for liberation. He alone who has 
conquered moha, i.e., one who has given up the feeling of ‘I’, and 
‘my’ in the body etc., deserves to tread the path to mukti, ie., he is 
said to be liberated. 
| 88 
Therefore, teaches Sri Bhagavatpada, give up moha, attachment 
due to delusions. Bhage 7 OE ee | 
stg ae erg, eeregenfeg | a facat qaat ater afzeot: Te TA Ce 
moham jahi mahamrtyum dehadarasutadisu | | 
yam jitva munayo yanti tadvisnoh paramam padam 1} 
Give up your attachment to the body, wife and sons, 
which is the great death. Conquering it, the sages reach 
the supreme state of Visnu (Brahman). : 
_ munayah: mananaésilah: those accustomed to meditation and re- 
flection. | 3 | | 
sutadisu: Adi here is intended to include friends, wealth etc. 
moham: bhrantim: delusion. | 
mahamrtyum: the great death; for, it is delusion which con- 
ceals one’s real nature; it is the cause of non-realisation of the 
atman. | 
jahi: destroy by inquiring into the meaning of srutis. 
a jitvud: abandoning the false identification of the atman with the , 
body etc., though deep-rooted by its existence for a long time, get- 
ting over it by the words of the guru based on Sruti. 
yanti tadvisnoh paramam padam: tat: celebrated in éruti. visnoh 
paramam padam: the super-excellent state which is of the nature of 
Brahman. | | | 
When it is said: visnoh padam, Visnu’s state, the state is not 
different from Visnu. Visnu himself is the state and the state itself 
is Visnu i.e., Brahman. It is a possessive case indicating non-differ- 
ence. abhede sasthi: as in rathossirah: the head of Rahu, the head is 
Rahu and Rahu is the head. They reach Visnoh padam means they 
become Visnu (Brahman) Himself, ie., they are liberated, | 
104 | VIVEKACUDAMANI 
: --yanti: They attain the super-eminent state of the nature of 
Brahman, which is infinite and devoid of any limitation. | 
89 
Sri Bhagavatpada confirms the sense for abondonment out of re- 
vulsion from the gross body which is completely undeserving of 
attachment being filled with extremely impure components and 
which must be discarded even from a distance. 7 
casniacfre-earqael-aseeadgor 
qi aaqtiarsat cyst rated oh tn A 
tvanmamsarudhira snayumedomajjasthisarnkulam | 
pirnam mutrpurisabhyam sthilam nindyamidam vapuh it 
This gross body is despicable as it consists of skin, 
flesh, blood, blood-vessels, fat, marrow and bones and the 
urine and the faeces. 
snayuh: tendon, muscle: 
_ The repulsive nature of the body and the need to cultivate de- 
erent from it as it is full of impure and offensive things. are em- 
phasised. The extreme. repulsiveness of the body is brought out by 
reference to its containing urine and faecal matter. No one would 
wish to touch a } 2d-pan or a pisspot. Whehce then can arise the 
_ feeling of ‘I’ness with reference.to it? Hence it is despicable. 
90 
Having thus despised the gross body to sroduce vairagya, Sri 
Bhagvatpada resumes the topic of discrimination. between the atman 
and the a4natman. 
GSaearat Wary: eqaea: aR | 
© Rarated eget sterageraree: W 
WaT Se erealaaa Wa: 1 Fo 1 
pancikrtebhyo bhitebhyah sthilebhyah pirvakarmandé | 
_samutpannamidam sthulam bhogayatanamatmanah 1) 
avastha jagarastasya sthilarthanubhavo yatah v" 
: This gross body is produced by one’s karma in past life 
out of the elements which have undergone paficikarana* 
and is the instrument of the jiva’s experience. That is its 
waking state in which it experiences oe M ects, : 
. explained earlier, 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 105 
Previously, it was Said that the subtle elements like the sky etc., 
got mixed with one another’s parts.and became gross to effectuate 
the gross body. The process of paficikarana was not referred to by 
its name. That is done here. : 
‘pirvakarmand: the basis of the differentiation into divine, 
human and sub-human forms out of the gross elements called earth 
etc., on the basis of previous karmas is explained. The origination 
-of divine and other bodies is in accordance with pure punyakarma 
resulting in a divine body, pure papakarma resulting in a sub-human 
body and a mixture of the two leading to a human body. 
idam sthilam: idam: This,-i.e., what is visible here and now. 
bhogayatanamatmanah: dtmanah means jivasya: of the jiva; 
bhogayatanam: the place of enjoyment of bodily pleasures; i.e., that 
_in which there is the experience of pleasure and pain, 
samutpannam: ‘sam’ is prefixed to ‘utpannam’ to show that 
there is no confusion in a specific kind of karma producing a parti- 
cular kind of body. It is intended to remove the doubt of ‘samkara’ 
or wrong mixture. [That is, pure punyakarma will not lead to either 
human or sub-human body. Similarly, pure papakarma will not 
produce either a divine or human body. The same is the case with 
mixed karma. It will produce a human body and not any of the 
other two.] iSvara'is the dispenser of the fruits of karma. He is 
omniscient. He dowers the jiva with a particular body Birietty on 
the basis of the karmas performed. 
| This gross body has arisen out of the process of paficikarana of 
the elements strictly according to antecedent karmas and is the 
venue of the jiva ’s experience of pleasure and pain. . | 
; avastha jagarastasya sthiilarthanubhavo yatah: the gross body i is 
wrongly considered as the atman. It is different from the &tman. 
The state of the gross body is specially to function as the experi- 
encer of bodily pleasures and pains. The time of such experience 
is known as the jagara; the waking condition. The definition of 
jagaritam, wakefulness is the ability to perceive objects by the sense- 
organs (indriyairarthopalabdhirjigaritam). This ability to per- 
ceive objects by the sense-organs means: Each organ has a presid 
ing deity back of. it. In the case of sound, it is ability to receive it 
through the ear favoured by the deity presiding over it. So with 
the other sense-organs. During dream, the gross sense-organs cease 
to function. The sounds etc., which are of the nature of. vasanas are 
not physical; they do not have the character of being perceived by 
106 | VIVEKACTIDAMANI 
the respective organs by virtue of the presiding deities. Even if 
the mind is considered as an organ, there is no sense-perception by 
_ it in the manner of the physical organs. 
yatah: yasmat: by which: by this gross body, ie. by attach- 
ment to it arises the experience of gross objects. For that reason 
is the waking state associated with the gross body. | | 
| 91 
The same meaning is further explained. 
‘agifaa: cusqaraaai 
 aRrercante-fafaa-wary | 
HUtia sta: CaNHaaTaTAT i: 
qearenaferagatsed AMT 37 
bahyendriyaih sthiilapadarthasevam 
srakcandanastrydadi vicitra ripam 
_ karoti jivah Svayametadatmand : | 
tasmat prasastirvapuso’ sya jagare 1" 
Identifying itself with the body, the jiva enjoys gross 
objects like a garland, sandal paste, woman etc., through — 
the external organs. Hence the Paper nce of this body in a 
the waking state. | | os Cae Ts 
bahyendriyaih: by the external organs of sense, namely te skin, 
the organ of smell, eye ete. | | 
srak candanastryadi vicitra ripam: ees pimaahe ante: iti 
rupani: ‘ripyante’ means made concrete objects of perception; hence, 
the name riipani. That in which is the enjoyment of various ob- 
jects like a garland, sandal paste, a woman etc. | we 
7 vicitra ripam: of diverse shapes and forms. 
sthilapadarthasevam: the enjoyment of gross objects. The 
grossness of objects has been explained earlier. It is the experierce 
of pleasure and pain generated by the anugraha ( grace) of the deity 
presiding over each particular sense-organ. 
jivah: the pratyagatman, the inner atman. 
svayam karoti: does itself; enjoys. | 
etadatmana: through the gross body ; by its nature reflected in 
VIVEKACTIDAMANI | 107 
the gross body through the mind or by } its sense of atman se a 
posed on the gross body. 
In the dream state, there is no association of the mind with the 
gross body. So, there is no reflection of the cit and no ground for 
enjoyment. But during dream, there is imagined another gross body 
of the nature of vasanas (residual impressions). For, it is well 
known that one has experiences through the forms of bodies of inani- 
‘mate and divine beings different from the well-known gross bodies. 
Therefore, to this gross body importance attaches in the state of 
waking. That is because there is no attachment of the mind to the 
--gross body in dream and dreamless sleep states. Thus the anat- 
matva of the gross body is established by distinction from the dream 
and the dreamless sleep states as it is not apparent in these states 
but is clearly seen in the waking state. But the atman as witness- 
ing consciousness of all states accompanies them throughout, and for 
ae reason is different from them. That is clear. 
92 
| Even as, in the world, no one looks on his house as his atman, 
so should the gross body be thought of, and the sense of the ‘I’ should 
never be associated with it. 
eats agi: HAT: GeIeT Tara: | 
fafa aefaa east qeaaqgnfar: 11 <Q 
sarvopi bahyah samsaérah purusasya yadasrayah i 
viddhi dehamidam sthilam grhavadgrhamedhinah |) 
Know that this gross body is that on which rests man’s a. 
entire contact with the external world and is like the house 
of a householder. 
samsara: transactions of a person with the external world. qt 
is of two kinds: external and internal. The internal samsara re- 
lates to the experiences of pain, pleasure, acting and enjoying. The 
external samsara has reference to birth, death, stoutness, ete. The 
entire external samsara is clearly stated in the next Sloka. The 
atman (purusa) is asamsiari, i.e., it is not affected by anything that 
is the result of the identification of the 4tman with the body even as 
a householder is really unconnected with the house he lives in. 
grhavat: like a house. 
viddhi: know. It is well known that a man residing in a house 
acquires a wife etc. For, in the absence of even a house to live 
108 | - VIVEKACUDAMANI 
in, no one would think of marrying at all. So, ae wrongly thinking 
that the gross body is the atman, the jiva thinks that old age. and 
death which are the qualities of this body as his own and undergoes 
pains, not otherwise. In deep dreamless sleep there is no sense of 
the gross body or attachment to it. Then one is not afflicted | by 
(awareness of) old age and disease ete. Hence the sense of the ‘I’ 
is inappropriate in the ‘gross body which iS to be known as absolutely | 
distinct from the atman, 
93 
The external samsara is explained. 
—taseq aan aay: 
“ geiteutaat agtaen: fareareraeat: | 
-aurferatfs-frmat agurssrat: eq: 
— garareagarer | fater: e311 
sthilasya sambhavajarimaranani dharmah 
sthaulyadayo bahuvidhah sigutadyavasthah | 
varnasramadi niyama bahudhamayah syuh 
| pitjavamana bahumanamukha visesth 11 : ; 
The features of the gross body are birth, old age ‘ana ‘ 
death. It has many kinds of states like stoutness, infancy 
ete. It is subject to disciplines of caste and station. (varna 
and 4srama) and to various kinds of afflictions. It is also 
subject to different kinds of treatment like worship, dis- 
honour, honour, etc. 7 | 
sambhavah: origination—birth Jara: ote age. 
maranam: death. _— 
sthaulyam: excessive growth of the body. By 1 the use of the 
word adi (etc.), leanness which is also a transformation of the body, 
colours like whiteness and darkness are included. 
bahuvidhah: of various kinds. 
SiSutddi: childhood etc., i.e., including boyhood, youth and 
adulthood and old age etc. Though by the use of the word ‘jara’, 
old age has been previously included, it is not ipePETaptiate to add 
it in the context of sisutadi. 
varnasramidiniyamah : The rules of varnas and aéramas, the 
varnas including brahmana, ksatriya, vaisya, and sadra and the asra- 
mas—brahmacarya, garhasthya, vanaprastha and samy ase 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 109 
adi refers to gotra and sitra also. — 
4 : niyamah: the prescribed duties of the varnas like brahmanatva 
and aéramas like brahmacarya and also the traditional family codes. 
~~ bahudhamayah: various kinds of ailments like fever, headache 
etc. - | - 
 -pijavamanabahumanamukhah visesisca syuh: piija: honouring: 
what is done by sandal paste, flowers etc. avamdanal: not being even spoken to; being ignored like not being taken notice of even by a look.. bahumanah: being given a high seat. 2 | | 
- Jatakarma etc., are done only for the body. So too the marks 
of agrama, etc. pertain only to the body. Hence, it is said that the 
duties of varna and asrama too relate only to the gross body. ~The 
internal disciplines which are intended for the mind are not seen ex- 
ternally. But, the external disciplines pertain to this gross body 
and are ‘perceived outside. Or, it means these observances by which 
it can be determined by athers, e.g. that this is a Brahmana, this is a 
Brahmacari.etc., are known. These observances purify the mind 
through their operation in the body. Though based on the false 
superimposition of the body on the atman, they have to be adopted 
as they serve the purpose of obtaining jiana. It means, therefore, 
that the other niyamas like paja and avamana need not be observed 
as they make for bondage. —— | 
94 
Having thus explained the gross body which is the anatman, the 
bondage of samsara to be traced to it and the way of release from 
it by the observance of the rules of varna and asrama, by the next 
five glokas the subtle body is expounded. - 
agifzarin saci, catia, saret a farge farataateang | 
areaiioarar qaacared wa hxarion saoiT RAT ee Ul 
buddhindrifani sravanam tvagaksi . : | 
ghranam ca jihvd visayavabodhanat | 
vakpanipada gudamapyupastham 
 karmendriyani pravanani karmasu |) 
The ear, the skin, the eyes, the nose and the tongue are 
known as the jiianentriyas as they give knowledge of ex- 
ternal objects. Vocal organs, hands, feet, the anus and the 
genitals are known as karmendriyas as they lead to actions. 
110 _-VIVEKACUDAMANI 
The ear is the space enclosed in the round shaped organ of its _ 
internal part. Touch is the organ located in the skin. The eye is 
inside the eye-balls; it is the sense of sight. Smell is located in the 
nose. Taste is imbedded in the tongue. These five intimate sound, 
touch, visual appearance, smell and taste.. As they produce the res- 
pective kinds of awareness, they are known as buddhindriyas or 
jnanendriyas. vdak refers to the vocal chords which are the organs 
enabling speech; pani is the organ of the hand which helps to take 
or lift; pada is the organ of locomotion, the feet. guda and upastha 
help to eject the solid and liquid refuse from the body. These five 
beginning with vak are the causes of bodily action. They are called 
_karmendriyas. They are all concerned with actions. The reason for 
this is that they are adapted to the respective karmas. 
95, 96 
| Having ‘his spoken of the external ten organs, the snigenal 
organ (antahkarana) which is important as that by contact with 
which these organs function and originate knowledge, and not other- 
wise, is explained in four ways with appropriate reasons. _ | 
fatrerasrasacoy wat at 
ss Bfarfearafafer eaatafi: ) 
Bae ancafanccntafa: 
afe:. ATA aAA AAT: 1184 
marfanratag faa cata: 
ial faa eg 
nigadyate’ntahkaranam mano dhir- 
 aham krtiscittamiti svaurttibhih | 
manastu samkalpavikalpanddibhih 
_buddhih padarthadhyavasiyadharmatah 
atrabhimanadahamityahamkrtih - 
svdrthanusandhanagunena cittam || : 
According to its differing activities, the antabharagh’ is 
called the manas, dhih, ahamkrtih, and cittam. The manas 
is responsible for cogitating. Buddhi determines the real 
nature of its objects. Ahamkrtih brings about the attach- 
ment to (by reason of identification with) the body. ‘Citta . 
is the memory aspect of antahkarana. | 
The antahkarana is one only; but by its activities it is distin- 
guished into four as manas, dhih (intellect): ahamkrtih (aharmkara: 
- ego-sense); and citta. The activities of these four are. enumerated. 
VIVEKACUDAMANI | | Lil 
-sankalpa and vikalpa: samkalpa is determinate intellect; 
vikalpa is indeterminate or doubting intellect. Vikalpana means 
vividham kalpanad: imagining in various ways. | 7 
| padarthadhyavasiya: i.e. padarthanirnaya: determination of the 
nature of objects. The modification of the internal organ connected 
with it is called buddhi. 
ahamkrtth: aharmnkara: which arises from attachment to the 
body, etc., and a false superimposition of them as “T’’. 
svarthanusandhana gunena: by the modification of remembering. 
The modification of internal organ connected with it is called citta. 
97 
Having thus described the jfianendriyas which spring respec- 
tively from the five elements of predominantly sattva nature, and 
the karmendriyas which spring from the same source and are predo- 
minantly of rajas nature and also the antahkarana which is effec- 
tuated by them, predominantly sattvik in their combination, now 
prana is explained which effectuates the siiksma Sarira compacted of | 
the five elements endowed with rajoguna. ee ; 
TTMTMACATAATATATAT WACTAT ATT: | 
vaqna afada fanddangarateatad ys 
prandpana vyanodana samané bhavatyasau prainah | 
svayameva vrttibhedat vikrterbhedat suvarnasalilamiva |1 
By its differences of actions and modifications, like gold 
and water, the breath by itself becomes prana, apsna, vyana, © 
udana and samana. . 
The same gold by reason of its modifications becomes many 
ornaments as bangles, earrings, etc. The same water is known by 
the differences of its form as river, pool, and tank. Similarly ‘the 
breath that permeates inside the body is known as prana, ap&na, 
vyana, udana and samana according to its actions of pranana, apanana, 
vyanana, udanana and samanano. ? Kp ee 
In the gloka the expression svarnasalilam is to be uriderstood as 
suvarnaschitam salilam, i.e., suvarna and salilam. Each of these is to 
_be understood as a separate example. 2 ; 
Even as the same piece of gold is differently named by reason of 
its. modifications, as the same water by its modifications is called 
wave, foam, bubble etc., so here too in the case of the breath. 
112 | VIVEKACUDAMANI 
_- prénanam: exhaling and inhaling by the mouth and the nostrils. 
“apdnanam: leading the refuse etc., down. | 
vygnanam: spreading what is eaten and aun throughout the 
body through the blood-vessels. 
_ udananam: carrying upward as while vomiting. 
_Samananam: leading the food eaten or oo for neeren to 
_the cooking fire in the stomach (the jatharagni). | 
_ These are the five functions of the breath, © 
98 
Now the components of the siksma Sarira compacted of the Abe: 
nendriyas above referred to are enumerated clearly. 
amnfeqeq sanrfaqea cro faqaT a TaT eT OTT | 
qeareaants a ara-waot Gasca qerTTreteng: Ween 
| vigadi panca sravanadi panca . 
_ pranadipancdbhramukhani paiica t 
buddhyddyavidyapi ca kamakarmani. 
purystakam siiksmasariramahuh i 
The aggregate of these eight, namely, ae | 
the five (karmendriyas) beginning with epeechi, 
the five (jianendriyas) beginning with hearing, 
the five forms of breath beginning with prana, 
the five elements beginning with space (akaSa), 
the intellect etc., buddhi, avidya, kima and karma, | 
is said to be the subtle body (saksma Sarira). s 
“The Vedantins call the combination of all this eight-fold aggre- 
gate of these things as the siiksma garira” is to be added at the end 
of the Sloka. | 
a Now is explained the subtle ‘nod, the sulkgmaéarira tas which the 
jmanendriyas etc., were enumerated. , | | 
1. vagadipancakam: = The five made up ) of epeeeh etc. : 
reeds. Sravanadipaficakam: the five made up of hearing ete. 
3 : _ pranapajficakam: the five-fold breath. | 
4. bhutapafcakam: the five subtle elements. | | 
5. pee ty acneatus(ayaln: buddhi, manas, ahamketi and cittam.. 
-elttam - 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 113 
6. avidya: - adhyasa, super-imposition 
7. kamah: desire 
8. karma: | action of the nature of dharma and > 
| adharma. | 
99 
The sloka clearly conveys that the pais Sarira (subtle body) 
is not the 4tman as it is composed of a number of things and because 
whatever is a combination is like a house intended oe for another. 
Te MEL YY aenefae foe equeeipeanadaad | 1 
AIR HABSTTATAS erearraiseifeeerto ren: Ngan 
idam Sariram srnu siksma samnjiitam 
lingam tvapaficikrta bhiitasambhavam | 
 savdsanam karmaphalinubhévakam — 
svajninato’nadirupadhirtmanah i 
Listen! This which is called the subtle body (siksma 
$arira), is also known as the linga Sarira. It arises from 
the elements which have not undergone the process of pafici- . 
_karana. It is made up of the residual tendencies of past 
desires. ‘It is the experiencer of the fruits of actions. It is 
7 begnningless limitation on the atman due to its own © 
 nescience. | 
This body bears the appellation of suksma. Being what is pro- 
duced, it does not have the form of the eternal 4tman. (For, “what 
is produced is liable to destruction). It arises from the elements 
prthvi, ap, tejas, viyu and: akésa—earth, water, fire, air and ether— 
which have not been split into five parts ee 
bhavam). | 
_lifigam: linga’ is derived from the root ‘ligi’ which means. 
what reminds. The lihgagarira puts one in mind of the Aatman. 
The karmendriyas (organs of action) like vak etc., are insentient en- 
tities (jada): they cannot function unless directed by an agency 
acting through them. For, what is lifeless acts only under the sti- 
mulus of a living body as seen in a chariot etc. So, this siksma 
garira which is made up of external and internal organs is speken 
of as linga, iie., what reminds (of the controller or adhisthatr). 
tu in Jingam tu’ is intended to lay emphasis. 
V.c.—~ | | 
M4 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
All schools of thought agree that dufing dreamless sleep there 
is no jhana in the sense of awareness. In the waking state and in 
dream such jnana arises only through the operation of the mind. 
But the mind itself is a material thing. Without the operation of — 
the atmacaitanya on it, there can be no illumination by it of any- 
thing else. The mind’s function of giving awareness of the atman 
arises only through its being the medium of the reflection of the 
atman. Therefore, it has to be understood that this subtle body is 
the symbol and is known as the linga-Sarira. This does not hap- 
pen in the case of the gross (sthila) and the causal (karana) -bodies. 
Savasanam: constituted of residual impressions of past desires. 
The atman is quality-less and actionless. It is nirdharmakam. The 
gross body perishes at the end of every life term and is numerous as 
there are as many gross bodies as there are janmas (successive 
births). It does not continue to be identical and permanent till the 
time of liberation. Therefore, the subtle body alone is the repository 
till moksa of all impressions (samskaras) of past lives and of those 
which are to be acquired in future. Hence the expression sava- 
‘sanam, which means being attended by samskaras produced by 
experience. 
karmaphalanubhévakam: of the nature of: experience of the 
effects of karmas. The subtle body is also the experiencer of the 
fruits of karmas. This experience of the fruits of punya or papa is 
in the form of pleasure or pain. In the dreamless sleep state, the 
_ Jinga Sarira accompanied by the vasanas is merged to the extent of 
‘non-existence. ‘That is why in that condition there is no experience 
‘ of pleasure or pain. But, the lingaSarira functions. in waking and 
dream states. Hence their experience in these states. Thus by the 
positive and negative methcds of proof.is known the fact of the 
‘lingasarira being the cause of experience which can pertain only to 
the linga Sarira which abides through several births. | 
svajnanato’nadirupddhirétmanah: This linga Sarira’is the begin- 
ningless limitation (upadhi) of.the atman. Though it is the product | 
of the subtle elements, beginning from the universal deluge (mahi- 
pralaya), it remains identical until the state of disembodied moksa 
(videha kaivalyam), by reason of its undergoing changes of mani- 
festation and absorption only and ‘not completely disappearing. 
Therefore, it has no beginning like the gross body. 
| But, it may be objected: Suiper-imposition (adhydsa), in terms 
of kama and karma which are synonymous with avidya arise sepa- 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 115 
rately in several lives. How then can the subtle body made of them 
be said to be permanent and identical throughout? 
Though they are separate like that, the external organs like vak, 
the antahkarana, the intellect etc., are not different till the time of 
release and so the permanent identity of the subtle body must be 
affirmed. 
It should not however be argued contra on the basis of that vak 
etc., of different persons being different and also being different for 
the same person in different lives as that would make for plurality 
of vak etc. Vak etc. are the same for the same individual till liberation 
just as his antahkarana. Differences in the subtle body . cannot be 
proved: by dumbness etc.,. some persons being born dumb, others 
blind etc. as that is the result of obstruction brought about by karma. 
The difference can never be affirmed of the antahkarana- which is 
the basis of all samskaras. If differences. are associated with it, the 
result will be that the effects of some karmas will not be experi- 
enced, and there will be experience of karmas which were never 
done. Moreover, if the subtle body in each janma is different from 
others, the antahkarana which is the basis of the experience of a 
| previously done karma will have lapsed and, in the new antahkarana, 
there will be no rasidual vasana to experience. That will mean 
_ thare is no samsara as such. The: new born. infant will not suckle at 
its mother’s breast. 
The Atman is quality-less and actionless (nirdharmakam). 
Avidya is one only. If the subtle body is not identical, there will 
be confusion of the experiences of pleasure and pain and there will 
arise enjoyment and memory in dreamless sleep. This will ensue 
if it is said that in every janma there is a new set of subtle bodies 
and their organs. For these reasons, it must be concluded that vak 
etc., and intellect. (buddhi) are not different but remain identical in 
the stiksma Sarira till disembodied liberation (videhamukti). Even © 
though the siksmaégarira is. not. of the nature of not being the coun- 
ter-entity of antecedent negation, i.e., though it has not praigabhéva — 
apratiyogitva?? as in the case of avidya, yet it may be taken that 
what was born once (long ago), if it is continuous without differ- 
ence of form through time, is also beginningless: or ananh (This is 
called pravaha-andditvam.) — 
23 When a pot is made, it was non-existent before it was made. Such non- 
existence is antecedent negation of the produced ‘pot. It is called pragabhdva; — 
(prik=before. So it is negation before production). The produced pot is the 
counter-entity of this prigabhava. It is called. the pragabhava pratiyogini. The op- 
posite of this is pragabhava-apratiyogi, i.e., what is not counter-entity of the ante- 
cedent negation: Avidya which is beginningless is such a prigabhiva-apratiyogini). 
116 : | VIVEKACUDAMANI 
svajnanato’nadih: Though the atman is one, yet, among jfanis 
we make differences as brahmavit, brahmavidvarah, brahmavidvari- 
yan and brahmavidvaristhah, signifying different grades of brahma- 
jiana. That is due to differences in the character of the antah- 
karana. So long as there are differences in the effects, the cause 
of such differences is to be traced to the upadhi. That shows be- 
yond doubt that the lingasarira is only an upadhi of the atman. 
Hence the use of the word ‘sva-ajnanatah’. As the true self has not 
been realised, the cause of such non-realisation is the supeEmposes 
ae 
100 
_ The special state of this subtle Body is explaitied.” 
 earal «-waraed famaaaen, zaman faenft aa | 
eat q afg: caana TSH aaa aTaTAATE: 1 
 waffeera face cea, aa carded TUT 1 Joo tt 
svapno bhavatyasya vibhaktyavastha 
| svamatrasesena vibhati yatra | 
svapne tu buddhih svayameva jagrat- 
kalina nandvidha vuasanabhih | 
kartradibhavam pratipadya rajate 
yatra svayamjyotirayam paratma }| 
Dream is a state different from this (waking state) _ 
where the buddhi shines by itself by taking the role of the 
agent etc., by the various -vasanas derived from the waking 
‘State. In it this supreme atman is self-resplendent. — | 
The dream state is one which is a distinct state of siiksma-garira 7 
( which distinguishes it from the sthila-Sarira). ‘The waking state 
is a characteristic of the gross‘body and it merges and is inactive in 
dreamless sleep. So, it is only in the dream state that the siksma- - 
Sarira is prominent. The reason for this is given in the words ‘sva- 
matrasesena’ etc. It is the only thing which remains in Lg dream 
state. 
svamdtram: By itself only. It alone remains. i the dieain 
state, there is no attachment to (awareness of) the sthila-Sarira. 
Therefore, the quality of awareness refers only to the siksma Sarira. 
yatra: in the dream; where the atman in the dream abandon- | 
ing attachment to the gross, by its lone residual pature shines by its 
attachment to the suksma-Sarira alone. 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 117 
svapne tu buddhih svayameva jagratkalina-nindvidha-visana- 
bhih: The aforesaid is explained with reference to the residual lone 
state of the self. In the dream state, the antahkarana shines by §it- 
self i.e., without the aid of an external stimulus by the various vasa- 
nas of the waking state. _ 
kartradibhavam: the attitude of the doer etc., i.e., doership, the 
result of the action, the activity, the instruments of action and place 
of action comprehending all the component features of an action, 
which arose in the waking state now pertain as Vasanas (samskaras) 
to the dream state. ees : ar 
pratipadya: attaining. 
rajate: shines. 
It may be objected: “How can such a power accrue to the | 
antahkarana which is a jada (insentient) object? When the mind 
courses through the tubular organs of the body called ‘hita’, then, 
says the éruti, it is called the dream state. There is no occasion 
for any luminosity. ge GE : 
- We reply: It is in that context that it was said svayamjyoti- 
rayam paratmaé: This Paramatman is self-effulgent. Vide the Sruti: 
na tatra siiryo bhati na candratérakam nema vidyuto bhanti kuto’ 
- yamagnih | tameva bhantam anubhati sarvam tasya bhasa sarvami- 
dam vibhati 1; (Katha). “There the sun does not shine; nor the 
moon and the stars; nor do these lightnings shine; nor even this fire. 
All this shines after that Light; by Its effulgence all this shines”. The 
Gita says: yadadityagatam tejo jagad bhasayate’khilam , yaccandra- 
masi yaccignau tattejo viddhi miamakam | “Know that lustre to be — 
Mine which is in the sun and which illumines everything in the 
world, that which is in the moon and in the fire’. The antahkarana 
is connected with the effulgence of: the cit extolled in these Srutis 
and smrtis, which is unilluminable by anything outside. By such 
‘connection accompanied: by the vasanas of the waking state, such 
power accrues to the antahkarana. | a gh os | 
It may be asked: ‘By virtue of the érutis, ‘satyam, jfidnam, 
vijfianamanandam brahma’ (Taitt.), “ayamatma brahma sarvanu- 
bhih’, ‘prajfianam brahma’ (Brh.), ‘krtsnah prajianaghana eva’, 
(Aitareya), the atman is self-effulgent, as it is always effulgent cai- 
tanya, and as its self-effulgence is ever present, why should the 
dream alone be specially singled out for affirming the self-effulgence 
of the atman’? Listen to the reason therefor. This will be clearly 
understood if the jyotirbrahmana of the Brhaddranyakopanisad is 
(118 | VIVEKACUDAMANI © 
carefully read from beginning to end. There Janaka asks 
Yajnavalkya “kimjyotirayam purusah”: “What is the (nature of 
the) effulgence of this purusa?” To this query, Bhagavan Yajiaval- 
kya first refers to the Sun, the great illuminator well-known in all 
the worlds. When the sun has set, he says, it is the moon. When 
that has set, the fire. When that has died down, the speech. To 
the further query ‘what (or wherefrom) is the splendour of speech.’ 
he says that the atman is the source of effulgence. By the atman 
these luminous things exist, ie., function, go, do actions and come 
back. Even-though this splendour of the atman exists always, yet, in 
the waking state when the external luminaries like sun etc., which 
help the sense-organs function. and in the cumulative activity of the 
internal and external instruments of action. its (the atman’s) lumi- 
nosity could not be perceived in its distinctness. Though it is distinct 
in dreamless sleep, it could not be seen as then there is no object to 
illumine; for every perceivable object is swallowed up in the darkness 
of sleep. It may be said ‘ajfana exists in sleep’. But it is a deba- 
table point as some people consider it as abhava, a negative category. 
Therefore, where various activities take place as in the waking 
state, but where there are no external sources of light, when the 
- gross body does not exist (does not function) and when all instru- 
ments of external action are stilled, then the’mind alone by its 
power of reflectinz the a4tmajyotis assumes all forms endowed with | 
the vasanas of the waking state. When the éruti Says atradyam 
purusah svayamjyotih, atra meaning here, in the dream, it does not 
mean that it is not svayamjyotis in the waking and dreamless sleep 
states, but that it is so in dream state. Though. the world is always 
of the form of Brahman which is devoid of differences of like, unlike | 
or internal nature and which is never sublated, yet for easy com- 
prehension by the hearer, the Chandogya Sruti. says: sadeva somya 
idam agra Gsit. (Hence agre dsit, ‘was.in the beginning’ does not 
mean it is not so now.) So too, in the case-.of the mind in dream. 
Though in the dream the mind is endowed, ‘with the samskaras of the | 
waking state, it is jada (insentient), it has to be illumined by some-_ 
thing else. So,.it has to be transformed as illuminatory like the sun, 
moon etc., by virtue of their reflecting the luminosity of the Para- 
m&tman of the form of caitanya and as the illumined like the pot, 
cloth etc. That is why even blind persons etc., see objects in the 
dream. It may be asked: ‘How can they see since they have ‘no 
eyes in the waking state’? It must be said that the mind alone is 
modified as the eye, by the power of the a4tman. Hence, to clearly 
VIVEKACUDAMANI Ag: 
convey to the hearer that in the state. of the absence of luminosity 
of the eye, the sun etc., the power to invest all objects with their 
reflected luminosity belongs to the atman only, it is said in the text 
of the Sloka following the sruti: svayamjyotirayam paratma. | 
101 
Even though the sun induces all creatures to act by giving the 
power of sight, it is not associated with their actions. So too the 
atman which is the illuminator of everything is unattached to the | 
actions performed by buddhi. | tat 
a facad acHATAAT: | 
read TT HAT: 
a facad fafeaaatiert Fa: 1909: U 
-dhimatrakopadhirasesasadkst | . 
na lipyate tatkrtakarmalepaih ‘ian 
-yasmadasangastata eva karmabhih 
na lipyate kitcidupadhina krtath 11 
ih Limited only by the buddhi, the atman, the witness of 
everything, is not tainted by anything that it (buddhi) 
does. Hence it is said to be unattached to the actions. It ae 
is not affected by whatever has been done by the limitations © 
_(upadhis). | : oe _ 
The reason dor it-is‘given: aéesasiksi etc. One is said to be 
a witness only if he merely looks on and knows without participating 
im any situation. The taint of action will attach only to the actor. 
In the world, the witness is unconnected with the plaintiff or with the 
defendant. Sco here too, as the atman does not act, being purely a 
witness, it is not tainted by what the upadhi, here the antahkarana, 
does. The atman is absolutely unattached. Vide the Srutis: asango 
hyayam purusah: “This purusa is unattached”; asango na hi sajjate 
(Brh.): “Being unattached, it does not associate ( itself) with any- 
thing”. - | oe e 
-. yasmadaséigah: There is no taint to it (the atman) by any 
kind-of karma done by the upadhis, the mind, speech etc. By the 
sole ¢eason of its.being asanga, unattached, it is not affected even 
in the -least by actions, right or. wrong, done by the upadhis, by 
the body, by speech or by the mind, 
120 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
102 . 
The association is wrought by upadhi. The truth is unattached- 
ness. This is now explained. | os a 7 ee 
aaeara fans fagfnd ear feaareHT: qa: | 
arenfanfina aon: aaareat WATS SAA 11-40% U1 
_ Sarvavydaprtikaranam liigamidam sydccidétmanah pumsah | 
. visyadikamiva taksnah tenaivdtma bhavatyasango’ yam tl 
This lingasarira (subtle body) is the indispensable 7 
operative cause of ali the activities of the individual self 
which is of the nature of intelligence as the tools are of a 
carpenter. For that reason this atman is unattached. | 
cidétmanah: of the atman of the individual which is of the 
nature of intelligence. 
This lingaSarira soniescted of the buddhi etc., is the indispen- 
sable operational instrument of all activities of the atman like the 
tools employed by a carpenter in his work. No carpenter can work 
on wood with his bare hands only without the tools of his profession. | 
So too for the 4tman all worldly activities arise only by lingaSarira 
associated with ajfa@na. Hence there is no activity, in susupti. 
( dreamless sleep) as there is no connection then with the lingaSarira. 
When there is the lingasarira there is activity, not in its absence. 
tenaiva, for that reason only: i.e, there is action ‘when there is 
lingasarira. In its absence the activity is absent. This reason is s well 
established in the world. 
ee * “asangah: sakala vyavaharaéangahinah: Devoid of real -con- 
nection with all activities. BEG os 
‘avam at the end of the Sloka means ‘this .atma’. | 
103 
It may be objected: The atman is what is referred to by the 
word ‘I’. When it is said ‘I am blind’, ‘I am deaf’, ‘I am dumb’, ‘I 
‘breathe’, ‘I am afflicted by hunger and thirst’, ‘I do’, ‘T am happy’, 
‘I am grief-stricken’, in these ways the ‘I’ i.e., the 4tman is associated 
with these and other various qualities. So, to say that the atman 
is unattached is not correct. To this it is replied that these qualities 
relate to the respective upadhis and so. there is no quality of the 
- VIVEKACUDAMANI 121 
atman relating to samsara. This is cuveyeda in this sloka- in which 
the aaa of the upadhis are analysed. 
— Hrerea-Areea-qacaaay: | 
| attea-anvaaemts aarg: t 
- arfnd-aacaqarerta 
sjtatfaaat & a qa: 1.903 
andhatva-mandatva-patutvadharmah 
saugunya-vaigunyavasaddhi caksusah | 
badhirya-mikatvamukhastathaiva 
Srotradidharma na tu vetturaétmanah 31 
~The qualities of blindness, defective vision and clear 
vision belong to the eye by reason of its healthy or diseased 
condition. Similarly qualities like deafness, dumbness, ete. 
pertain to the ear etc., but they do not belong to the atman 
which is the witness. | | 
- First the external organs are taken. If the eye is in a fit condi- 
tion, it is said to be sharp. If it is not fit, it is said to be blind or 
weak. Similarly by defect of the ear, arises deafness or defect in 
hearing. If it is fit, it is said to be sharp. If the vagindriya is defec- 
tive, dumbness arises. If it is in proper condition, it is perfect. The 
same applies to the other jmanendriyas namely touch, smell and taste 
and to the karmendriyas like hands and feet. None of these qualities 
attaches to the Atman, The reason for it is stated: “na tu vettuh” 
i.e., not to the knower. The defects of weakness -or sharpness 
existing in the eyes etc., are known by the atman as their knower. 
_ The qualities of the known do not pertain to the knower. : 
_ tu in the last line is for emphasis; it means ‘never’. _ 
104 
, That breathing i in and breathing out pertain to the prana is 
stated. | 
 egate-frare-fareroraqserarreceroicet: feat: 1 
srorfanattor qafer asat: sToEa eatararfaata Nqov tl | 
_ ucchvasa-nissvdsa-vijrmbhana-ksut- 
| praspandanadyutkramanadikah kriyah 
—pranddikarméni vadanti tajjnah 
_pranasya dharmdvasaniapipase 1) 
Those who know about. them say that actions of © 
_ exhaling, inhaling, yawning, sneezing, secretion and leaving __ 
122 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
the body etc, and hunger and thirst are qualities of the 
prana. | a . i 
pranddikarmani: The word @di here is intended to include 
beside prana, apana, etc., also the nagas etc. (which are upapranas). 
Inhaling is to be traced to the prana, exhaling to the apana; yawning 
to devadatta; sneezing to krkara, shivering fo vydna or to dhanai- 
jaya. Gdi here is to include winking. It is to be traced to karma. 
Going out is to be traced to udéna. Here too ddi is to include 
vomitting to be traced to itself. Those who know say that these 
actions belong’ to prana etc. That is, experts are able to assign 
each of the karmas to its appropriate source. Thus hunger and 
thirst also are qualities of prana. That is why in sleep there is no 
hunger or thirst as then there is no identification (of the 4tman) 
with prana. 
105 
In answer to. the query: ‘If blindness etc., indicate the quali- | 
ties of the eye etc., which are anatman, how then does this atman 
think of itself as so qualified?’ it is said: 
WABTTAAT BATaT qa | | 
- atefaeafraraa fereseaT ATTRA Fok Ul 
antahkaranametesu cakgurddigu varsmani 
- ahamityabhimanena tisthatyabhasatejasa || 
The antahkarana has its seat in these, the eye and other 
organs of the body identifying itself, with them with the 
sense of “I” by reflection of the atman in it. ~ 
antahkarana: here means the mind or manas. 
caksurddisu: in the jfianendriyas like the eye and in the 
karmendriyas like the vak. 
varsmant: in the gross body. 
abhasatejasa: by the effulgence produced by he reflection of 
the cit (atman), i.e., by the jiva. ahamtyapiimanena: by false iden- — 
tification produced by ajfana. 
tisthatyabhasatejasa: When the antahkarana which cannot dis- 
tinguish between the 4tman and the anatman, receiving the reflection 
of the cit in itself, thinks that it is the eye and other organs of the 
body being reflected in it, the 4tman too caught up in it imagines in 
itself the blindness and other qualities of the body and then goes 
about saying: I am blind etc. During dreamless sleep there is no re- 
VIVBKACUDAMANI | 123 | 
flection of the 4tman in the antahkarana and there is no scope for 
saying ‘I am blind’. Though there is such reflection in dream state, 
the antahkarana does not reside in the eye etc., by this reflection. In 
that state the gross sense-organs do not function. They simply melt 
away. Hence it is that in dream experience there is no reference 
to blindness etc. as in waking state. 3 
106 
Having thus shown that the entire external experience of the 
atman is to be traced to the antahkarana, it is said that the agency 
of action, and pleasure and pain which are internal also belong to 
it, | es | 
weet: a fasta: wal weafearaay | 
arate iararaaaaagta tl Yok Ui 
ahamkdarah sa vijneyah karta bhoktabhimanyayam | 
_ Sattvddigunayogenavasthatritayamasnute 11 
The aharnkara is to be known as thinking of itself as. 
the enjoyer by its conjunction with sattva and other 
qualities and as assuming the three states (of waking, 
dream and dreamless sleep). aa 
Thus it is to be known that ahamkara—the ego sense—is the 
anthakarana in which the cit or the atman is reflected. It then 
identifies itself with the body made up of the eyes etc. This 
antahkarana considers itself as doer and as the enjoyer. This is 
effected by the prakrti which is of the form of sattva, rajas and 
tamas. It acquires the three states of waking, dream and dreamless 
sleep by conjunction with those qualities. Waking state is the result 
of conjunction with the rajoguna. dream’ state arises by conjunction 
with sattva-guna and dreamless sleep with tamas. ‘Though in all 
states all the three qualities are: present, in each of them one or 
the other predominates. 
asnute: prapnoti: attains. 
107 
Having shown that agency and enjoyment too are the internal 
qualities of the antahkarana, it is said that same is the case with 
happiness and grief: 
— facorormrnpaet gat g:et farda | os 
TS VST FT MIAH: AATATAET AAA: 1 Gow tt 
124 | 4 | VIVEKACUDAMANTI 
 vtsayanamanukilye sukhi, duhkhi viparyaye — 
sukham duhkham ca taddharmah sadéinandasya natmanah 
When sense-objects are favourable, one considers one- 
self as happy, and as unhappy if they are otherwise. 
Happiness and grief are qualities of the antahkarana and 
not of the 4tman which is ever blissful. 
The feeling ‘I am happy’ arises when Sabda (sound) and other 
objects are favourable in accordance with one’s desire. If they are 
otherwise, i.e., if they are against a person’s desires one feels grief. 
They belong to the antahkarana; for they depend on its desires. — 
They are not the qualities of the atman. For, it is always of 
the nature of bliss. Vide Srutis like anando brahma (Taitt.), viynd~ 
namanandam brahma, raso vai sah (Taitt.), yadesa akasah (Taitt.), 
ete. : oo: or poe 
This (that these feelings belong to the antahkarana) also seems 
reasonable; for the same sound which gave pleasure at one time, 
causes pain at another. This is well known. The object is the same | 
on both occasions. So the cause of the difference is to be traced 
to difference in the mental state. The same sound which causes 
spain to one person gives pleasure to another at the same time. The 
mind thought of this sound as favourable to it previously. Now, 
however, it thinks otherwise. Therefore, pleasure and pain are its” 
qualities, | nae @ 
108 
‘Now, the. ever-blissful nature of the atman declared by the | 
sruti is proved by reasoning. | | as 
| rennet fe Rare fae a eae: fara: | 
vad va fg adata sent fraaat aa: god tt 
 atmarthatvena hi preyan visayo na svatah priyah 
svata eva hi sarvesam atma priyatamo yatah } 
The objects of the wo1ld are dear only for the sake of 
_ the atman; they are not dear by themselves. For, the atman > 
is dear to every one by itself. | 
hi: for the reason that 
Sense-object is riot dear by itself, but only because it gives | 
pleasure to or removes pain from the mind. | oS 
VIVEKACUDAMANI : 125 
preyaén: the object of pleasure; prema-visayah. If it were dear 
by itself in the form of sound etc., then there will be no variation 
in its nature of being dear. Men are known to abandon sound etc., 
and sons, friends and wives previously regarded as dear. The body 
which is considered. to be dear is subject to. the rigours of discipline; 
the breath is controlled; the mind too is made to disappear in a 
state of laya (dissolution). Why speak of other things? People 
give up even the ajiana which is known to accompany the bliss of © 
a4nandamayakoéga, the sheath of bliss. The reason for all this is the 
absence of real bliss in them and the ees of their capacity 
to produce joy. 7 
The blissful nature of the atman is . self-established; — it | 
is superlatively dear at all times. For it is said: ma na bhivam — 
hi bhiiydsam iti prematmaniksyate: The attachment to the atman is 
seen in the form “may I not not be; may I (always) be”. Never | 
- does a man say: ‘may I not be’. That means ‘may I be always’. | 
_ This applies properly to the 4tman only. ‘The gross does not appear . 
in the dream state. The subtle does not appear in dreamless sleep 
and the causal disappears in samadhi. The sense-objects like sound 
etc., do not appear in dreamless sleep and samadhi. Though func- 
tioning in waking and dream, they do not produce pleasure perma- 
nently. This has has been explained earlier. The Atman accompa- 
nies all the states, even in the absence of sense-objects in dreamless 
sleep as is confirmed in the experience of all creatures as of the 
- form of bliss, and also in samadhi in which the jfianin experiences 
such bliss. Therefore the Atman devoid of limitations (upadhis is 
considered as dear by all creatures. © csadl 
109 
ae are TRY are Rak were 
 TRaaat fataaa TATAISTRTA N 
afer: : TemreTa here aA a “arate 140811 
tata atma saddnando nasya duhkham kadacana | 
yatsusuptau nirvisaya atmanando’nubhiyate |: 
Srutih pratyaksamaitihyam anumdnam ca jagrati i 
The Atman is ever blissful; it never suffers misery. In 
dreamless sleep there are no sense-objects; but the bliss of 
atman is experienced then. This is attested by Sruti, sense- — 
perception, tradition, and inference, in the waking state. 
126 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
Therefore, being extremely dear to all creatures, the atman is 
of the nature of bliss always.. Grief does not attach to it at any 
time. This is attested by experience. Dreamless sleep is devoid of 
sense-object awareness. It is nirvisaya. All objects considered as 
giving joy, like those heard, touched, seen, smelt ett., are completely 
absent then. But every one enjoys at that time dtmanubhava which 
is inherent in that state, (not dependent on anything extraneous). 
_ Sarvairapi must be understood after anubhiyate in the gloka. By 
referring to Sruti in the Sloka, it is conveyed that it should not be 
spoken of as a delusion like the pleasures issuing from the body. 
Vide grutis: eso’sya parama adnandah; eso’sya paramé sampat (Brh.). 
These declare that there is a bliss (Ananda) in dreamless sleep which 
is the highest when there is conditioning by ajfiana. This is so 
because pleasure derived from sense-objects is ear auaH with pain; 
this, however, has no such admixture. ‘ 
That is why, though able to obtain Sense-pleasures by the 
thousand, even an emperor does not wish to live without sleep 
though he has the capacity to obtain and enjoy sense-objects. The 
reason for this is that the pure bliss of the 4tman is. untouched by 
any tinge of sorrow. Hence the érutis say: ko hyevanyat kah 
pranyat yadesa akasa Gnando na sydt: ‘Who can inhale or exhale 
if this A4tman, which like akaSa_is undefiled, does noi exist?” Akasa 
in the Sruti-vakya means ‘akasavat’—unpolluted or unaffected like 
akasa. | 
It is true that in dreamless sleep the sukha or bliss is covered by 
tamas. Yet, it is superior to that in jagract and svapna, in waking 
and dream states. If that is so, what needs be said of atmananda, 
the bliss of 4tman which shines by itself when tamas is destroyed 
by jfiana even as the sun shines in its native splendour when the 
mist covering it gets dispersed? Thus sruti—scripture, pratyaksa 
which is the testimony of sense-perception common to all people, 
aitihya, the words of the well-meaning, i.e., tradition and anumdana, 
inference cumulatively point to the fact that the atman is ever of 
the nature of bliss as it is dear beyond compare. What i8 of a con- 
trary nature cannot be so. These are evidences of the 4tman being 
always of the nature of bliss as sound etc., are of the jagrat state, 
(waking state). 
110 
Having so far in this work distinguished the gross body 
pertaining to the anatman and the subtle body relating to the 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 127 
objects like sound, and having explained their qualities for the 
understanding of the atmatattva which is quality-less and unattached, 
now is begun the explanation of the. causal aa which is the cause 
of the aforesaid anatman-elements. | | 
weuaaatedt Taafaa: sarefaar farrier qT | 
avatar qfraa erat aot amcraiad TAA NW GGo 
 avyaktanémni paramesasaktih 
anadyavidyd trigundtmika para | 
 kéryanumeya sudhiyaiva maya 
yaya jagat sarvamidam prasiyate || 
Maya is called avyakta. It is the power of Parames- 
vara. It is beginningless avidya. It is compacted of three 
gunas. It is superior to its effects and is to be inferred from 
them by the wisé whose intellect functions in accord with 
Sruti. She gives birth to this entire world. | 
Maya is called avyaktam, not manifest, not ‘vyaktam, because 
one cannot obtain awareness of it by sense-perception. For, it 1s 
devoid of form etc. 
‘paramesa Saktih: It is the power of Parameswara: of Brahma. 
‘It is an unimaginable and wonderful power. It has no beginning. 
Hence it is called anaddyavidyd, ‘beginningless avidya. It has no 
reality in the absolute sense. vastutah na vidyate. So it is called 
avidya. 
| trigunatmika: that to which pertain the three qualities, sattva, 
rajas and tamas. Or, the three gunas themselves are the constituents 
of it; hence trigunatmika; of the nature of three gunas. 
para: superior as their cause to all its effects beginning with 
Hiranyagarbha. 
kdryanumeya etc. The reason is given for calling it avyakta. 
It is to be inferred from its effects. As it has no visible form etc., 
it is not available for sense-perception. It is to be inferred from its 
effects as the akasa is inferred from sound. If this power is not 
accepted as a fact, creation from nirguna Brahman cannot be 
postulated. An effect without cause is impossible. By virtue of 
being the cause of all transformations beginning with 4kasa and by 
virtue of the sruti which intimates the evolutions brought about by 
iksana (seeing, thinking) samkalpa ipunposing) and pariyam 
(transformation), maya is established.- 
128 , VIVEKACUDAMANI 
- sudhiya: Those who do not accept sruti (as an instrument of 
knowledge) speak of the origin of the world in various ways, The 
word sudhiya, by the wise, is used to indicate that it is inappropriate. 
The dhih, the intellect is said to be susthu, good, if it follows sruti. 
That is indicated by the expression, paramesasaktih. By this, it 
must be known that the view of the Sarhkhyas that Pradhana 
which is inanimate is itself the cause of the world is rejected. 
Sruti also says in this context: mayam tu prakrtim vidyan mayi- 
nam tu mahesvaram (Sveta). “Know that maya is prakrti and Mah- 
-e$vara to be the mayin, the wielder of maya”. And again:. jivesava- 
bhaisena karoti maya avidya ca svayameva bhavati; indro mayabhih 
pururipa iyate etc. “Maya is responsible for the reflected being of 
Igvara and avidya for the reflection that is the jiva” etc. _ 
This maya is to be inferred from its effects by persons whose 
intellect functions in accord with the declarations of sruti. a 
suchiya: susthu sobhana érutyanusarini dhih yasya sa gudhih | 
‘by him whose intellect is in accord with sruti. Poe fact of it is 
to be inferred from its effects. 
By such maya is born evethiag’ from ihe: Paha to bral 
_ manda that is known as the karanaSarira or causal aed of the atman. 
This i is to be linked to Sloka 122. , 
| a | “111 
The nature of maya is stated. 
— waruanraaaerst at faarcafrarquaticnar ati 
argreargreawarterst at saiertetren, nau 
sannapyasannapyubhayatmika no . 
bhinnapyabhinnapyubhayt tmika no | 
singdpyanangapyubhayatmika no 
mahddbhuta’nirvacaniyaript || 
It is not sat (real), not asat (unreal), not both. It 
is not bhinna (different), not abhinna, (not non-different), 
not both. It is not sanga (with parts), not ananga (with- 
out parts), not both. |‘ It is very wonderful and of a form 
which is inexpressible. 
In the world, reality of what is never sublated and 1 the unreality 
of what is sublated are well-known as is the case with truth and 
- falsehood. What is never experienced at any time by anybody is 
unreal as in the case of the horns of a hare or of a skyflower etc. 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 129 
By éruti and smrti texts like bhiyascinte visvamaydnivrttih (Svet.); 
taratyavidyém vitatim hrdi yasminniuesite | yogi mayamameyaya 
‘tasmai vidyitmane namah 11 mameva ye prapadyante maiyimetam 
taranti te (B. G.); “again at the end, ie. after gravana, manana, 
nididhydsana, there is the cessation of cosmic maya’; “I bow to that 
vidyatman namely Brahman, who dispels maya when He is lodged 
in the heart”, and “those who seek refuge in Me. cross this maya”, — 
its (may4’s) being annulled by jfiana is understood. | Therefore, ‘it 
is not possible to associate reality with it like the reality of. the 
atman. According to the Gita statement: nabhavo vidyate satah: 
“there is no non-existence for what is real”, it is clear that it cannot 
-. be real as it ceases to exist after the dawn of jnana: Before jnana 
arises, as it is seen in the form of its effects and of their transfor- 
mations, as it is also the subject of inference, it cannot be said to 
be unreal like the horns of a hare. It is not of the nature of both. 
i.e., it is not both existent and non-existent as existence and non- 
existence being opposed to each other, it is not proper to predicate 
them in one and the same place. As it cannot be each of these 
separately, its being of the nature of both is absolutely impossible. 
In respect of objects seen in a dream and of those produced in 
jugglery, they are said to be of the nature of mithya* as they 
disappear even as they are seen. Hence’ they: are said to be different 
from the sat and asat, the real and the unreal. So too is it with 
maya. For it is said in the Gita: ndsato vidyate bhavah nabhavo 
vidyate satah | ubhayordpi drsto’ntastvanayostattvadarsibhih 1, “Of 
the unreal there is no being; of the real there is no non-being. 
Of both these the truth is seen by the seers of the essence”. ‘If 
ordinary mortals accept the absolute unreality of the pot etc., prior 
to origination and non-existence by destruction of what has come’ 
into existence after origination, that this is not. right. with reference 
to the absolute sat and asat has been declared by Lord Himself 
who said that the fact of these, that the superlatively Real cannot 
be non-existent, and the absolutely unreal-‘cannot become existent 
and that has been determined by the seers of Truth. Thus also, 
this maya is not a sadvastu (real), it is not an asadvastu (unreal) 
and it is not both (real and unreal). As it is not possible to de- 
termine if it is real or unreal, it is indescribable (anirvacaniya). 
As it is not capable of being stated to be real or unreal and so 
‘is called, anirvacaniya, so too it is said to be anirvacaniya also for 
the reason that it cannot be said to be different or non-different from 
24 mithyi is a technical word in Advaita Vedanta not to be understood. as 
illusion. mithya is that which is not unreal because it appears, but is not real since 
later it disappears. 
V°C.—10 
—-130 | VIVEKACUDAMANI 
Brahman. If it is said to be entirely different from Brahman, that 
_ will conflict with the Sruti-texts intimating non-difference. In the 
world there is absence of difference between a power and the pos- 
sessor of that power. But if it is said to be non-different from 
Brahman, difficulty will arise as it (may4) is liable to destruction 
while Brahman cannot be sublated in any of the three periods of 
time. If it is said to be both different and non-different, that will 
be to indulge in a ‘contradiction. The real and the unreal are 
opposed to each other, relate to different periods of time and it is 
not-right to predicate them together in the same place. Therefore, 
it is not of the nature ot both what.is real and what is not real. 
Hence it means it is not different, it is not non-different; it is not 
both. | | 
Similarly, it is beginningless. So, it is without parts. For, if 
it is with parts, it must be said to have originated. But if it is said 
to be without parts, its evolution (into things of the world) cannot 
be asserted. Hence, it is not without parts. It cannot be both as 
- both cannot be affirmed of a thing in the same context. . 
Hence, as between reality and unreality, difference and non- 
difference, being with parts and being without parts, nothing can 
be predicated of maya. Hence it is anirvacaniya, indescribable. It 
| is of a very wonderful nature. | i 
| 112 | 
As there is a cause for its complete annulment, for that reason 
~ also, maya is said to be not asat ¢for what is Be AD EOHETY asat a 
not be annulled). ted the, 
qauagifad area | 
aaa wafaanal at | 
waeaneacafafa sfazt | 
aoreddtar: afd: err: 1992 UN 
Suddhadvayabrahmavibodhanasya 
sarpabhramo rajjuvivekato yatha | 
rajastamassattvamiti prasiddha 
gundstadiyah prathitaih svakaryath 11 
‘This maya can be destroyed by the realisation of the pure 
~ non-dual Brahman even as the Illusion of a serpent ‘is nega- 
ted by the knowledge of the rope. _Its qualities are known 
to be rajas; tamas and sattva and they a are well known by 
their actions. | . 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 131 
Suddhaidvayabrahmavibodhandsya: destructible by the realisation 
of the pure non-dual Brahman. 
Suddha: nirguna, qualityless. 
_  advaya: non-dual, devoid of difference of like kind, different 
kind and of internal differences. 
vibodhah: realisation in its (Brahman’s) non-dual nature. | 
(tena) nasya: the counter entity of its destruction arising from 
it: tajjanya dhvamsa pratiyogini. | 
This is explained by an example. scepabltanan: the illusion of 
‘this is a serpent’ produced in a rope, 1.e. mistaking : a rope for a 
serpent. : 
In the same way as this illusion ‘this is a serpent’ vanishes on 
the knowledge of the basis (adhisthana) of the serpent, namely the 
rope, ie., by ‘the realisation, this is only a rope and not a serpent, 
so too the maya imagined in the nirguna non-dual Brahman vanishes 
on the realisation of the truth of its Daesaisariae substratum sd 
Brahman. | 
It was said earlier that maya is to be inferred by the wise en 
its effects. This is explained here by referring to its nature, quali- 
ties and actions. The qualities associated with maya are known 
to be rajas, tamas and sattva. They are invisible; so they are to be 
known by the effects of those qualities. Hence the expression 
prathitaih svakdryaih, i.e., by their well-known actions to ‘be 
detailed below. 7 : 7 
113 
| Giving in order the effects of rajas, tamas and sativa gunas, 
first the effects of rajoguna are stated. 
fagaradt <aa: frarterat 
aa: cafe: TAA eT 
aaraatseat: srrattea face | 
q:araat & waat fare: 11993 
viksepasakti rajasah kriyatmika 
— -yatah pravrttth prasrtd purdni ti : an 
- rigidayo’syah prabhavanti nityam geet 
duhkhadayo ye manaso vikérah 1) 
1320 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
The viksepa - Sakti pertains to rajas; it is of the nature 
of activity. From it is the well-known ancient samsaric 
procession. From this issue forth always attachment, pain 
etc., which are modifications of the mind. 
There are three powers in maya, namely vikgepasakti (the 
power of projection differently), a@varanasakti (the power of con- 
cealment. of the real nature) and jiadnasakti (as jfiana is reflected 
in sattvaguna which is a constituent of maya). The first two are 
-eauses of bondage; the third makes for liberation. Among these, 
the viksepagakti pertains to the rajoguna. It is of the nature of 
action. What is meant is that, when rajas predominates, the projec- 
tions become various. By the association with viksepaSakti starts 
the procession of ancient, heginningless samsara. It may relate to 
the jiva, or to the ISvara who is the cause of the creation of the 
world; for the creation of the world is effected by viksepaSakti. 
Isvara’s mayA is pre-eminently of sattvaguna and is under His 
control. So, there is no possibility of His being bound by it. The 
jiva’s maya, however, is of the nature of impure _ sattva and is 
subject to the upadhi of ajiana. Also jfidanaSakti is liable to destruc- 
tion by rajas and tamas. So he is subject to the upadhi (of maya) 
and to the bondage of its effects. 
rigddayah: This expression relates to the jiva. By association 
with the viksepasakti, raga, dvesa etc. (attachment, hatred etc.) 
which stimulate action, originate always in the jiva. 
- manaso vikarah: Therefore sorrow etc., 1.e., sorrow, joy, desite 
and forbearance are all modifications of the mind and never of the 
atman which is nirvikarin, incapable of any modification. Vide the 
‘$ruti: kaémassamkalpo vicikitsa sraddha asraddhaé  dhrtiradhrtih 
hrirdhirbhirityetat sarvam mana eva (Brh.) “Desire, purpose, doubt, 
earnestness, indifference, firmness, weakness, modesty, intelligence 
and fear, all these are only of the mind”. By the process of super- 
imposition, they are all imagined in the jiva; really they are not 
in it. Vide the Sruti: saksi ceté kevalo nirgunasca (Svet.): “The 
cetana is the pure witness devoid of qualities’; nanyato’sti drasta 
(Brh.) “There is none else as the seer”; niskalam, niskriyam 
Sintam (Svet.): ‘“‘Partless, actionless and of nature of peace”. 
114 
a ow waned | Sri Bhagavatpada uses ‘he word ragadayah, raga etc., 
by adi in ddayadh~"® refers to the rajasa characteristics which 
produce the effects dr!”?0ng projection “ caused | by rajas, their 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 133 
| making for grief by their terrible nature, their causing the series 
of human activity ultimately ending in bondage. , 
Te: aay AAT E AA ATSE HTL ATT ett: A 
eat od Ua: duqfaaenretaaat aRT: WAY 
- kamah krodho lobhadambhabhyasiyd- 
*hatnkarersyamatsaradyastu ghorah | 
dharma ete raijasth pumpravrttih 
7 yasmadetat tadrajo bandhahetuh i: 
Desire; anger, avarice, pride, jealousy, egoism, envy, Z 
niggardliness ete., these are terrible characteristics of rajas 
and are inducements to actions of men. This rajas is the 
cause of bondage. 3 . 7 oh Rig 
Kama is desire for objects. Krodha is the mental change that 
ensues when a desired object is not obtained. ‘Lobha is the thought 
of safeguarding a thing obtained. Dambha is ostentatious display of 
one’s qualities. Abhyasiya is intolerance of the prosperity of others. 
Aharnkara is consciousness of one’s superiority. Irsya is interpreting 
good qualities as bad. Matsara is the tendency not to part with > 
things which are inexhaustible like preventing a person from drink- 
ing from a well dug by the king. 
The — adi in matsaradi is a include lust ‘sha freclenee: 
These are said to be ghorah, terrible as they are the cause of 
danger both in this world and in the next. These characteristics — 
are called rajaséh, because a man subject to desire, anger etc., does 
not refrain from action at any time, but always keeps on ever doing 
something or other. That even a little of a man’s actions is to be 
attributed to rajoguna is borne out by the Gita which says: rajah 
karmoni Bharata savijayati: ‘QO Bharata, rajas triumphs in action.’ 
The Nyaya Siitra says: pravartandlaksana dosah: “The rajasic qua- 
lities are stimuli to activity”. Sukha issues-out only from desisting 
from action. In the case of a person affected by rajoguna there is 
no place for desisting from action. The Gita also says: lobhah 
 pravrttirdrambhah karmanimasamah sprha || rajasyetini jayante 
viurddhe Bharatarsabha; “Greed, activity, involvement in work, 
unrest, desire—these arise when rajas is predominant, O! best of the 
Bharatas”. Therefore, this activity which is a fact of the experience 
_of all persons which springs from the rajoguna and spoken of as a 
quality of maya is the cause of bondage. The superimposition pro- 
duced by combination of cause and effect makes for bondage; with- 
134 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
out such superimposition there can be no activity. That is why 
rajas is the cause of bondage. This is referred to in the Adhydasa- 
bhasya in Sri Bhagavatpada’s commentary on the Brahma-Sitras 
when he says: na hyanadhyastétmabhavena dehena kascit vyapriyate: 
“Nor does anybody act by means of a body on which the nature 
of the 4tman has not been. eu pense : . 
115 
Now is explained the power of tamas which is the. precondi- 
tion for the functioning of viksepasakti and the cause of samsara 
etc. | | 
- atssaferte aurora wafeaaray TATA TAS TAT 
aot frat gear ‘aaa: faatarad: sacea ST: 1994 
esavrtir nama tamogunasya 3 
Saktir yaya vastvavabhasate aaa | 
 Saisa nidinam purusasya samsrteh . 
viksepsakteh prasarasya hetuh || 
The veiling power. belongs to tamas. It makes for the 
_ wrong projection of objects differently (from what they _ 
are). It is the root cause of the functioning of the project- 
ing power and is the original cause for the procession of 
‘Samsara (man’s transmigration). — 
| That concealing power.by which a thing appears different from 
what it is, that by which the real which is of the nature of Ex- 
istence, Intelligence and Bliss appears otherwise through the antah- 
karana, the body etc., belongs to tamoguna. It is the original cause — 
of samsara, characterised by grief, birth, old age, death, etc. Due 
to misapprehension, the qualities of the anatman are supposed to 
attach to the 4tman which is asamsdrin, which is free from the 
shackles of samsara. Therefore, it is the concealing power (dvarana- 
Sakti) issuing from a misapprehension and causing one to see a 
thing as what it is not which is of the source of samsara. In the 
absence of this concealing power, the power of wrong projection 
-eannot function in the least. .Hence the expression: viksepasakteh 
prasarasya hetuh: “the cause for the origination of the activity of 
the viksepa-Sakti’”’ The wrong projection of the serpent arising on 
the concealment of the rope produces fear etc., not otherwise. 
Hence it is that for the jianins, though the viksepa-Saki acts on 
them as the result of prarabdha-karma, there is no bondage for them: 
for in their case the concealing power . (avarana-Sakti) has been 
VIVEXACUDAMANI 135 
cancelled. This will be known clearly by the Sloka 145 to come 
later. In the world too, the deleterious effects of viksepasakti will 
be seen only in respect of an object about which there is doubt or 
wrong knowledge. Where a person's knowledge about a thing is 
clear and certain, there is never any viksepa for him. Hence, it is 
said that the tamoguna-gakti envelopes the nature of an object and 
makes it appear otherwise. By producing such viksepa, distortion, 
it becomes the cause of bondage. 
nidinam: adi kiéranam: the original cause. 
116 
While these two (rajas and tamas) are cause of bondage, the 
superior power of tamas is conveyed by this Sloka. | 
saratafa ofesatsty aaxtscacataeataay 
eqreieeanat a afa ager aattaatsia caer | 
MAMMA Al HHAATsead ACTA 
gratal Saat zeae: afsragearafa: 1 9qqq Ut 
prajnavanapi pandito’pi caturo’pyatyantasiksmarthadrg : 
vydlidhastamasa na vetti bahudha sambodhito’pi sphutam | 
bhrantyadropitameva sédhu kalayatyalambate tadgundn - 
-hantasau prabala durantatamasah saktir mahatyavrtth \ 
Even a man of wisdom. one learned in the gastras, a 
though he be clever even possessing the capacity of the most | 
subtle discrimination does not realise the nature of the — 
atman though repeatedly and clearly taught if he is over- — e 
powered by tamas. He considers what is superimposed by __ 
his delusion as true and attaches himself to its qualities. 
Alas, the concealing power of tamas which makes for untold 
hardships is great indeed. "ae 
prajidvan: prajid traikaliki maté: prajna is understood as 
referring to all the three periods of time. So, prajnavan means one 
who has definitive (unshakable) intelligence in all the three periods 
of time. | : die “ys 
panditah: the wisdom arising from study of sastras is panda. 
He who has this panda is a pandita. | 
—“*5"The idea is: The jnanins-see the world in its multitudinous form as a result 
of the viksepa Sakti acting on them due to the effect of their samskaras of past lives. 
But they are not deceived by them. For, even while they see the world, they main- 
tain their realisation of the substratum (adhisthéna) of the world objects, namely 
Brahman whose avarana (concealment) has been cancelled by the jfana. They 
see multiplicity, but they are not deceived by it, — 
1 36 - VIVEKACUDAMANI 
caturah: uwhapohavicaksanah: one who is expert in positive and 
negative reasoning. 7 = 
‘atyantasitksmarthadrk: one wh) sees (understands) the subt- 
lest meanings of words. This is the result of the preceding qualities. 
By having definitive knowledge, with the aid of Sastras and by skill 
in positive and negative reasoning, one is able to understand even 
the minutest of things. : | | | 
Even such a person, when completely overpowered by tamas. 
cannot realise the 4tman. What can a man do in deep darkness 
even though he has keen eyes? He cannot know the atman though 
well taught in.many ways. Vide the Srutis: $rnvanto’pi bahavo, yam 
na vidih: \ Katha.) “Him, whom many cannot know even though 
they hear about Him"; nayamatma balahinena labhyah (Mund.): 
“This atman cannot be realised by those who are devoid of strength”: 
na medhayd na bahund srutena (Katha.): “Not by intelligence or by | 
much hearing’; dscaryavat pasyati kascidenam (B. G.): “One sees 
this with wonder’, ete. | _—/ | 7 | 
bhrantyd: by misapprehension, by the superimposition on a 
thing of what is not that thing. He considers the gross body etc. 
which are superimposed as real. sédhu kalayati: abadhitam janati. 
He thinks that it is not negated, i.e., he thinks that the body itself 
is the 4tman. He also imposes the body’s qualities like adoration 
and disgrace, its strength and health etc., agency etc., and also the 
qualities of the subtle body on the dtman. Alas! Is not this well 
known in experience that-people do not get rid of their misappre- 
. -hension though they. are taught by sruti and the acaryas that every- 
thing except {ne dtman is mithya? - | , 
durantatamasah: the tamas, which at the end, works havoc on 
mahatyavrytih: mahati Saktih: great power. 
‘This tamas which has disastrous effects is hard to get over ex- 
cept by abundance of sattva guna. The power of concealing is 
Stupendous. Compared to viksepa-sakti, it (the tamo guna) is very 
Strong as it is the cause of intense delusion. | 
117 
_ In order to convey that tamoguna will be destroyed by gravana 
(listening to the scriptural texts and words of the guru), manana 
(reflecting on them), nididhyasana (getting determinate know- 
ledge about them), and that, by asambhavana, viparitabhavana and 
VIVEKACUDAMANI (137 
producing samsaya it diesbles a Peron from knowing } his own atman, 
this Sloka is uttered.?°. | 
sara at faqdtiaaraat aaraar Fasifirafercetit: 
dataed a faqsafa wa faetoafea: aqarasaq 1 qqe 0 
 abhavana va viparitabhavana sambhavana vipratipattirasyah ' 
samsargayuktam na vimuiicati dhruvam viksepasaktih ; 
ksapayatyajasram 1} 
Abhavana;, viparitabhavana, sambhavana or vipratipatti* 
does not ever release from its hold a person who is affected 
by this concealing power. Then, the projecting power 
always destroys the person so affected. 
abhavana: absence of right judgment—the impression that 
the oneness of jiva and Brahman and the mithyatva of the world 
spoken of by Sastra cannot be a fact ( na Sout a ees or see sie 
are not (nastikyam ). | 7 
| viparitabhavand: The impression of 4tmanhood in the body ete. 
vipratipattih: contrary impression. a | - 
sambhavana: samgaye bhavana: doubt. The mark of doubt is | 
the apprehension of different opposed qualities in the same substance 
(ekadharmivisesyaka-viruddhaninadharma-prakérakajiinam ). 
These three (abhavana, viparitabhavana and sambhavand) never 
release a man subject to them from their hold. The viksepa-sakti 
ever destroys such a person. vide: ajiascisraddadhénasca sam- 
Saydtma vinasyati (B. G.): “Ignorant and faithless, the one of 
doubting mind cames to ruin.” | a AER E 
| 118, 
Now the effects of tamoguna are clearly stated. 
HATTA Sea ATA SAT: THT: 
Ud: saat a fg afa fafeafaart ag eAAaSa fervafa q9e 
ajnanamalasyajadatvanidra- | 
pramidamidhatvamukhas tamogunith 1 
etaih prayukto na hi vetti kincit- 
nidraluvat stambhavadeva tisthati 1 
26 asambhavana is the impression that there does not exist a Brahman not 
separate from the inner atman; viparitabhavana is the impression of the atman in 
the anatman like the Pedy etc. sambhiavana is the doubt in the communications of 
the éruti and the gur 
* Explained in the commentary. 
138 7 - VIVEKACUDAMANI 
Ignorance, apathy, sloth, sleep, negligence, foolishness, 
etc., are the effects of tamoguna. One subject to these 
knows nothing, but remains as one in sleep or like a pillar. 
ajnanam: non-apprehension of a meaning that has been con- 
veyed. Vide the Gita: etat jnanamiti proktam ajninam yadato’- 
nyatha: ‘This is said to be jana: ajfiana is what is otherwise. ig 
Or. wrongly fancying a meaning etc. 
dlasyam: not taking any effort. 
jadatvam: absence of skill in determining effect and cause. 
nidra: ‘is well known. Nidra has been defined in the Yoga 
Sitra as “abhavapratyayalambanad vrttih nidra”: “Sleep is the 
mental state which has for its content the perception of nothingness.” 
That state in which there is sense of absence of an object upon con- 
cealment by tamas, that is the state of sleep. That modification of 
mind which makes: such nothingness an object is sleep. __ 
_pramada: not doing something even when one has the capacity 
to do it, not being awake (to one’s duty); the dictionary says: 
premngo navadhanata: pramada is not being intent. 
 -miidhatva: the impression of non-existence with relerence: fo 
an existing object. 
These—ignorance. apathy, sloth, sleep, negligence, foolishness 
etc.—are the effects of tamoguna. This is explained further. One 
subject to these qualities produced by tamoguna does not know any- _ 
thing even as a man in sound sleep knows nothing. He stands.as 
a pillar without exerting himself in any way for his uplift. Or, 
it may be said that not knowing of what is to be known when it 
is to be known is pramada. The not-doing of what has to be done 
is alasya. oer. | . 
119. 
Thus has been. declared that the qualities of rajas and tamas 
are total hindrances to spiritual uplift. That means, giving them up 
completely, one should cultivate sattvaguna. These have been ex- 
plained at length only to impress that they should be renounced in 
the same way as adharma is sought to be known only to renounce 
it. Now, to show what has to be sia cic the natuie of Sattva- 
character is explained. 
act fagg asaaarft area fafacan AUT ETT 
aarenfaca: sfafafeaa: ar weTaas garfa HE GI 
VIVEKACUDAMANI | 139 
sattvam vigsuddham jalavat tathapi — 
tibhyam militvad sarandya kalpate | 
yatratmabimbah pratibimbitah san 
prakdsayatyarka ivakhilam jadam }1 
Though sattva is very pure like clear water, yet, in 
combination with the other two (rajas and tamas) it makes 
for samsara in the same way as the original which is the 
atman, when reflected, makes the entire inanimate world 
bright as the sun does. 7 : 
_ As there is the expression tathapi (even then) at the end of 
the first line, yadyapi (even if) has to be understood in the 
beginning. : | | | & 
As water in its natural state is undefiled, so too sattvaguna i is 
pure and undefiled. Yet, combining with these two, rajas, and tes, 
' it makes for samsara. 
sarandya: samsaraya: for samsara. 
kalpate: prabhavati: generates. 
Its purity is explained by ‘yatratmabimbah’ etc., nenebinbah: | 
The atman itself is the bimba here (the original) like a face (which 
is the original of its reflection in an undefiled mirror etc.) atmabim- 
_ bah: atma eva bimbah: the atman itself is the original, like the | 
face. 
In the unturbid water, the space above is reflected with the sky 
and the stars and shines: clearly. In the clean mirror’ the face is 
clearly reflected. So reflected in the pure sattvaguna, the atman 
shines clearly. So, too, like the sun reflected in the water or the 
light in the mirror the 4tman so reflected makes all andtman objects 
shine, i.e, makes them known. Vee the Gita: sattvat sanjayate 
jranam: “from sattva arises jfidna.” And sarvadvaresu dehe’: smin 
prakasa upajayate jranam yada tada vidyat viurddham sattvamityuta: 
“From all pores of this body the light (of knowledge) shoots ‘up. 
When that arises, it may be inferred that sattva is predominant. 2 
120 
Though rajas and tamas exist, the quahies of sattva not over- 
powered by them are stated. a 
fren acaea wata a fern UAT: 1 
ag a wfeara age a cat q aafazafaafa: 11920 1 
140 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
misrasya sattvasya bhavanti dharmas 
tvamanitadya niyama yamadyah | 
Sraddha ca bhaktigsca mumuksuté ca 
daivi ca sampattirasannivrttih 1) 
The features of mixed sattva are the complete absence 
of pride, etc., the presence of yama* and niyama etc., of 
faith, devotion, longing for liberation, of divine tendencies, 
and withdrawal from whatever is not real. 
misrasya: means, of sattva which is completely free from tamas 
but. has a tinge of rajas. If they overpower, the aoe that are 
to be spoken of about sattva will not arise. 
tu in “dharmastu’ is intended to distinguish (sattva) ane 
the other two qualities and of its being unaffected by them. 
. In the Gita the qualities beginning with ‘amanita’ etc., are listed 
as follows: 7 
amanitvam adambhitvam ahimsa ksantirarjavam| 
dcaryopasanam sgaucam sthairymatmavinigrahah|| _ 
indriyarthesu vairdigyam anahamkara eva ca| 
geet Sad es oe econ nem) 
-asaktiranabhisvangah putradaragrhadisu| 
nityam ca samacittatvam istanistopapattisul| 
mayi cdnanyayogena bhaktiravyabhicarini|| 
viviktadesasevitvam aratirjanasamsadi|| , 
adhyatmajiananityatvam tattvajsandrthadaréanam|| 
“Humility, modesty, non-inj ury, patience, uprightness, service 
to the teacher, purity, steadfastness, self-control, absence of attach- 
ment for objects of the senses and absence of egoism, perception 
of evil in birth, death and old age, in sickness and pain, unattach- 
| ment, absence of affection for son, wife, home and the like, constant 
equanimity on the attainment of what is desirable or undesirable, 
unflinching devotion to Me in yoga of non-separation, resort to soli- 
tary places, distaste for the society of men, constancy in knowledge 
of the 4tman and perception of the meaning of the ultimate Truth. ” 
_ His Holiness proceeds to explain these virtues extolled in the 
Gita: 
amanitvam (humility): Manitvam is the sense of ‘self-glorifi- 
cation by one’s existing or susie auanues: a-rmanitvam is 
being devoid of this. > tee 
* Yama is self-restraint: niyama is elie of prescribed ey 
_ VIVEKACUDAMANI 7 141 
adambhah: Proclaiming one’s qualities for acquiring fame or 
profit is dambha. Absence of it is a-dambha. , 
ahimsa: avoiding harm to others by mind, act and speech. 
ksintih: absence of change of attitude towards others though 
disgraced by them. 
Grjavam: identity wcueaiae: speech and act. 
dcaryopdsanam: Following the teacher by obeisance, by inquiry 
and service. 
bahirantassucitvam: Washing away exienal ( bodily) impuri- 
ties by mud and water, and the internal (mental) impurities like. 
attachment by the inclinations of friendship etc., and by the Peaches 
of seeing the sense-obj ects as evils. 
sthairyam: endeavouring again and again in the face of obstacles 
tc the practice of means to liberation without giving up the attempt. 
atmavinigrahah: controlling the nature of the body and the | 
senses which are hindrances to the attainment of liberation and con- 
verting them into a condition favourable therefor. | 
vairdgyam: absence of desire for the objects of senses like 
sound and touch and for pleasures here and hereafter. 
anahaikarah: absence of pride of the form: I alone am 
superior to all. 7 : 
 janmamrtyujara: janma: life in the womb and coming off the 
uterus; mrtyuh: severance of all the ties of nerves, muscles and 
other internal organs; jara: decline of powers of mind, body and 
spirit and consequent disrespect and insult by everybody. — 
vyadhayah: fever ete. 
duhkhani: mental sufferings caused by the association of the 
undesired and dissociation from the desired like the adhyatmika 
etc. | | | | 
dosah: wind, bile and phlegm (the three humours of the body), 
excreta, urine and bad smell; seeing these again and again and 
thinking of them repeatedly. | | 
(tesim) anudarganam: punah punah_ aldcanarn: reflecting on 
them again and again. 
asaktih: giving up of attachment to sons etc., not identifying 
142 © VIVEKACUDAMANI 
oneself with them as perceived in the feeling that one is sad or happy 
when they are sad or happy. | 
harsavisidasiinyatvam: always and permanently possessing an 
equanimous mind free from joy or sorrow in the face of whatever 
happens, whether favourable or otherwise. 
bhaktih: unwavering and exclusive devotion to Me who is the 
inner atman born of the conviction: ‘I am the Lord Vasudeva’, © 
acquired by concentrated yogic practices resulting in a state of 
samadhi which does not refer to anything separate from one’s self, 
viviktadesasevitvam and aratirjanasamsadi: residing in a place 
which is pure and producing calmness in the mind and non-attach- 
ment to the assembly of people given to sense-pleasures. 
adhyatmajiananityatvam: Being firmly established in adyatma- 
jnana which means the knowledge with reference to the Aatman 
distinguishing it from the anatman. It means constantly analysing 
the sinficance of what corresponds to ‘Thou’ (in the mahavakya: 
That thou art). For, the purport of a sentence is understood only 
when the meaning of the words used in it is understood properly. 
tattvajnanarthadarsanam: dargana or Alocana, i.e. contempla- 
tion of moksa which is the artha or fruit of tattvajnana, the know- 
ledge of the Supreme Truth is the form of the knowledge of the 
meaning of sentences. The idea is that it is only by contempinune 
on the fruit of tattvajnana will the effort to realise it arise. 
‘Though ahimsa which is a constituent of yama, and sauca which 
is included in the niyamas have been dealt with, yet later when 
reference is made to ‘niyama yamadyah’: niyama, yama etc., “ 
is more than these 3s to be understood. | 
niyamah: The Yoga Sutra says: saucasantosatapassvadhyayes- _ 
varapranidhénani niyamah: “Cleanliness, satisfaction or peaceful- 
ness, austerities, scriptural studies and propitiation of God are 
Niyamas.” Sauca etc. are called niyamas because they are checking 
and directing means. By reversing one from kamya-dharmas 
which are causes of birth, they direct one towards niskama-dharma 
which is the means to liberation. These five are now i aaa 
Sauca: already explained. . 
santosah: being pleased with whatever benefit accrues. 
tapah: disciplining the body. Vide Yoga ‘Yajfuvalkya Smrti: 
vidhinoktena mdargena krechracandrayanadibhih; Sariragsosanam 
VIVEKACUDAMANI | 143. 
pradhuh tapasth tapa uttamam: “Disciplining the body by the 
method prescribed in the Vedas by adopting measures of expiation 
and regulation of intake of food by the rigid Candrayana rule is the 
highest among the forms of tapas.” 
| svadhyadyah: silent incantation of the mantras like Prana, 4 and 
the gayatri. 
Isvarapranidhianam: dedication to God of all actions whether 
prescribed or not prescribed but unprohibited, without expectation 
of fruits of those actions. Hence it is said: kamato’ kamato vapi 
‘yat karomi subhagubham ; tat sarvam tvayi vinyasya tvatprayuk- 
tah karomyaham || : ‘Whatever I do with desire or without it, 
all that I surrender to Thee and perform it directed by Thee”. The 
great have spoken about the evil of attachment to fruits of actions 
thus: api prayatnasampannam. kamenopahatam tapah | na tustaye 
mahesasya Svalidhamiva paiyasam 11 : “Though performed with 
great effort, the tapas motivated by desire does not make for the 
grace of God being like the payasam licked by a dog”’. These five,. 
Sauca, santosa, tapas, svadhyaya and Isvarapranidhana are the 
niyamas. | 
The yamas are next explained: ahimsd-satya-asteya-brahma- 
carya-aparigrahah yamah. Thus according to the Yoga Sitra, the 
yamas too are five: : | : 
ahimsa: explained already. 
sdtyam: never speaking an untruth at any time. 
asteyam: not taking away another’s wealth. | 
brahmacaryam: giving up the eightfold copulational act.*7 
aparigrahah: Not accepting anything that makes, for enjoy- 
ment except what is necessary for maintenance of the body. | 
By the word yamddyah: yama etc., the limbs of yoga, namely 
Asana, pranayama, pratyahara, dharana, dhyana and samadhi are also 
included, i.e., posture, breath-control, restraint of Renee organs: con- 
centration, meditation and absorption. 
27 These include seeing a woman, “smiling at her, talking about their qualities 
and actions, albeit proper thought of them, endearment, mutual talking, living 
with them, association are said to be eight forms of maithunam. What is different 
from these is brahmacaryam (celibacy) which makes for delight of the mind. 
- Vide Slokas 109 and 110 of Sri Bhagavatpada’s Sarva Vedanta Samgraha: 
smaranam darsanam strindm gunakarmanukirtanam | 
samicinatvadhistasu pritih sambhdsanamn mithah 
sahavésasca samsaryo’pyastadha maithunam viduh 
etadvilaksanam brahmacaryam cittaprasidakam 11 
144 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
 Sraddha: astikyabuddhih: which is the repository of spiritual 
benefit. 
bhaktih: devotion. It is of two kinds, para, and apara: 
higher and lower. The apara or lower bhakti is called sadhana- 
bhakti. It is the means to the higher bhakti. Vide the Bhagavata: 
bhaktya samjitaya bhaktya bibhratyutpulakam tanum: ‘By the 
sadhya-bhakti produced by sadhana-bhakti, one attains the state of 
one’s hairs standing on end’, i.e. acquires devotional ecstacy. In the 
Srimad Bhagavata the nine forms of devotion are enumerated as: 
Sravanam kirtanam visnoh smaranam pidasevanam 4 arcanam van- 
danam dasyam sakhyamatmanivedanam i: “Hearing, praising, 
thinking of Visnu, worshipping at His feet, offering Him flowers, 
prostration, service, friendship and surrender of one’s self”. This 
nine-fold bhakti is the means to the higher bhakti which is charac- 
terised by supreme love of God. 
mumuksutdé: the desire to get rid of the bonds (of the upadhis) 
from the ahamkara to the body which are the results of avidya. 
This is sought to be effected by the direct realisation of one’s real 
nature. | 
daivasampattih: the divine virtues. These have been enume- 
reted in the 16th chapter of the Gita in the Slokas Peeing with 
“abhayam sattvasamsuddhih” etc., as follows: 
abhayam sattvasamsuddhirjranayogavyavasthitih i 
dinam damasca yajiasca svadhydyastapa arjavam 11 
ahimsa satyamakrodhah tyagassantirapaisunam | 
daya bhutesvaloluptvam mardavam hriracipalam 41 
tejah ksama dhrtissaucam adroho natimanita | | 
bhavanti sampadam daivim abhijatasya bharata |) 
| “Fearlessness, purity of heart, steadfastness in knowledge and 
yoga, alms-giving, self-restraint and worship, study of scriptures, 
austerity, uprightness, harmlessness, truth, absence of. anger, renun- 
ciation, serenity, absence of calumny, compassion to creatures, non- 
covetousness, gentleness, modesty, absence of fickleness, energy, | 
forgiveness, fortitude, purity, absence of hatred, absence of. pride— 
these belong to one of a divine and noble birth, O Bharata”. | 
All these virtues are explained: 
“ebhavan: being devoid of the fear of sorrow arising from the 
separation from what is dear or conjunction with what is not dear 
tr © mee See me cee = 
28 It includes belief in the Vedas, the ‘soul, karma and after-life. 
VIVEXACUDAMANI 145 
istanistasamnyogaviyogadarsanajanyam yadduhkhabhayam tadrahit- 
yam). Or, being firmly established in the practice of what is pres- 
cribed in the SAstras without doubt about its efficacy. 
sattvasamsSuddhih: purity of heart; absolute purity of the 
antahkarana which is compacted of sattvaguna; being undefiled. The 
sattva nature here means the capacity to intuit the nature of the 
Divinity: bhagavattattvasphirtiyogyatvam. : 
jranam: The understanding of the truth of the atman from 
Sastra and the upadesa of the guru. : 
yogah: the process of converting the understood meaning into 
a fact of one’s own experience by concentrated contemplation. 
jidnayogavyavasthitih: means being always established in them. 
danam: the giving of one’s own wealth to a ooerure person 
according to his qualification. 
damah: controlling of the external senses. 
Srautah: the sacrifices of agnihotra, darsapirnamasa, etc. 
smartah: The four yajnas (sacrifices), namely devayajia, 
pitryajna, bhitayajia and manusyayajia, i.e., propitiation of the 
gods, one’s ancestors, creatures and men. Svadhyaya or Brahma- 
yajna is recitation of one’s branch of the Vedas, like Rgveda, etc., 
which provides unseen results and is separately stated. 
tapah: is of three kinds based on the distinction of body etc. 
deva-dvija-guru-prajiid-pijanam Saucamarjavam | 
brahmacaryamahimsa ca Sariram tapa ucyate il 
anudvegakaram vakyam satyam priyahitam ca yat | 
svadhyaydbhyasanam caiva vanmayam tapa ucyate }| 
manahprasddah saumyatvam maunamatmavinigrahah | 
bhavasamsuddhirityetat tapo manasamucyate i) 
“The worship of the gods, the guru, the wise men, purity, 
truthfulness, celibacy and non-injuring are called forms of bodily 
tapas. Speaking so as not to hurt another, using true and kindly 
and beneficent words, practice of Vedic recitation are known as © 
tapas of speech. Serenity of mind, goodness, silence, control of the 
mind, purity of nature—these are forms of tapas of mind’. 
avakratvam arjavam: sincerity, identity of the functioning of 
the mind, speech and body. — ; 
V.c—ti 
146 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
ahimsa: avoiding harm to others. 
satyam: speaking about a thing as it was witnessed. 
akrodhah: the allaying of anger which may immediately arise 
when censured or hit by another. 7 , 
_ddna: already explained. | 
_.tyagah: though tyaga ordinarily means dana, dana having’ been 
already referred to, tyaga here means giving up association with 
grief. | —_ 
santth: subduing the internal organs to the extent of non- 
existence. | 
— apaigunam: paisunam is publicising the faults of athete ae 
absence is apaisunam. | 
daya: not bearing (to see) the afflictions of othe: creatures 
when they are in that state. | 
alolutvam: should be alolupatvam. pa has been dropped. This 
is sanctioned by ancient usage (drsa.) Another reading is alolupt- 
vam. It refers to the sense-organs not being affected even in the 
presence of sense-objects. 
mdrdavam: being deserving of the association of good people. 
hrih: a sense of shame in doing what should not be done. _ 
acadpalam: not being engaged in useless action. 
tejah: confidence; not being overcome by women, boys and 
fools. | bau : 
ksama: non-origination of anger, even if there is the capacity, 
towards the cause of insult. 
akrodhah: the immediate stifling of ¢ anger that has arisen. This 
is the distinction from ksama. 
dhrtih: the steadying of the mind afflicted by grief. 
Saucam: - external and internal purity. 
adrohah: not wielding weapons out of a desire to Kill others. 
natimanité: atimanita is an attitude glorifying one’s own self. 
The opposite of it is natimanité. An attitude of humility towards 
those who are to be respected is indicated. 
These are the 26 sattvika divine characteristics which accom- 
pany a person as inborn good tendencies produced by meritorious 
actions. The ésruti says: tam vidyaékarmani samanvarabhete. pirva- 
prajna ca (Brh.): “Knowledge, karma, and pre-consciousness accom- 
pany him”. And again, punyah punyena karmana bhavati, papah 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 147 
papena (Brh.): “Punya (spiritual merit) occurs from punye-satma, 
and papa (sin) from papa karma, sinful action. : 
asannivrttih:. withdrawing from whatever is asat, Le., is not 
Brahman. Or, asannivrttih may mean being sinless. Vide the 
Sruti: ndvirato duscaritat (Katha.): ‘Of one who has not desisted 
from evil conduct”. Being sinless. _ es 
121 
- Having spoken: of sattvagunas not overpowered by Yajas. and | 
tamas in spite of their existence, the nature of -Sattva absolutely 
untouched by them is explained. 
faqgaeaea Wor: sara: 
eararaafe: qear santa: | 
afta: aga: azercafaser | 
mal aalarava | aATOlgT 1927 
7 viguddhasattvasya gunah prasadah 
svatmanubhitih paramaé prasantih | 
trptth praharsah paramatmanistha — | 
yaya sadanandarasam samrcchati 11 
The characteristics of pure sattva are limpidity of mind, 
realisation of one’s self, supreme peace, contentment, great 
joy and being anchored in the Paramatman always which 
ensures the enjoyment of bliss without intermission. | 
visuddhasattva is pure sattva uncotaminated by rajas and 
tamas. The effects of such pure sattva are enumerated. : 
prasada: absence of impurity in the mind. 
svatmanubhatih: Experience of one’s self arises because there 
is no tamas to conceal the atman and no rajas to project it wrongly. 
When the atmatattva is concealed by tamas, it does not shine clearly 
and the sheaths which -conceal it, annamaya (bodily) etc., shine 
forth. That means that, where there is pure sattva only, the 
atman’s own nature is experienced without any impediment. Hence, 
there arises thereform supreme peace. As is said later in this work: 
“Who will delight in a void giving up the experience of supreme 
bliss? Who will desire to look at a picture of the moon when the 
planet itself is shining resplendently in the sky?” The peace that 
was sought previously with effort in the state of a sidhaka (endea- 
vauring aspirant), becomes a matter of personal experience upon 
148 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
the realisation of the atman. As the mind does not stray in the 
unsubstantial world, contentment of the mind becomes natural. 
_ praharsa: the bliss that arises always of itself without any 
effort. It is superior delight. Or, it may mean: One considers 
oneself as fortunate (happy) by reason of having done what is to 
be done or of having attained what is to be attained. His mental 
state is praharsa. 
paramatmanistha: being established without break in the 
Paramatman alone. It is a perfect enjoyment of the supreme bliss 
always. That is, the person experiences nirvikalpa-samadhi by rea- 
son of the mind being unable to emerge out of its absorption in the 
enjoyment of the perception of its real nature. 
122 
The nature of avyakta or the unmanifested was detailed in the 
Sloka beginning with ‘avyaktanamni’ (vide sl. 110). This avyakta 
is compacted of three gunas and is called maya and avidya etc. It 
is to be inferred from its effects. It is the cause of the gross and 
the subtle and other effects. It is destroyed by jiiana. Reference 
is also made to the causal body (ka@rana-sarira) by deriving Sarira 
from Siryate which means declines. Having said all this about 
avyakta, Sri Bhagavatpada concludes: 
seaaaad faired scare ant MATARAA: | 
angfataea fawacaacat sctaaa taraatgata: qRVU 
avyaktametat trigunair niruktam | 
_ tatkaranam nama sariramatmanah | 
Susuptiretasya vibhaktyavastha 
pralina-sarvendriya buddhivrttih | 
This Unmanifested is said to be made of three gunas, 
It is the atman’s causal body. Susupti is a distinct aspect 
of.it and is characterised by the dissolution of the activities _ 
_ of all sense-organs and buddhi. , | 
avyaktam: what cannot be clearly seen in its native nature. _ 
trigunaih: inferred by its three constituent qualities made up 
of kama and krodha: desires and anger constituting rajoguna; 
ajnana and dlasya (nescience and sloth) constituting tamoguna and 
amanitva (humility) constituting sattvaguna. | es 
niruktam: explained already, i.e. that avyakta or maya is iiade 
up of these gunas and is to be inferred from its seneces has dale 
clearly explained in the previous Slckas. : 
VIVEKACUDAMANI | 149 
This avyakta which is indicated by the words avidya, etc., is 
the causal body of the (jiva) a4tman. In the Sastras it is known as 
the karana-Sarira. . 
| Its special condition is spoken of as susupti or dreamless sleep. 
 etasya in the gloka means karansarirasya i.e., of the causal body 
which is also spoken of as avyakta. 
=e The special character of the susupti state (of dreamless sleep) 
is that in it the buddhi and the indriyas are completely dissolved, 
i.e., they do not function in that state. Thus the susupti state is” 
differentiated from jagrat state in which both the buddhi and the 
indriyas function and from the svapna (dream) state in which the 
buddhi alone functions. | = 
| ‘vibhaktyavastha: differentiated state. _ 
Though ajmana is associated with all the states, the susupti 
state has a special feature of its own in that the functioning of 
ajfana is patent in the other two while it is latent in susupti. 
123 
‘The meaning of the last quarter of the pees ee is 
clarified with reference to experience. : | 
aararentafasem fa: _ | 
diarnasaferfata ad: 
— -gaftaxarea fa saitfa: 
fafsanaczifa anenfag: i qR2 1 
sarvaprakarapramitiprasantih 
- bijdtmandvasthitireva buddheh 1 
susuptiratrisya kila pratitih 
_ kincinna vedmiti jagatprasiddheh 1 
(In susupti ) All pramanas (sources of knowledge) are 
still. The buddhi remains only in the form of a seed. The 
test of this is the universal verdict: ‘I did not know any- 
thing’ (while asleep). | 
sarvaprakara-pramiti-prasantih: prasantih: prakarsena - $antih: 
absolute stillness or non-functioning. pramiteh: of source of know- 
ledge. sarvaprakara: of all kinds including perception, inference, 
gabda, remembrance etc. In dreamless sleep all sources of know- 
ledge are still. None of them functions. There is no knowing 
activity at that time. : eas 
150 — VIVEKACUDAMANI 
But then how does a person resume conscious activity on waking 
from dreamless sleep next day? The buddhi or antahkarana or 
manas (all are used synonymously here), is latent in dreamless 
Sleep in the form of a seed, i.e. in the form of a samskara which lies 
imbedded as ajfiana in the karanatman, as causal atman, not as 
karyatman, the functioning atman. This is indicated by ‘eva’ only. 
That condition is called susupti. The absence of knowledge of all 
kinds in that condition is a fact of universal experience. For, the 
man who has awakened from such dreamless sleep has an appre- 
_hension of the form: “I did not know anything.” 
kila: indicates that this is well-known. 
If there was any apprehension by the mind during dreamless 
Sleep then, on waking from it there will be nothing corresponding 
to: “I did not know anything”. The idea is that such an apprehen- 
sion is not felt in wakefulness and in dream. In ‘this matter of 
general experience, there can be no difference of opinion. 
124 
The explanation of the andtman for the purpose of distinguish- 
ing the A4tman from the andatman is now brought to a close. 
aeftaa-sta-watseataa: 
wa fear fava: qarea: | 
sarnfavaratad 3 fasaq 
seqaaTaa aS AAT 1 Ge MN 
dehendriya-prana-mano’hamaddayah 
Sarve vikara visydssukhddayah | 
vyomaddibhitanyakhilam ca visvam 
avyaktaparyantamidam hyandtma 11 
The body, the sense organs, the breath, the mind, the 
_ sense of I (egoism, etc.), all forms of functions, the sense- 
objects, pleasure etc., the elements like the sky etc., the 
entire universe upto the Unmanifested—all these come under 
the category of the anadtman. 
In describing the anatman, the body, the sense organs, the 
_prana, the ego, the varied functions of the manas, all gross objects, 
sense-objects like sound, touch, form, taste and smell, pleasure, 
pain, delusions and other mental feelings ending with fear, the ele- 
ments beginning with sky and. ending with the earth are all in- 
cluded. In fact this entire universe which is perceived upto avyakta, 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 151 
all this is andtman. Thus the question: ‘what is this anatman? nies 
sl.. 51 avara) is answered. ee 
125 
‘Beginning with the last effect of may&, upto the first material 
cause (responsible for the world), it has been said that everything 
is the anatman. To convey this with great force it is said conver- 
‘sely everything from the primordial material cause of transforma- . 
tion to the last produced effect also is of the same nature. The 
mithya character of all this is conveyed in this Sloka. ; | 
Aa ATaTHIa aa Healfzagraray \ 
sufgzaarenaca fafs ct weatifatneta 98k 
maya mayadkaryam sarvam mahadididehaparyantam q 
asadidamanatmatattvam viddhi tvam marumaricikakalpam Me 
Know that all these, maya and its effects, from the 
mahat upto the body are asat and of the nature of the 
anatman like a mirage. 
maya: mila prakrti: primordial Nature. 
-mahat: the category or tattva of mahat. 
The éruti says: tadaiksata (Taitt.): ‘That thought’, ie. in the 
beginning Sat (existence or sadvastu) alone was, quality-less and 
inactive. Then, That saw or thought. This seeing or thinking itself 
is the first act resulting in the procession from Mahat to body which 
are the effects of maya. From Mahat issued ahamkara which means 
the sarnkalpa of Iévara. Vide the sruti so’kamayata (Tait.): That 
(He) desired.. Thence issued forth the five subtle elements; then, 
the gross elements by the process of quintuplication; then the entire 
universe (brahmanda); from that the fourteen worlds and the gross. 
bodies contained in them—all this upto the body and including you 
(as the body); this maya and the products of maya are of the nature 
of the andtman, i.e., what is distinct and different from the atman. 
The question: ‘What is this anatman?’ in $l. 51 is, answered by 
saying that it is asat, that it is separate and distinct from the 
atman which is of the nature of sat or pure existence. Therefore, 
understand that all this is mithya like a mirage. It is destructible 
by the realisation of the aforesaid pure non-dual Brahman. All this 
universe melts away even while perceived. In the hot séason, the 
hot rays which the sun sends forth fall on the earth producing the 
impression of a sheet of water. But really, when seen carefully there 
5200 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
is no water on the spot. So too before the dawn of Brahmajiiana, 
maya and its effects are found to function. Immediately upon Brah- 
man realisation, everything disappears without a trace like a dream 
on waking. Hence is their character of disappearing before en- 
lightened perception. Hence, the world is mithya like a mirage. 
126 
_. Having thus completely spoken about the anadtman, Sri Bhaga- 
vatpada proceeds to give the answer to the Sisya’s question: “What 
is the supreme atma?” (vide él. 51 supra). 
wa a araeaa aed wag | 
tata AT TTA: HACTATTT 92S 
atha te sampravaksyami svaripam paraméatmanah ; | 
yadvijnaya naro bandhanmuktah kaivalyamasnute i; 
oI shall now tell you clearly the nature of the Paramat- 
man by knowing which a man attains kaivalya (liberation) 
freed from bonds (of samsira). | 
atha: then: indicates consecution to the explanation of the anit- 
man. | : 
yat paramaétmanah svaripam vijindya naro bandhat muktah 
kaivalyam asnuiz: knowing (realising) which Paramatman’s svariipa, 
narah i.e., the person who is qualified for Brahmavidya becomes 
freed from the bonds beginning from aharnkara and ending with | 
the body, i.e., becomes one who has renounced the false identifica- 
tion of the anatman with the atman, is freed from association with 
all:upadhis and attains to the state of being the lone seer (without 
the object - kevaladrgripa), the differenceless nature of the sat, cit 
and ananda. I shall teach you clearly and fully the nature of that 
Paramatman. a we 7 a 
| 127 | 
‘The Guru proceeds to speak about the atma: 
afta atraaq cad facraencaaara: | | 
| aera a TSaatafasert: 19209 11 
~ asti kascit svayam nityam ahampratyayalambanah | 
avasthatrayasaksi san paicakasavilaksanah ) | 
_ There is something which exists by itself as the sub- 
stratum of the consciousness of ‘I’. Being the witness of the _ 
VI TEKACODAMANI — 783 
three states, it is different icon the five sheaths (That is 
the atma). 
svayam: in (by) itself: not dependent on anything else for 
manifestation of its existence. 
ahampratyayalambanah: the substratum of the awareness of 
the ego, which has attained identity with the mind which manifests 
itself as ‘I’ or aham, i.e., which is the medium of the reflection of 
the original which is the ‘Tl’ or aham. It also means: which is the 
object of ahamurtti, the modification of aham as the object. 
avasthatrayaséksi san: being the seer or witness in the three 
states of waking, dream and dreamless sleep. oo 
paficakosavilaksanah: which is different from the annamaya | 
(bodily), pranamaya (of vital air), manomaya (mental), vijmana- 
maya (intellectual), and anandamaya (blissful) kogas or sheaths. . 
_nityam: always. 
san kascid asti: that something exists. That is the atma. 
Here the character of existence in all the three periods of time 
without the possibility of sublation is expressed. 
128 ae 
The atma being the witness of the three ‘mental states is 
explained in the succeeding Slokas. 
at fasrenia ane sraccacraatey 
afa-nafe-gremarang fica | uqreu 
yo vijanati sakalam jagratsvapnasusuptisu | 
buddhi-tadvurtti-sabdhdvam abhavamahamityayam |) 
That which as ‘I’ knows everything in the waking, 
dream and dreamless sleep states, the presence of the 
buddhi and its actions, and their absence—that is the atman. 
Buddhi and its activities are evidenced in their operation in 
waking and dream states in the forms: ‘I see this; and this: [I 
infer this; I understand it from scriptural testimony; I remember’, 
etc. In dreamless sleep, the buddhi and its activities are absent 
since after waking from sleep, a person says: ‘I did not know any- 
thing (during the sleep state)’. That which is conscious in the 
form: ‘I know; I knew and I shall know’, which is aware of waking 
State experiences and of dream objects and of anata: in ‘dreamless 
sleep, that is the atm. aor 
154 | VIVEKACUDAMANI 
129 
The atma is of the nature of intelligence being unknowable by 
otber things, while it sees everything. This is explained. 
a: wala tag ag aa cate fsa | 
aradaat azemie A aa BAAAAA 92s 
yah pasyati svayam sarvam yam na pasyati kificana | 
yascetayati buddhyddi na tad yam cetayatyayam 1} 
That which perceives everything, but which nothing 
can perceive; that which illumines the buddhi etc., but can- 
not itself be illumined—that is the a4tman. | 
That which itself sees all. Vide the Sruti: nanyo’to’sti drasta 
‘(Brh.) There is no other seer. That which none else sees. Vide 
the gruti: na tatra caksurgacchati na vaggacchati no manah (Kena.): 
“There the eye does not go; speech does not go; nor does the mind’’. 
na caksusé grhyate napi vicé nanyair devaih (Mund): “It is not 
grasped by the eyes, not even by speech or by other organs’. naiva 
vicad na menasaé prdptum sakyo na caksusa: “It cannot at all be 
attained by speech, mind or by sight (Katha)”. That which makes 
the inanimate etc., as if shining with intelligence, that which buddhi 
etc., do not make intelligent, as it is intelligence in itself, that is 
the atman. For what is inanimate depends on something else to 
inform it with intelligence; but cetana (pure intelligence) itself is 
not extra-dependent that way. | 
130 | 
aa favafae care a a caratfa fasaa i 
AMSA AT FT AKAATAKATA 1 qR0 Ul 
yena visvamidam vyaptam yam na vydipnoti kificana | 
abharupamidam sarvam yam bhantamanubhétyayam I 
. That by which this universe is enveloped; that ‘which | 
no object whatsoever envelops; that effulgent one on which 
all this (universe) of the form of none-effulgence depends 
for its shining—that is the 4tman. | 
yena..kificana; That by which, as the saleeinl of all, as inter-— 
nal to everything, this universe is enveloped; that which no ooject 
whatsoever can envelop; for it is outside everything else.. 
Vide: vistabhyahamidam krtsnam ekamSena_ sthito jagat: 
(B.G.): “Myself enveloping. all this, by a part of Me is the universe 
constituted.” . 
_ VIVEKACOUDAMANI 155 
vikadravarti ca tathahi sthitiméha: “And not abiding in effected. 
things because (the Upanisad) has stated (B.S.)." : 
pado’sya visvd bhitani tripddasyamrtam divi (Purusa Sikta): 
“A quarter of it are all the creatures; three quarters of it is the divine 
part in the sky.” 
. jyayan orthivyth jydyanantariksat jyayanebhyo lokebhyah: 
“Greater than the earth, greater than the sky; greater than all these 
worlds.” 
Thus declare the $rutis, the aris and sutras. 
abhdripam: not of the nature of effulgence, i.e., inanimate. 
That which everything shines after i.e., that by whose power all 
this shines. Vide the Sruti: tameva bhantam anubhati sarvam 
(Katha). Everything shines after that alone which shines (by it- 
self). That is the atman. 
It is to be understood that by this declaration of sruti the in- 
finity of Brahman spoken of as satyam, jfianam, anantam is convey- 
ed by the affirmation of the absence of limitations of space. 
131 
_ The expression in sl. 129, yascetayati buddhyadi is explained: 
ara afafartan aegfaanatieaa: | 
faut caratag ade Seat sa 939 tN 
yasya sannidhimatrena dehendriyamanodhiyah 
visayesu svakiyesu. vartante prerita iva | 
By whose very presence, the body, the indriyas, the 
mind and intellect are (act) in their spheres as if impelled 
thereto—that is the atman. 
In the Kena Upanisad it is said: 
kenesitam pratati presitam manah kena pranah prathamah praiti 
yuktah kenesitam vacamimadm vadanti caksussrotram ka u devo— 
yunakti 11 “Induced by whom does the mind function; induced by 
whom does the breath first function; induced by whom do people 
utter this speech; which deva induces the eye and ear?” 
To which query it is replied: Stotrasya srotram. manaso mano 
yadvaco ha vacam, sa u prénasya praénah caksusascaksuh: “That 
which is the ear of the ear, the mind of the me the speech of the 
ed 
29 “And it is not a fact that the Supreme resides in the solar orb etc., within 
the range of effects. He has also another aspect which is eternally free ‘and trans- 
cendental to all things’—Sri Sémkara Bhasya. 
156 (VEKACODAMANI 
speech, the breath of breathing and the eye of the eye,” which means 
Py the sense e eCentsneeHon arising by the mere presence > of the 
pili daycare the word deha stands for the sash of 
action, ie., speech, feet, hands, etc. The word indriya stands for 
the organs of apprehension like (the ear etc.) manas is the antah- 
_karana; dhih here is agent of action, not the buddhi or the intellect. 
prerita iva: In relation to their respective functions, the body, 
sense organs etc., act, speak, take, ete., go, hear, see, touch, etc., 
determine doubt, ere in respect of all spiritual and secular activities 
as if impelled; for, these jada (inanimate) physical organs cannot 
act by themselves.° vartante sa dtma should be added at the end 
of the sloka. a let Gh ttt gto? au tS Meee NT 
132 — 
araaterm bec TETaa: | 
aera uzaaa facastereaetoon i 932 1 
ahankdrddidehanta visayasca sukhédayah | 
vedyante ghatavad yena nityabodhasvaripina T 
That by which, being of the nature of eternal’ know- 
ledge, everything from aharmnkira to the physical body includ- 
ing sense objects, pleasure etc., is known like a pot—that is 
the atman. ae, cer — 
As what is seen does not have the quality of the seer, all things 
from.ahamkara to the body come under the category of ine seen. 
These are the five sheaths. 
visaydh: the objects of senses: sound ‘ete, 
sukhadayah: pleasure etc., include their results. 
, nityabodhasvarupind: by that whose self-subsisting nature is 
jnana. | z 
ghatavat: like a pot. 
vedyante: are known. 
sa dtma: ‘that is the atma’ is to be understood at the end. 
As sukha etc., belong to the group of the seen, they cannot have 
30 The iva, as if. in prerita iva is intended to show that though these seem 
to act impelled by the atman, the atman which is actionless (niskriya) does not 
really impel them. 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 157 
the nature of the seer. By this the unconnectedness of the atman 
(with anything) is declared. | 
By saying that ahamkira etc., upto the body which ate the five 
sheaths are things known, it is affirmed again what was told earlier 
in aphoristic form that the atman is different from these sheaths. 
This is made clear in the Sloka 156 infra. se, MOUS 
133 
CUISATT gee: gent faz 
aaaeq: sfratemat aafaa srenatadien, rT qa 1 
eso’ntardtma purusah purdno nirantarakhandasukhanubhitih 
_ sadaikaripah pratibodhamétro yenesita vigasavascaranti 1) 
This is the innermost 4tman, the primordial Purusa- 
ever abiding in the body, the ancient eternal, of the nature 
of integral experience of bliss, ever the same, accompany- 
ing every mental modification and by whom speech, a 
pranas, etc. perform their respective functions. 
yena isitah: isitah: impelled by mere proximate presence. | 
vik asavasca: speech and the vital airs (i.e., pranas). These 
include the entire assemblage of causes and effects. | 
The function of vak is making sounds. Those of | prana are in- 
haling. and exhaling of breath. a 
By common consent, by the authority of Sruti and by reason of 7 
understanding the nature of Brahman, this 4tman accompanies the 
several sheaths beginning with the annamaya and ending with the — 
_ Bnanda-maya-koga which are all imagined in it as the basis of the 
imagination, even as the rope shines as the basis of the cleft in the 
ground, the serpent, the stick and the streak of water which are 
superimposed on it. 
purusah: the perfect or the All; or puri Sete: abides in. the body; | 
hence purusa. 
purdnah: purapi navah: though ancient, yet new, i.e., ‘eternal. 
nirantardkhaadasukhanubhitih: nirantara: unending: akhanda: 
not broken up by division; the experience of a bliss which is eternal — 
and undivided. Vide the éruti: yatsaksad-aparoksad brahma (Brh.): 
“That which is the object of immediate supersensuous experlence,; 
i.e., it is evens the same and unchanging. 
158 VIVEKACODAMANI 
. pratibodhamatrah continuously accompanying every activity of. 
the buddhi like fire being always inbedded in wood; vide the éruti: pra- 
tibodhaviditam matam (Kena.): i.e., bodham bodhan viditam: this 
atman is known upon the occasion of each cognition. 
- It is stated here that the nature of jfana is continuous, integral 
experience of bliss. 
pratibodha may be understood in two ways: either as in every 
act of cognition or cognition generated by every upadeSa by the guru: 
vide the famous saying: ‘gurund pratibodhitah,’ pratibodhah: It is 
well known that awakening has reference to one who is asleep. 
Here pratibodha has reference to the destruction of avidya: bodha of 
the form of the cognition of the nature of akhandakara-vrtti produced 
by the mahavakyas. Or, it may mean the object of that cognition 
_ (for the reason that Brahman and Brahma-jfiana are non-different 
as Brahman is defined as satyam jranam anantam Brahma). | 
134 | | 
In accordance with the Sruti: sarvani ripéni vicitya dhirah 
namani krtva abhivadan yadaste (Purusa Sikta); and with the 
Brahma Sutra: avasthiteriti kasakrtsnah: ‘(The initial statement is 
made) because (the highest self) exists in the cordition (of the 
individual soul): so Kagakrsna thinks”, the Paramatman alone abides © 
in the form of the jiva indicated by analysis of the meaning of ae 
the meaning of tat indicated by the éruti anagnannanyo abhicakasi 
(Mund.): ‘The other (bird) shines without ene: is aaa 
waa aearaft dag 
oe HENSTBTT TEAR: | 
ATT Sea: tlaaq caHTet 
wads farafad THT TT RE 
atraiva sattvatmani dhiguhayim 
avydkrtdkdsa uruprakasah | 
akdsa uccaihravivat prakésate | 
svatejasa visvamidam prakdsayan 1{ 
In this body itself, in the secret cave of buddhi which 
is of the nature of sattva, in the adkaga spoken of as the 
unmanifested, the resplendent atman shines like the sun in — 
the sky illumining this entire universe by its native efful- 
gence. 
atraiva: here itself: in the body of the aspirant. 
- -VIVEKACUDAMANI 159 
sattvatmani: in the innermost cave of the buddhi, ie., the 
buddhi which is predominantly sattva is itself the cave. The word 
‘guhe comes from the root ‘gih’: guhii samvarane: which means 
covering or concealment. The Atman is covered by the vijiana- 
mayakoga, the sheath of the knowledge. avyakrtakase: the avyertae 
_ k&sa which is continuous as the material: in it. : 
uruprakésah: uru: adhika: abundant, eceanidiy: effulgent; 
illumining everything by its cognitive uninonty: Vide: taddeva 
jyotisam jyotih. (Brh.). 
akaSah: The Paramatman by His own effulgence is the illumi- 
nator of all lights beginning with the sun by shedding the light of 
knowledge on everything. Vide the sruti: yena siryastapati tejased- 
ahah: ( Taitt.) 
idam visvam: this entire universe which is dréya, ae is seen. en. 
prakasayan: shining (illumining) like the sun. 
uccaih prakdSate: shines in the most radiant (resplendent) 
manner. Or, like the sun high up in the sky (uccaih). 
In the previous loka, where it was said: eso’ntaratma purusah; 
the atman was referred to as purusah ie, puri (in the body) sete 
(abides). -This is further explained in this $loka as follows: atra: 
here, ie. in the gross body; dhi-guhadyam: in the cave of the buddhi, 
i.e., in the subtle body and, avydkrta akase: in the unmanifested. 
akaga: in the causal body. eite Sets 
It is well known that the sun in the sky is the illuminator of 
all things in all directions. So, too the atman, which is the inmost 
core of everything, is the illuminator of all objects. 
135 
ATA waite: fafa aptamer -fFRaToty | 
aaisiiaaararqaaatat 7 gqera at fancita fasaa 98a 
jrata mano’harnkrti-vikriyanam | 
dehendriya-pranakrta-kriyanam | 
ayo’gnivat tananu vartamanc 
na cestate no vikaroti kincana }} 
The atman is the knower of the modifications of the 
- mind, the aharhkara and the activities of the body, indriyas 
and the breath. Accompanying them all, like fire in an 
iron, it neither acts nor effects changes in anything. 
160 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
- mano’hamkr ti-vikriyindm jiata: The knower of the eyenuss of 
the mind and the ahamkara. The changes of the mind are kdma and 
samnkalpa: desire and purpose. The changes of aharhkara are pride, 
arrogance, etc. The atman is the knower of all these changes 
which take place internally. Similarly also of the external changes 
wrought in the body, the sense-organs, the breath etc. By the word 
‘deha’ the karmendriyas (organs of action) are indicated. Of these 
and of the activities of the eye and those of the jianendriyas connected 
with seeing, hearing, etc., and of the activities of the prana like in- 
haling and exhaling, the 4tman is the knower. The Atman is the 
witness of all the internal and external transformations. But like 
the fire in the hot iron itself, it undergoes no change. The heated 
piece of iron may undergo change of form as round, long, etc., but 
the fire in the iron which now appears long and now round as such 
undergoes no change. The atman reflected in these organs remains 
by itself unchanging at any time and in any manner though diverse- 
ly spoken of by their respective functions. The a3tman is like the 
sun in whose presence the inanimate world undergoes change, but 
the sun remains unchanging. So is the atman. 
136 
The same idea is explained here with reason therefor. _ 
aq waa at faad a ada 
at atad at fanctfa faea: 
tatemasta aqerafera 
Rae grH gaat CATA URE 
nea Gayate no mriyate na vardhate 
na ksiyate no vikaroti nityah | 
viliyamdne’pi vapusyamusmin 
na liyate kumbha iwambaram svayam || 
It (the 4tman) is not born; it does not die; - does not 
grow or decline; it does not change. It is eternal. Even if 
this body is destroyed, it does not become extinct even as 
space does not become extinct on the destruction of the pot 
which enclosed it. 
Birth, being (existence), change, growth, decline, and extinction 
are the six transformations seen in the body etc. This Paramatman | 
is eternal, is bereft of origination and extinction. Therefore, He is 
not born, He is not originated. He does not die, He does not — 
become non-existent. As He has neither - origination nor death, 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 164 
neitner beginniae nor end, He does not grow. He does not decline. 
- As there is no origination, there is no being or existence as a state 
after that. As He is eternal and partless, He does not undergo any 
change. It is only what is itself subject to change that can effect 
change in another thing. That is why in the previous sloka it was 
said: na vikarott. Why it does not effect change is explained in 
this loka. Though this particular body is destroyed, even as space 
does not disappear when a pot is destroyed, so too the atman is not 
destroyed on the destruction of the body, i:e., it does not become 
extinct by itself nor is it made so by another. 7 
(137 
For proper understanding, unifying the nature of the vijfanat- 
man with that of the Paramatman, the Guru says: 
safa-fanfatan: qeataraara: 
azarae araafafana: | 
fasafa qarea ataatiacaqea- 
cagnetata anette aaery TP 1 930 0 
-prakrti-vikrti-bhinnah suddhabedhasvabhavah 
sadasadidamasesam bhasayannirvisesah | 
vilasati paramatma jagradadisvevasthasu 
' ahamahamiti siksaét saksiripena buddheh | 
Different from prakrti (avidya) and its tranformations, 
of the nature of pure intelligence, and being quality-less, 
illumining all this material world with all that has form and 
is formless, the Atman shines through the waking and onner 
states as their witness and is: ‘referred to as the ‘I’. 
prakrtih: avidya: vikrtayah: akasa etc., its transformations. 
tadbhinnah: different from all causes and effects. 
éuddhabodhasvabhavah suddhah: nirvisayah: of the Satuve of 
pure knowledge -without an object of knowledge, i.e., » the seer (drk) 
by itself. 
idam: whatever is known by | the instruments of sense-perception 
etc. | 
sat: whatever has form like tejas etc. 
asat: whatever has no form like space, wind (akasa, vayu) etc. 
 agesam:; everything. 
bhadsayan: illumining. 
V.C.—12 | 
162 | VIVEKACUDAMANI 
 nirvisesah: without any quality. 
jagradadisu avasthasu...buddheh: The Paramatman abides fo; 
ever as the witness in the jagrat, svapna and susupti-states and as 
: the buddhi in latent (seed) form even in susupti. : 
 ahamahamiti: by refence to oneself as ‘I’, He shines through 
them directly inside. | | 
_ 138 — 
The Guru teaches the sisya the meaning of the éruti: brahma- 
samstho’mrtatvameti (Chand.): “One who is established as Brahman 
attains immortality”. This he teaches by speaking of the control 
of the mind and through it the clarity of the intellect for the reali- 
sation of the Paramatman as non-different from oneself, 
faataaraard ca CARTATARTEH 
eqangiata mentets stenarard 
HPA THAT ETAT CRATE AT 
TAL WA BAA AMIEAMN AEA: 1 GRC Ul 
| niyamitamanasimum tvam svamatmainamatma- . 
nyayamahamiti siksad viddhi buddhiprasadat | 
 janimaranatarangaparasamsarasindhum 7 
pratara bhava krtartho brahmarupena samsthah. 4, 
_ By means of a controlled mind and the clear perception 
of the intellect, directly realise your atman as the ‘I’. By 
that means cross this ocean of samsara with its waves of. . 
birth and death. Thus established as Brahman, be a person 
of fulfilled purpose. , 
adimani niyamitamanasa: concentrating your mind by Sravana, 
manana and nididhyasana on the 4tman which is distinguished from 
the five sheaths; vide Sruti: manasaivedamiptavyam: “This ought 
to. be obtained only by the (pure) mind. af | oe 
buddhiprasadat: prasadat: anugrahat: by the grace of the bud- 
dhi which is devoid of all kinds of defects like asambhavana, a sense 
of improbability, viparitabhavana, wrong comprehension and sam- 
Saya, doubt. Vide the srutis: drsyate tvagryaya buddhya siksmaya 
(Katha): “This is seen (comprehended) by the single-pointed 
subtle intellect”; jndnaprasddena visuddhasattvah tatastu tam paé- 
yate niskalam- dhyayamanah (Svet.): “Becoming compacted of the 
pure sattva by the clear nature of jnana, one then sees Him medi- 
tating on Him”. He sees (realises) the Paramatman which his 
VIVEKACUDAMANI | —— - 163 
own nature. Vide thé Sruti: sa adtmd tattvamasi (Chand.): “That is 
the atman; That thou art”. Also by Sruti: asanneva sa bhavati 
asad brahmeti veda cet (Taitt.): ‘He himself becomes non-exis- 
tent if he thinks that Brahman is not’. All these show that the 
Paramatman alone is important. ) | | 
ayamahamiti sdksat viddhi: Until now you were thinking: ‘He 
(Brahman) is one, and I am another! Giving that up, realise your 
non-difference from Brahman. This (Brahman) is-I.’ 
The fruit of this realisation is oer in the second ne of 
the verse. 
‘janimarana-tarangaparasamsdrasindhum pratara: The samsdara- 
sindhu: the samsarik ocean has for its waves the alternation of 
birth and death. This succession is continuous so long as Brahma- 
jfiana is not obtained. It is apara: shoreless, -beause the only: shore 
is Brahman. So long as that is not realised, this ocean is ‘shoreless. 
pratara: cross that ocean. The preposition: pra in pratara is 
intended to convey the idea of crossing completely and significantly 
here and now; prakarsena tara: i.e., attain immediate Reeoee (sad- 
lice 
- Being for ever established (samsthah) as Brahman, be a krtar- 
tha, i.e., one who has nothing else to accomplish, one who has accom- 
plished everything. Vide the Sloka: jranamrtena trptasya krtakrt- 
yasya yoginah | naivasti kijcit kartavyam asti cenna sa tattvavit 11 
“There is nothing else to be done by the yogi who has realised his 
oneness with Brahman having drunk of the nectar of jiana. If there 
remains anything to be done, that means he has not realised the 
truth.” 7 
139. | : 
Beginning with. the sloka 127, in 11 Slokas the answer to the 
question: ‘What is the Paramatman?” was given. Now the guru 
proceeds to tell the Sisya in the next two slokas the answer to the 
first question: ‘What is bondage’? 
varaeneagtata ata: aca aatsea Wa: 
| TCA SATTT AAA ALTA MATTEL: 
aaa. aqitanad aateardagar 
guacqercaata fand: arate: BITHST 1936 1 
atrandtmanyahamiti matir bandha. eso’sya pumsah 
prapto jfiand) jananamaranaklesasampitahetuh: 
164 - VIVEKACUDAMANI 
yenaivayam vapuridamasat satyamityatmabuddhya 
pusyatyuksatyavati visayais tantubhih kosakrdvat }| 
The belief that the andtman is the atman is man’s — 
bondage. This belief arises from avidya. It is the cause of 
the congeries of griefs like birth, death etc. By it, thinking 
this unreal body to be real like the 4tman, one nourishes it, 
_bathes it, and protects it by sense-objects and gets bound by 
them like the silkworm by its threads. 
As explained earlier, the Paramatman is the essential nature of 
the jiva. Yet, by reason of the beginningless avidya to which he is | 
subject, man thinks of the body etc., as ‘I’, i.e., he says: ‘I am a man; 
Yam subject to hunger and thirst; I denies: I act; I eat’, ete. This 
thought of his Atman as all this is itself bondage. The cause of this 
is to he traced to ajfiana. All illusory experience is due to a defect 
(dosa). As bhrama common to all is productive of defect, the 
wrong impression of the atman as the body etc. is to be traced to 
ajnana of one’s real nature. atra: in the visible body etc., which are 
the anatman. The bhrama of the unseen atman in the visible body 
ete., is a doga. ( Ajiana is of two kinds: milajiana and tilajiana. The 
former is the primordial cosmic ajiana to which all people are sub- 
ject. The latter is the ajhana of each particular individual on every 
vccasion). According to the Samkhya and other views, the miula- 
jnana is not accepted. In that case the question of bondage and 
liberation will not arise; for, bondage is the result of ajfiana: when 
ajnana is destroyed by jihana, its effect, bondage also will be. des- 
troyed. Otherwise, i.e, if the miulajfiana is not accepted, bondage 
will be real and it cannot be said to be capable of destruction. In 
the absence of dosa, bhrama cannot arise. 
The effects of bondage are enumerated: janana-marana-klesa- 
sampata-hetuh: the cause of being engulfed in the throes of birth, 
death and grief. The throes include hunger, thirst etc., or it may 
be taken to mean birth and death and the kleéga (woes). 
sampatahetuh: sampitah: sammagnatvam: being completely 
— immersed. 7 a 
The list refers to egotism, desire, hatred and attachment. What 
is stated earlier as andtmanyahamiti matir bandhah, that the belief 
that the anadtman is the atman is the first cause of grief due to avidya 
has been stated already. (These are the parcaklesas: avidyd, 
asmitd, rdga, dvesa, abhinivesa: nescience, egotism, desire, hatred, 
and attachment). The Yoga Sitra Says: anityasuciduhkhanatmasu 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 165 
nityasucisukhétmatvakhyatir avidya: “The mistaken perception of 
the atman which is eternal, pure and blissfull in what is transient, 
impure and subject to grief, is avidya.” Due to being inclined to 
the gross body, birth and death arise; due to attachment to dnanda- 
mayakoéga etc., arise desire, aversion and attachment. Thus the first 
klega, namely the resultant avidya is the cause of all kinds of misery. 
—yenaiva: by which alone ie., by the wrong perception of the 
Atman in the andtman; by the bondage resulting therefrom 
man thinks this unreal body as the 4tman and gets attached to it. — 
visayaih: the sense-objects appear pleasant though really 
they are forms of bondage. By their relish, they make for nourish- 
‘ment, growth and protection. An appropriate example is given. 
The silkworm spins a web out of the threads manufactured by its 
saliva. It thinks that it is protected by those threads. Caught up 
in them, it is not able to move out of them and ultimately dies. So 
too the jiva thinking that its body is the atman. Nourished by the 
sense-objects, caught by them, it is subject to various kinds of griefs 
like birth, death, etc. Vide the Sloka: | 
kogakrimis tantubhiratmadeham dvestya cavestya 
ca guptimicchan | 
svayam vinirgantumasakta eva san tatastadantarmriyate 
ca lagnah 7 
avanam: means raksanam: safeguarding what exists. posanam 
is making it grow. 7 
140 
Superimposition (adhyasa) cannot arise if one understands the 
difference between the basis (adhisthana) and what is super-im- 
posed (the aropya). That adhyasa is the essential cause for bon- 
dage is explained with an.example by referring to ajnana which is 
the prime cause operating through avidya and making for bondage. 
walencaeata: saata faqeca aret 
faantarata eHciat wet THAT 
aaistaaral frcafa aeraractere: | 
eat aisaaarg: a fg wafer seer: oy ATU Yeo Ui 
atasmin tadbuddhih prabhavati vimiidkasya tamasa 
vivekdbhavadvai sphurati bhujage rajjudhisand | 
tato’narthavrato. nipatati samaidaturadhikah 
tato yo’sadgrahah sa hi bhavati bandhah srnu sakhe 11 
166 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
By (ajnana which is of the nature of tamas) an:undis- 
criminating man mistakes what is not a thing as that thing. 
This is due to lack of discrimination. This is like thinking 
a serpent to be arope. Then great calamities befall one sub- 
ject to it. Hence, listen, my friend! Taking unreal things 
‘to be real is what constitutes bondage. | 
- To the-man devoid of discrimination, due to the tamas of ajfana, 
ikke arises the idea of atman ( tadbuddih }. in the body, etc., which 
are not the atman (atasmin). An example is given for this, Due 
to absence of discrimination, when actually a serpent is before a per- 
son, not being able to differentiate, he is not aware ‘this is not a 
a rope’; but taking it to be a rope he lifts it up and suffers untold 
misery therefrom. Even so, thinking the anatman to be the Atman 
he is subject to life-long misery. Therefore, it is concluded that 
asadgrahanam, taking a thing to be something. else different form 
it” is bindage. 
rajjudhisand: rajjuh buddhih: the idea that it is a rope, 
ki indicates certainty. a | 
sa hi bhavati bandhah: it certainly becomes bondage. 
Listen well to this, friend. 
The usual way of speaking of the super-imposition is to mis- 
take a rope (which is the adhisthana) for a serpent (the aropita). 
Here this illustration is reversed: the serpent is taken as the adhis- 
thana and the rope as the arcpita. This is done to bring out the dis- 
astrous consequence of taking the andtman as the Atman. 
141 
The answer to the question: ‘How did this (bondage) arise?’ 
is begun. | 
— aeueftertgaatanaeat CET ARTATTATATL | 
arrantearafanfiater aati. ‘rg fear farar, neq Me 
akhandanityadv ayabodhasaktya 
sphurantamatmanam anantavaibhavam 
samavrnotydvrtisaktiresi 
tamomay? rahurivarkabimbam 11 
Like Rahu concealing the orb of the sun, this concealing 
power envelops the atman of infinite glory, which is eternal 
and non-dual, manifesting itself by the power of know- 
ledge | 7 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 167 
There are two powers of ajfiana which are the causes of bon- 
dage: one is the power of concealment (évarana-sakti) and the other 
is the power of (wrong) projection - ( viksepa-Sakti). Their causing 
bondage is explained in order. The Atman is akhanda, not separable 
into parts. Hence it is eternal ‘(nitya). It has no origination or 
destruction (for, only what is originated will have an end and can- 
not be nitya or eternal). It is advaya, without a ‘second. It is 
a power of the nature of knowing; vide the Srutis: svabhaviki jiana- 
balakriya ca (Svet.): ayamatma brahma sarvanubhih: satyam jnina- 
manantam brahma_ (Taitt.), vijianamanandam brahma;. krtsnah 
prajynainaghana eva (Brh.) etc. | 
sphurantam: shining: the 4tman shines by that power; ananta- 
vaibhavam: by saying it is ananta, endless, the idea of relative end- 
lessness as in the case of the sky etc., is negated. Its (the atman’s) 
glory is ananta, does not. depend on anything else. By this, its ex- 
traordinary glory is conveyed. This is to show that the sense of the 
aham (the atman) is inappropriate in the body which is extremely 
delimited from other things. 
' On this stman, being delimited, being AoneiarAal having .some- 
thing outside itself, having a second (sadvaya, not advaya) and 
being inanimate (jada) are superimposed due to ajhana. The rea- 
son for this is given. The atman is anantavaibhava of infinite ex- 
pansiveness; it is integral, eternal, without a secand and shines in its 
native splendour of the power of intelligence. This atman is hid-— 
den by the concealing power which is of the nature of tamas, and 
whose existence is known to those who have learnt to discriminate.” 
The concealing power hides the 4atman as Rahu which is tamo-. | 
maya: hides the intensely bright orb of the sun making it appear 
as if it has no power to shine. In the same way as the sun, though 
of intense brightness, is spoken as not shining when enveloped by 
Rahu, so too does the a4atman. when enveloped by the concealing 
power; though by itself supremely effulgent, i.e., its real poe be- 
comes unknown. 
142 
The first. half of this §loka speaks of pence snt and ane 
the second half of (wrong) projecHon: ) 
3 The idea is that ordinary noitals are. not aware of the existence of this tamo- | 
maya-aovrti-sakti. To those who have learnt to dise Fimmnate between the anatman | 
and the atman, the. poncee ns power is clear, - | 
168 ‘VIVEKACUDAMANI 
fata eneranecdsitafa car 
Beret atereefafa watt aoata 1 
a: HTT RETA AT aH ATT: | at faaiareat tara senfaredtaafa igen 
tirobhite svatmanyamalataratejovati puman 
andtmanam mohéd ahamiti sariram kalayati , 
tatah kamakrodhaprabhrtibhir amum bandhakagunaih 
param viksepikhya rajasa urusaktir vyathayati 1, 
When one’s atman of supreme effulgence is concealed, 
due to non-discrimination, a man considers his body to be 
the atman. Then, by the constraining qualities of desire, 
anger, etc., which are of the nature of the powerful rajo- 
guna making for wrong projection, he comes to untold grief. 
amalataratejovati: of what is of absolutely pure effulgence. 
svatmani: in its own nature, i.e, in its nature as the Param- 
atman. : 
tirobhute: when hidden by the concealing power of ajiana, i.e., 
when it does not shine clearly. 
puman: the jiva. 
-mohat: due to aviveka, non-discrimination. 
anatmanam sariram ahamiti kalayati: considers the body whic: 
is different from the atman as his self, i.e., identifies himself with it, 
tatah: after such wrong identification. | | - 
tatah ......:.. vyathayati: then, by the strong power of rajo- 
guna which makes for viksepa (or wrong projection), by the quali- 
ties of desire, anger etce., which produce bondage, it plunges him in- 
to grief. : | | 
uru saktih: very strong power. 
param vyathayati: afflicts extremely. 
kamakrodhaprabhrtibhih: the other qualities are miserliness, 
ostentation, jealousy, arrogance, envy, greed etc. These are al] 
causes Of superimposition. 
It is well-known that those who identify their a4tman with the 
body are moved by desire for things favourable to it (the body), are 
angry when they are not attained, become miserly on getting it etc.; 
vide the Gita: trividham narakasyedam dvaram nasanamétmanah | 
kaémah krodhastatha lobhah tasmadetat trayam tyajet ;; “Three- 
VIVEKACUDAMANI | 169 
fold is this gate to hell—subversive of the 4tman—desire, anger ane | 
miserliness. Hence, one should abandon these three.” 
—-:143 
‘The statement that ajfiana is the source of every evil through 
its concealing and projecting power is further explained. 
ATA S-MTAAT TATA ATA: | 
faut araTaeat: eqahrray TTTNATT 
ae Bart fagataare sresfaeit 
farsvitrssars wate afi: afeanfa: NaeZ 
mahdmoha-grahagrasana-galitatmavagamanah 
dhiyo ninadvasthas svayamabhinayan tadgunataya t 
apdre samsare visayavisapire jalanidhau 
nimajjyonmajjyayam bhramati kumatih kutsitagatih n 
The man of perverted intellect is in the grip of the big 
crocodile of delusion which prevents him from realising the 
real nature of the atman.. He super-imposes on the atman 
the states of his buddhi. Floundering in the big ocean of 
samsara, rising and falling, unable to attain Brahman-rea- 
lisation, he drifts along endlessly. 
mahimoha ........ manah: one who is in the grip of the. great 
monster (crocodile) of the lack of understanding of the true nature 
of the atman, i.e., one who does not know the real nature of the 
atman. 7 | 
mahaémohah: drdhatarah avivelaly strong delusion. 
galitam: nastam: lost. a ae ee | | 
atmavagamanah: correct knowledge of -e atman: knowing its 
real nature based on experience of it. | | | 
- nandvasthah: transformations of various kinds. | 
tadgunatayd: tadadhinataya: being based on it, arising: from it. 
dhiyo ........ gunatayaé: by reason of the atman’s caitanya 
being reflected in the buddhi and taking the transformations of the 
buddhi to be those of the 4tman. Because the reflection depends on 
the nature of the upaédhi which is here the buddhi. It is well known 
‘that when water in a reservoir is agitated, the reflection in it of any 
object seems to undergo agitation; vide the sruti: 
samanassan ubhau lokau anusaficarati sadhih _svapno. phates 
dhydyativa loliyativa (Brh). 
170 | VIVEKACUDAMANI 
“Being the same in the dream and the waking states, it traverses 
the two worlds (of waking and dreaming). That intelligence (which. 
is the witness of all states) in the dream condition functions as if 
thinking and acting.”’ i 4 
_ svayam abhinayan: superimposing on itself. 
apdare: endless (shoreless). . 
visayavisapitre: the sense-objects are the | poison: in the poiso- 
nous stream of visayas. _ Oo 
tasmin samsare jalanidhau: in the ocean of | samsara. : 
The use of locative case in the third line of the Sloka is intended 
to signify a common reference. 
kumatih: ‘one » whose intelligence does not. move icwatds Brah- 
man. As he is kumatih, he is. also kutsitagatih: his: knowledge is 
despicable; or he goes to lower worlds like hell etc. 
Such a man, unable to help himself, floundering and rising up 
due to the delusion caused by the sense-organs oriented to sense- 
objects and not under co ntrol, does not reach the Snore i.e., does 
not achieve Brahman-realisation. 7 | 
144 
That what is produced by itself conceals it, is Shown by an 
example. 
arama faaraastaa: 
ari favtata wat fasreat | 
ster faataa fatima 
aar faziara fasted TAA 1 4S UN 
bhanuprabhasafijanitabhrapanktih 
bhanum tirodhaya yatha vijrmbhate 
atmoditahamkrtir atmatattvam 
 tatha tirodhaya vijrmbhate svayam 11 
‘As the rows of clouds which arise from the sun’s rays 
conceal the sun and appear themselves, so too the aharhkara 
which arises from the a4tman (as its upadhi ) ) hides the atman ~ 
and shines itself. - 
bhanoh: of the sun. 
prabhaya: by the rays. 
saiijanita: produced. 
VIVEKACUDAMANI | 171 
. abhrapanktih: layers of clouds. It is well known that the water 
vapourised by the. sun’s rays in summer. appears as clouds. .. These 
clouds produced by the sun itself hide its face and themselves. ap- 
pear in front of it.. Being produced by the sun’s own rays them- 
selves, and concealing the cause of their (cloud’s) origin are the two 
elements in this comparison. So too, the ahamkara that has arisen 
from this 4tman, though its existence is dependent on it, hides the. 
effulgence of the eternal, pure, -ever free intelligence-which is the 
atman and, standing before it, shines itself. pe 
ahamnkrtih: buddhi which arises in proximity to the 4tman and 
conceals the atman as the vijnanamaya-kosa. 
145 
Now the effect of the concealing and projecting powers is eX- 
plained through an example. | 
nafeafaradt glad arzae: 
equate fereerarqeat qaAaTy 
afacaarransser rata Reale 
aqata age saraafaaretad: 1 9x4 1 
kabalitadinanathe durdine sandrameghath | 
vyathayati himajhanjhavayurugro yathaitan | 
aviratatamasdtmanydvrte midhabuddhim 
ksapayati bahuduhkhais tivraviksepasaktih 4, 
_ Even as a wayfarer suffers untold hardships when he 
goes out on a rainy day being subject to blasts of cold | 
winds, so too the man whose atman is concealed from him | 
is subject to intense hardships by the viksepa-sakti which is 
the cause of countless griefs. 
: sandramegaih kabalitadinanathe Hecine: on a rainy “ay hen: 
the sun is completely hidden behind heavy clouds. Vide the Kosa: 
“meghachanne’ hni dur dinam”. | 
vyathayati himajhanjha ...... yathaitan: himajhaiijha-vayuh: 
strong cold winds: accompanied by rain; Vide the Kosa: “jhanjiha- 
vitah savrstikah”. ugra: bhayamkarah: terrifying. on a day when ig 
sun does not shine. | 
yathaitan vyathayati: as ‘such a cold wind on a rainy day afflicts 
the wayfarer. There is no sunlight.. The man is caught up mid- 
way in the rains and there is a strong cold wind blowing. One can 
easily imagine the affliction of the man. . : 
1722 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
- Similarly the 4tman which is in the position of the sun does not 
shine being concealed by tamas which is like dark clouds and the 
powerful rajasic viksepasakti of the form of desire, anger and other 
qualities comes into play to effect the transformation in the mind. 
The man is already midhabuddhih: that is, he is subject to the dva- 
rana or tamas: for, he has not attained the knowledge which is his to 
attain. Such a man is subject to many sorrows which are the stream 
of many births and deaths. For one who is drowned in this con- 
tinuous whirlpool of sorrow, how can knowledge of his 4tman which 
is of the nature of bliss ever arise? As he has not realised his 
atman, he is lost. ae 
146 
.. The Sisya asked earlier: ‘How did this bondage arise?’ Having 
indicated the answer, the guru concludes as in this Sloka for clear 
understanding. i 
cearrara wfervat aq: Ta: aaa: | ane 
areai fartigat 2g aearera AAT YEE Ut. 
etabhyameva gaktibhyam bandhah pumsah ae 1 
yabhyam vimohito deham matvatmanam bhramatyayam HW 
Constrained by these two powers, subj ect to bondage, 
deluded by them, a man mistaking the body to be the atman, 
wanders about in such delusion. 
_etabhyam: by the tamas and rajas-Saktis of ajfiana which is 
compacted of three gunas and which have the power of concealment 
and wrong projection. 
By these is produced the bandage of the man which is of the 
form of super-imposition of a thing on what is not that thing. 
This cannot be got over except by the realisation of one’s atman | 
produced by inquiry into Vedanta preceded by the acquisition of 
sddhana-catustaya, the four-fold pre-requisites of such Vedanta- 
vicara. | | 
One deluded by these two concealing and projecting’ powers, 
bereft of enlightenment that is to be acquired, considers the gross 
body as his 4tman and wanders in the great forest of samsara. | 
147. 
For the easy underanding by those who desire liberation, ae 
whole of samsara from its roots is described as a tree. 
VIVEKACUPAMANI 173 
att aafrafraca J AAT SeTHETS aT: 
Ut: WAAR WA J AT: earentseaa: mifat: | 
ararvite aeig rest fasor: qoariet g2d Get 
aTaHaaage aga WMMISA Ba: TT UG UW 
hijam samsrtibhimijasya tu tamo dehatmadhirankurah — 
| ragal pallavam ambu karma tu vapuh skandho’ savah 
Sikhikéh 4 
| agranindriyasamhatisca visayah puspani duhkham shatient 
nénakarmasamudbhavam bahuvidham bhokta’tra jivah 
khagah it 
Tamas (ajfana) is the seed of this tree of samsara. The _ 
shoot is the mistaking of the body as the 4tman. Desire is 
the tender sprout; karma is the water. The body is the 
trunk. The pranas are the branches. The contact of the — 
senses with objects are the tendrils. The sense-objects are — 
the flowers. Suffering is the fruit arising from different — 
karmas. The experiencer is the jiva, the bird who eats the 
fruit. | | 
Samsara itself is a tree (bhimijah). Its seed, the primal cause 
is tamas or ajhana. tu shows that ainana alone is the cause; nothing 
else; The idea that the body is the atman is the shoot (ankura) as 
it is caused solely. by ajfana. Raga is the tender sprout as the 
sprout comes after the shoot. This raga takes the form of thinking 
that desires for sense-objects by reason of their being conducive to 
the body, are also good to the 4tman. Ambu.is the water which is 
necessary for the growth of the tree. It takes the form of karmas. 
tu as before is for emphasis and exclusion. It is said: kurvate karma 
bhogaya, karma kartum ca bhuitjate. (Pancadast) “One works to 
eat and eats to work.” This karma is two-fold, punya and its op- 
posite. The trunk of the tree is the body wherefrom the bran- 
ches come off, i.e., the middle part of. the tree is said to be the skan- 
dha. The winds shaking the tree (and which are produced by the 
agitation of its leaves) are the five pranas. The tendrils (agrani) 
are the combinations of the sense-organs, as the jfianendriyas like 
the eye and the karmendriyas like hands. They depend on the prana 
for their functioning. This is clear from the debate eles the in- 
driyas and prana in the Sruti. 
The tendrils, it is well known, depend on the branches. The 
visayas are sound, touch, form, taste and smell. The flowers are con- 
nected with the tendrils. The fruit is grief as it follows the connet- 
174 | VIVBKACUDAMANI 
tion between the visayas and the sense-organs. For, the fruit arises 
at the tip of the branches after the flowers have come out. Though 
it would seem that sukha also has to be designated as a fruit, 
inasmuch as by the word karma used before, punya and papa. karmas 
were mentioned, and as Sukha is only occasionally experienced, 
sense-object-pleasure is considered by the wise as pain only. For, 
both in getting pleasure, and when it is destroyed, one experiences 
pain.. Vide the Gita: ye hi samsparsaja bhogah duhkhayonaya eva 
te, adyantavantah . kaunteya na tesu ramate budhah |; ‘For those 
- delights which are born of contact are only. generators of pain, hav- 
ing a beginning and an end. O son cof Kunti! A wise man does not 
rejoice in them.” Hence the Nyaya Sastra enumerates twenty-one 
‘sources of pain, namely the six indriyas, the six, sense-objects, the 
six buddhis, the body, pleasure and pain. This duhkha arises from 
various karmas. As the karmas are of various kinds; the fruits 
thereof are also of various kinds. In this tree,'the bird is the jiva 
which experiences the fruit of suffering and sorrow. Thus this tree 
of samsara has its roots in ajnana, and its only: fruits are suffering. 
So, it is to be despised like a poisonous tree. The answer: to the 
questian: katham pratisthadsya: ‘How is it (the bandha) establish- 
ed?’ in Sloka 51 is given by saying that the bandha of the form of — 
mistaking the body for the 4tman arises from desire and hatred: 
caused by the karmas which are dharmic and adharmic 
by the succession of bodies produced by those karmas and =the 
firm attachment to those. bodies, and gets confirmed by their cumu- 
lative effects. 
| 148 | 
Now, before giving the answer to the question: katham vimoksah: 
How is release obtained, the guru ani the. aforesaid bondage 
along with its cause and its effect. 
AAATA SATA a A 
aatneisatzcaa ifza: 
araragearfatates:a— 
TATRA WATCARET Ase NN 
ajnanamilo’yamandtmabandho 
naisargiko’nddirananta iritah | 
janmapyayavyddhijaradiduhkha- 
pravahatapam janayatyamusya I 
. This bandha of the anatman has- ajfana for its source. 
It is natural. to everybody and is said to be without ‘begin- - 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 175 
ning and without end (till it is destroyed by jnana).- It 
generates to the purusa, the succession of sufferings-in the 
shape of birth, death, disease, old age, etc. , 
This.andtmabandha which is well known, which is mistaking the 
body etc. for the 4tman, has its source in ajnana of the real nature | 
of the atman. It is natural; it is produced by the samskaras of pre- 
vious adhyasas. acting in succession. It is beginningless, for, it is 
produced by beginningless ajfana. It cannot be known or said when 
it began. It is therefore anddi. It is also ananta i. e., endless. It 
does not come to an end except by. jnana. ge ee 7 
iritah: abhiyuktaih is understood: so described by those who | 
know. The Gita too says: ndnto na cadih: ‘has neither end nor be- 
ginning’. This bondage is of such nature. 
amusya: of this jiva. 
apyayah: death. 
It produces birth, death, disease, old age, suffering and: other 
series of effects. as 7 
adi: etc., in the Sloka is to include also the ddhibhautika and 
addhidaivika in addition to the ddhyatmika sufferings. By. the suc- 
cession of these sufferings this bandha generates extreme grief. 
Instead of pravahataipa, there is another reading: pueunsapen 
which means a succession of processes of falling down. 
149 | oO ogs 
The guru teaches here the unbreakability of this bondage except 
by the realisation of one’s true nature born of strong discrimination | 
obtained by the grace of God. | 
area meathiaa afgat 
Oa A maa. aw HaHlietH: | 
 faaafanrmarfa fart 
Og: Taran feet ASHAT 11 SS 
nastrair na sastrair anilena vahnina 
chettum na sakyo na ca karmakotibhih. | 
vivekavijninamahasina vind 
dhatuh prasddena sitena manjuna i 
Not by missiles, not -by weapons, not by: wind, nor by 
fire, nor even by crores of prescribed karmas -can this 
176 V IVEKACUDAMAN I 
bondage be nditiaver except by the great, sharp and attrac- 
tive sword -of discrimination atest by: the grace: of 
Paramesvara. 
_ dhatuh prasddena gitena manjund: by the grace of Paramesvara 
and by the strong, sharp sword; vige the sruti: yamevaisa vrnute 
tena labhyah (Katha.) 
mafijuna: by the handsome (sword). 
vivekavijianamahasina: by: the | great sweed of the vijaana of 
Brahmasaksatkara born of the discrimination between the 4tman and 
the anatman. 
(tena) vina:. aithout it. 
na chettum Sakyah: cannot be cut off. 
na astrath: not by missiles like the agneyastra. 
(na) sastraih: not by the iron-pointed arrows etc. 
(na) anilena: not by wind. | 
(na) vahnind: not by fire can it be burnt off. 
na ca. karmakotibhih: it cannot be destroyed by even crores (of : 
karmas though prescribed in the Sastras. | 
For, its source is ajfana and it can be destroyed by jiana only. — 
Thus, the reply for the question: katham vimoksah: “how is 
release obtained?” is given by saying that the release from this 
bondage is only by the realisation of the non-dual Brahman obtained 
‘by the grace of Paramesvara. 
150° 
When it is said in ihe previous Sloka na ca karmakotibhih, it 
may be thought that karmas prescribed in the Vedas are absolutely 
unnecessary for breaking the bondage. To remove this doubt, . 
Saying that they aré necessary to purify the buddhi, the guru pro- 
ceeds to affirm that they are needed for the knowledge that will 
lead to destruction of the bondage. ae 
srferrareraed : emurifirest aaanniagta cea t 
fauaad: qwMacKHad ag TATCAA ATT: u qo T 
srutipramdnaikamateh svadharma- 
nistha tayaivatmavisuddhirasya | 
visuddhabuddheh paramatmavedanam 
. tenaiva samsarasamilandsah |) — 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 177 
The realisation of the Paramatman is possible only for 
him whose buddhi has been purified by steadfastly observ-. 
ing the dharmas with a firm faith that the Srutis are the 
sole source for determining them. 
Srutipramanaikamatessvadharmanisthaé: $ruti alone is the cri- 
terion for karma. Vide the Gitd: tasmacchaéstram praménam te 
kéryakaryavyavasthitau | jnatva sdstravidhaénoktam karma kartum 
thaérhasi 1; “Therefore, Sastra is the criterion for you to determine 
what may be done and what may not be done. Learning what $astra 
says, you must begin to act.” : , 
Srutipraminaikamatih: He whose buddhi is governed by the 
statement of Sruti only and by nothing else, i.e. one who relies en- © 
tirely on the Sruti for whatever should be done for his benefit 
hereafter. 7 
-svadharmanisthad: svadharmah: the group of karmas pertaining 
to one’s varna and arama; being always steadfast; observing them 
unswervingly without attachment to anything else. 
atmavisuddhirasya: the special purification of the antahkarana 
of this jiva, ie., the liquidation of one’s papa. Vide: jnanamutpad- 
yate pumsam ksayat papasya karmanah | kasayapaktih karméni 
jranam tu paramad gatih \| kasdye karmabhih pakve tato jrinam 
pravartate 11 (Manu): “Jiana arises for men by the liquidation of 
papa, and karmas remove. papas; jfana makes for the supreme goal 
of moksa. When the papas are removed by karmas, then jana 
arises.” 
visuddha: that form which vices like desire, hatred, etc., have 
vanished. Such a buddhi is a viguddhabuddhih. 
paramaétmavedanam: the realisation of the non-dual Paramat- 
man. By that vedana only can the samsara be destroyed from its 
roots, i.e., the complete destruction of everything from ajiiana to 
dubkha. 
151 
In the previous gloka, it was said: vivekavijaanamahasina. The 
reference was made to vijiana produced by viveka. Earlier the Sisya 
asked: “Please instruct me to understand the distinction between 
the two” What was said generally about the gross, subtle and the 
caugal bodies in brief is now explained at length. 
aaaAa: atau aT dadt way. 
_ frrraferrrcaa: wawqzafcarea STHETT 11 949 Ut V.C.—13 
178 | VIVEKACUDAMANI 
kosgairannamayddyaih pafcabhirdtmaé na samvrto bhati | 
nijasaktisamutpannaih saivalapatalairivambu vapistham \} 
The atman does not shine clearly being covered by the 
material and other sheaths which have arisen by its own 
power, like the water in a well covered by a sheet of moss. 
The Srutis like salila eko drasté (Brh.) speak of the atman as 
being clear, bright and pure like undefiled water. But, it may be 
asked: if the dtman is so pure, clear etc., why does it not shine forth? 
Taking the illustration of that water itself, the guru explains why 
it does not shine clearly. 
nijasaktisamutpannaih etc: nija: of its own; imagined in itself, 
by the material (annamaya) and other sheaths and ending with the 
a4nandamaya (sheath of joy) to be enumerated, and super-imposed 
on itself (on the 4tman); which functions as obstruction to its (the 
atman’s) clear perception. That is, the Atman does not shine sepa- 
rately as it is covered over by the sheaths super-imposed on it, like 
a sheath concealing the sword. . 
_ Tllustrations for the above: moss arises by the quality of a 
sheet of water itself in a well. It arises on the surface of the water 
and prevents the water from being seen clearly. | 
Saivala patalaih: by layers of moss. 
Even as water in a well cannot be seen on account of its sur. 
face being covered with moss arising from itself, so too the a4tman 
cannot be clearly perceived due to the sheaths which get super-im- 
posed on the atman itself. 
152 
The reason for the clear shining of the water in the example 
is given. | 
qa wate vale Mga | 
TONTTAIST AMEM ATS AL FA KR 
tacchaivalapanaye samyak salilam pratiyate Suddham " 
trspdsantapaharam sadyassaukhyapradam param purmsah || 
When the moss is removed, the water becomes visible 
in all its clearness. It removes the pain om thirst and imme- 
diately fills men with happiness. 
When the moss is removed, the water underneath is seen in all 
its clearness without any obstruction. The effect of that is- declared. 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 179 
It quenches the affliction of heat. It immediately gives relief to 
the person who drinks it and fills him with Joy as he sees it, bathes 
in it and drinks of it. | | 
153 
The same is explained with reference to what is illustrated. 
warmay sara ava fame WE: 1 
faearacenca: Sea: ae: caasatta: 11.943 0 
| pancanamapi kosaném apavade vibhatyayam suddhah | 
nityanandaikarasah pratyagripah parah svayamjyotih | 
When the five sheaths are ret aside, this atman which 
is pure, ever blissful, indwelling, supreme and self-effulgent, 
appears clear (untouched by the anatman). 
Even SO, when ‘five kogas (sheaths) beginning with annamaya 
and ending with anandamaya are set aside by the course of reason- 
ing conforming to Sruti, then this 4tman which is the ultimate truth, 
is of the nature of eternal bliss, devoid of origination and dese 
tion, untouched by sorrow, Compas whole and entire of bliss only, 
the innermost citadel of one’s being, self-effulgent, which cannot be 
illumined by anything outside, and which is of the nature of pure 
intelligence and is ever pure, i.e., without native or external impu- 
rities, shines with great splendour. 
api in pancandm api is to indicate that they should be set aside 
entirely. 
pratyagripah: inside everything. 
| svayamjyotih: (self-effulgent—) incapable of being illumined 
by anything outside, of the nature of intelligence (jnana) on 
parah: super-eminent. 
§uddhah: untouched by native or acquired impurities. 
vibhati: visesena bhadti: shines excellently: shines being 
untouched by anything which is of the nature of anatman. 
154 
Therefore, 
areararafaan: sasat aranata fazer | 
aaataeal vata eq faata ateaarraa TRULaL 
adtmanatmavivekah kartavyo bandhamuktaye vidusa i 
tenaivanandi bhavati svam vijnaya saccidénandam t! 
180 | VIVEKACUDAMANI 
The man who has attained knowledge of the scriptures 
should learn to discriminate between the atman and the 
anatman for release from bondage. Having understood 
that which is of the nature of existence, intelligence and 
bliss, he enjoys the bliss of the atman. 
vidusd: by a man who possesses BROWICGEe derived from the 
Sastras. - : ae | 7 
bandhamuktaye: for the reioval of adhyasa or  superimposi- 
tion. | i : “ oe OE Se bee | 
vivekah: étmanatma-vivekah: distinct knowledge of the (lone) 
atman. and the many things which are the anatman, without oe 
the two. 
kartavyah: must be acquired with effort. By iv knowledge 
obtained by such discrimination. us a 
tenaiva: by such discrimination between the atman and the 
anatman. - 2H yee thy SNe 
svam: svasvaripam: One’s true nature; realising one’s 4tman 
as sat, cit and ananda and unsublatable in said of the three periods 
of time, one becomes blissful. | | 
anandi bhavati: He enjoys incomparable bliss always. Vide 
the second gloka supra: dtmanatma-vivecanam svanubhavah. 7 
155 i 
Having thus by an illustration conveyed to the sisya’s mind the 
method of discrimination, the guru teaches him what should be done 
after such discrimination for being ‘established as Brahman which 
is the meaning of mukti or liberation. 
asmtagiattaa = asaania 
ASTHMA SAAT | 
fafasx aa sfasra aa 
aarerat fercofa ea aa: 1 q44 
mufjadisikamiva drsyavargat 
pratyancamatmanam asangam aeuem) 
vivicya tatra pravilipya sarvam - 
taddtmanda tisthati yassa muktah 1 
He is liberated who separates the atman which is un- 
attached and inactive from every object of sense-perception 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 131 
as the tender core of the isika is carefully separated from 
its coverings in the munja-grass, and who remains for. ever 
firmly established in that atman. 
munja: a kind of grass. | 
istka: a delicate thread inside this grass. One must exercise 
the utmost care to take it out whole and entire from the surrounding 
grass. Vide the Sruti: esa sarvesu bhitesu gidhatma na prakésate 
drsyate tu agryaya buddhya siksmaya siksmadarsibhih 1; (Katha). 
“The atman concealed in all creatures does not shine out. It is 
however seen by the sharp intellect of those who can see what is. 
subtle”. By the mind purified by observance of the prescribed 
karmas and by meditation (updsana), the atman must be separated 
from the totality of seen objects which are the andtman. 
drsyavargaét: from the assemblage of whatever is anatman; 
which belongs to, the category of what is seen. 
pratyancam: pratilomyena aicati seeing i in the reverse way (not 
in the usual outgoing way of the senses) i.gé., seeing that which 
shines as pure existence, intelligence and bliss and distinct from 
what is unreal and ate and which is free from grief and aham- _ 
kara. 
asangam: being free from every attachment to anything else — 
as it is without a second. 
akriyam: as it is undivided and not delimited, it is without 
any action. - 
dtmanam vivicya: separating the atman; completely eliminating 
everything from it to the extent of not even thinking of any percei- 
vable object with the firm conviction that there is ‘nothing: that is 
real apart from the atman. | 
pravilapya: determining that there is nothing other than the 
pratyagatman. 
He who is established for ever in the contemplative realisation 
of this inner atman is said to be liberated from _ every kind of 
bondage. 
The state of remaining for ever as Brahman is to be attained 
by discriminating between the atman and the anatman. Thus, the 
man of discrimination should expunge from the mind every trace of 
contamination by the material world and be firmly established in 
Brahman. | . 
182 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
156 
The sruti says: asmdllokat pretya etam annamayamaétmanam 
upasamkramati: “Going away from this body, he (first) transcends 
the material body”. The atman is behind all the kogas of which (be- 
ginning with the annamaya-koga) the anandamaya-koga is the last. 
Being the gross sheath, it is the first to be eliminated. The guru now 
proceeds in these ten Slokas to analyse the nature of this annamaya- 
koSa. : 
I*samananisnNaTy atari 
| gaa wate fareafa afegta: 1 
- earanaiaeferefeaqctecrht: 
ara tag vfaanefa frag: r que Il 
deho’yam annabhavano’nnamayastu koso 
hyannena jivati vinasyati tadvihinah | 
tvakcarmamamsarudhirasthipurisarasih 
niyam svayam bhavitum arhati nityasuddhah | 
The sheath of the gross body is anna (matter)—born 
and anna (matter)—sustained. It lives by anna (matter) 
and dies without it. It is composed of the skin, flesh, blood 
and the excreta. It does not deserve to be the saber ae 
-&tman. | 
annabhavanah: that which is étiginated from anna (matter) 
Origin of this kosSa is from the food eaten by the father and the 
mother. So, it is annabhavana.. This body is a visible object. It 
is a gross material sheath. tu is to exclude other things. That is, 
‘among the five sheaths, the gross body alone is annamaya, not any- 
thing else. Vide the éruti: annad vai prajah prajdyante, atho anne- 
naiva jivanti (Taitt.) ‘People are born of anna (matter) and they 
live only by anna”. Being of anna is not merely by origin; but 
even after origination, it lives by anna (food). Without anna, it 
dies, its prana goes away. Thus, positively, as it lives by anna, and 
negatively, as it dies without anna, the gross body is dependent on 
anna. ' 
hi: indicates nigcaya, conclusiveness. 
The gross body being the anatman is not merely so because it is 
dependent on something else; it is’ also declared by the word ‘tvak 
(skin) etc., in the sloka as impure. It is made of skin, flesh, blood, 
bones, excrement etc. It does not deserve to be the atman which is 
eternally pure etc. Vide the Srutis: ajo nityah (Katha.); guddham 
VIVEKACUDAMANI | 183 
apapaviddham (Iga.) etc. “The atman is unborn, eternal, pure and 
sinless.” 7 
| | 157 | 
The guru explains clearly the transiency of the material body. | 
ga waa qaca atanfed 
| SeeTOTT OTUs HAAEA ATA: ; 
Wal aera aead afeeraaT: 7 
careat wu Wate srafeareaet Hq4y uu 
pirvam janerapi mrteratha naéyamasti 
jataksanaksanaguno’niyatasvabhavah | 
naiko jadasca ghatavat paridrsyamanah 
svdtma katham bhavati bhavavikaravetta iI 
It does not exist before its origination or after its des- 
truction. Every moment it is subject to birth and death. 
and so is impermanent. It is not of the same nature always. 
It is material and visible like a pot. How can it be the 4tman — 
which knows the changes of existence? © | 
piirvam janeh: before birth: before origination. _ 
mrteratha: after death, after destruction. 
api: in both cases of birth and death. 
It (the gross body) is drstanastasvabhavah, i.e., it is destroyed 
(passes out of existence) even while one is seeing it. The Mandukya 
Kariké. says: ddavante ca yannasti vartaméne’pi tattatha: “That 
which is not in the beginning and at the end, is non-existent also in 
the present.” So it is anirvacaniya: indescribable”! because it. is 
drstanastasvabhava. es 
The same is further explained by jaiahponoleiaita etc., ksanaks- 
anaguna: That which is subject to origination and destruction every 
moment. By contact with vayu (wind), and by the movement of 
the breath in the body, it lives; but, by the process of drying up due 
to consumption of this vayu, it begins to decline. Hence the frequent 
intake of food and water. ma coe 
aniyatasvabhavah: so it is impermanent; Le., it. is of inconstant 
nature. aetna: 
33 It is so because you cannot say it is real; for it disappears ultimately. You 
cannot say it.is unreal; for it is seen. You cannot say it is both real and unreal; 
for that will involve a contradiction. Hence, it is spoken of as indescribable, 
anirvacaniya. 
184 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
| naikah: In the same ‘janma it is known differently in boyhood, 
youth etc. os 
ghatavatparidrsyamanah: visible like a pot. Being dependent 
on illumination by an object outside it, it is espenecnt on it for its 
visibility. 
katham bhavati bhdvavikéravetta: How can it itself be the 
knower of its own changes as now it is lean, now it is stout etc. No 
object in the world can know its own changes. For,.a thing cannot 
know its own qualities. The pot does not see itself. Therefore, it is 
said: ‘The body is not the atman; for it is visible like the pot’ etc. 
The Atman is eternal, quality-less, of the same nature pee (i.e., 
not subject to change); and it is also the seer. 
158 
Another reason for it is given. 
atficratizaa eet ate eresia sitaara | 
aaesatcnmss a faaral frarre: negen 
panipaddadiman deho natma vyange’pi jivanat | 
tattacchakter andsdcca na niyamyo niyaimakah 
The body has hands, feet etc. It is not the atman as 
one is able to live even without limbs and as their powers 
are not lost. The ruled cannot be the ruler. 
_ panipddadi: hands, feet ete. The adi (etc.) is to include the — 
sides and the pele The combination of the hands, feet, etc. is not 
the atman. | - 
| vyange’pi jivandt: because, even if one is without these limbs, 
one lives. In the world we see men without hands and feet still 
living, as breathing continues. They perform. the functions of re- 
ceiving, and going from place to place with artificial limbs. There 
is no dependence on the natural limbs. Therefore, the body with 
hands etc., is not the atman. In tre Kathopanisad, it. is said: na 
prdnena napanena martyo jivati kascana | itarena tu jivanti yasmin- 
netavupasritau \,; : “The jiva who is mortal does not. subsist merely 
by the prana or the apana; both these depend on the atman which 
is of. the nature of cit.” This shows that the atman is the basis of 
all powers. _ _ 
The atman is the ruler, not the ruled, of the body, the sense- 
organs etc. The body is the object of control as it is a jada, a 
_ material, object. It does not have the quality of a ruler. 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 185 
Hence, as it has limbs, and as it is the ruled, it is not the Atman 
which has no limbs and is the ruler. That is the general meaning. 
159 
_ Having explained that the body is different from the atman, its 
special quality is further explained for clear understanding. 
Seca tt caee aa aearteeT fate: | 
aa va caattag aguenqanraa: N 948 1 
dehataddharma-tatkarma-tadavasthadisdksinah | 
sata eva svatassiddham tadvailaksanyamatmanah 4) 
The atman is different from the body, its qualities, its 
activities, and its states. Beiug self-subsistent, and as the 
witness of them, it is different from them all. | 
tasya dehasya dharmah: the qualities of that body: form, touch, 
smell -ete. 
tatkarmaéni: its actions: getting what is pleasant and avoiding 
the opposite; going forth etc. tadavasthah: its conditions like enter- 
ing, sitting, lying down etc. adi is intended to include changes like 
fatness, leanness etc. 
sdksinah: of the witness: the atman is the mere witness of the 
body, its qualities, activities and conditions. | 
In all the different states like boyhood, the atman is unchanging 
i.e, in any of the three periods of time it is not sublated. So it is 
distinctly different from the body. Its being different from the 
body is established by reason of the very fact of its being: a witness. 
The atman is different from the body etc., being their witness. | 
What is not different from the body etc., cannot be their witness, 
160 
Thus by reason of its transiency and by the fact of its being 
subject to perception, it was shown that the body is not the atman. 
Now the same is said giving the body’s impurity as the reason. 
wear: wiaferat aacoistanre: | 
ay Waed da caqdaizset: 1 Veo tl 
Salyarasih mamslipto malapirno’tikasmalah , 
katham bhavedyam vetté svayametadvilaksanah 1 
186 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
How can the body consisting of bones, covered with 
_ flesh, full of filth and very impure be the a4tman, the knower 
who is distinct from them? | 
The body is the combination of bones; it consists of flesh. It 
is filled with excreta including exudations from the eye, the nose 
and the ear. Hence, it is very dirty. It is very impure by reason 
of the sweat and the other foul-smellng things in it. How can such 
an impure thing be the impurity-less atman which is quite different 
from it? The Atman cannot be such a ney: 
161 | 
The fruit of such discrimination is conveyed. 
reniadatsferqiecemagata Heat: HUT 
facet afa faareite fancaed RATATAT 1969-11 
tvan-maimsa-medo’sthi-purisarasau 
ahammatim midhajanah karoti | 
vilaksanam vetti vicdrasilo 
nijasvaripam paramarthabhitam I 
The fool identifies his Atman with his body made of a 
skin, flesh, fat, bones and excreta. The man of discrimina- - 
tion, however, knows his true nature to be the supreme 
| Reality. 
midhajanah: a person who does not inquire: one whose mind 
is deluded. Such a person considers his atman to be this body 
which is a combination of the skin, the flesh, the fat, the bones and 
the excreta. The man given to inquiry, however, knows his atman 
to be that which is totally different from the body, which is the sup- 
reme Reality, which is incapable of being sublated in any of the. 
three periods of time and. which is his true nature and identical with | 
himself. 7 
162 
In this connection: 
-agisgineia azeq afz: 
Se a we fagaeragei i 
tte Herat 
12 AAA: 1 FEZ 
deho'’ naa ah ‘alae buddhih 
dehe ca jive vidusastvahamdhih 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 187 
vivekavijninavato mahatmano 
brahmahamityeva matih sadétmanah |)! 
The fool thinks ‘I am the body’. The sastraic scholar 
has the sense of the ‘I’ in the body and the jiva (the soul). 
The mahatman who has knowl<.ege born of discrimination 
always.thinks of himself in the form: ‘I am Brahman’. | 
The ordinary man thinks: ‘I am this body; not anything dif- 
ferent from it’. The scholar, however, who has acquired indirect 
‘knowledge of the S4tman from books has the sense of the ‘I’ in the 
body and jiva. He has the sense of the ‘I’ in the body for the 
purpose of practical life in the world and in the jiva different from 
the body for performing the sacrifices prescribed in the Vedas. (That 
is, he calls his body his ‘I’-for worldly concerns; for other-wordly 
concerns, to enjoy in other worlds the fruits of the sacrifices that he 
performs, he considers his jiva, apart from the body, as the 1’). 
vivekavijndnavatah: to the man who has discriminated between 
the &iman and the andtman, to the man of knowledge by which the 
misimpression of the 4tman in the anatman has been removed and 
who has acquired direct realisation of that knowledge. | 
 vivekavijiinam: vivekat vighanam: knowledge born of dis- 
crimination. | 7 
mahétmanah: of him whose atman is devoid of the three kinds 
of limitations (of place, time and things, deSapariccheda, kalapari- 
echeda and vastupariccheda). Previously, the sense of the atman 
existed in the sheaths which are delimited and are of the nature of 
the anadtman. So, he was alpa, small. Now, however, due to per- 
fect and correct knowledge, the man considers his 4tman to be devoid 
of the three kinds of delimitations. (So, he is mahaétma.) Vide 
the Srutis: yatra naényot pasyati, nainyat Srnoti, nainyat vijaniti sa 
bhiima | yatra tvasya sarvamatmaivabhit tat kena kam pasyet 11 
(Chand.): “Where one does not see another, does not hear another, 
does not know another, that is the Infinite. Where to him everything 
was the atman, what will he see by what?” To such a person, in| 
respect of his dtman there is always the conviction leading to the 
realisation: ‘I am Brahman’. matih anubhavah: experience, 
realisation. | F 8 
163 
Therefore, 
teats can qeag | aaarieatatsteartaersit i 
anata sein fafanet goog anita teat ATET 114963 | 
188 _  VIVEKACUDAMANI 
atrdtmabuddhim tyaja midhabuddhe 
tvanmaimsamedo sthipurisarasau | 
sarvatmani brahmani nirvikalpe 
kurusva Santim paramém bhajasva 1; 
Oh! thou of stupid intellect! Give up dentfving your 
atman with this body made up of the skin, flesh, fat, bones 
and excreta. Instead, rest your mind on Brahman, the one 
atman of all and which is not subject to change. And then, 
enjoy supreme bliss. 
miudhabuddhe: you whose mind is devoid of discrimination; or 
it may mean; in this body wrongly ener to be the atman by ‘the 
men of stupid intellect. 
Give up the impression that this — of skin, flesh, fat, bones 
and excreta is the 4tman. Vide the Srutis: idam sarvam yadayamatma 
(Mand.); sarvam khalvidam brahma (Chand.): “All this is the 
atman”; “Verily, all this is Brahman.” Transfer your belief that 
this body is the atman to Brahman, the supreme Paramatman 
which is the material cause of all things and the ultimate substra- 
tum of their appearance, which is devoid of different kinds of 
changes. Understand the truth; I am only the supreme Brahman. 
nirvikalpe: vividhakalpanasunye: which is devoid of different 
imaginations about itself. 
The consequence of such understanding is stated. Attain the 
supreme peace and bliss of liberation, of being firmly established in 
Brahman. Vide the Gita: sdntim nirvénaparamém matsamstham 
adhigacchaii: ‘attains to the peace abiding in Me which culminates 
_in moksa.” 3 3 ; 
. 164 
In this Sloka it is said that there can be no liberation merely 
from the knowledge of Sdstraic books without renunciation of false 
identification of the atman with the body etc. 
aehaararaata wattaci 
factrgat @ satta ata | 
aaa aearter faafeaarat- 
screed FaaAAPATAT VEY UI 
dehendriyddaévasati bhramoditam 
vidvanahamtam na jahati yavat | 
tavanna tasydsti -vimuktivarta- 
*pyastvesa vedantanaydntadarsi || 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 7 489 
So long as the mere scholar (who has only book learn- 
ing) does not give up his idea arising from the wrong im- 
pression that his body, sense organs etc., which are asat 
(not the real Atman) are the atman, there can be no talk 
of his release even if he is most proficient in the science of 
Vedanta. | 
vidvan: an expert in discrimination. | 
As long as a man does not give up identification of the atman 
with the body, the senses, the prana, the manas and the buddhi, till 
then there can ‘be no talk of liberation, i.e., how can such a man get 
liberated? Let this man be an expert in the ultimate reaches of the 
science of Vedanta. Even then he is not qualified for liberation if 
he does not renounce this wrong identification. Hence, by inces- 
sant contemplation all misapprehensions must be got rid of. 
asati: In the body etc., which are of the nature of mithya. 
vedantanaydntadars: Vedanta itself is naya or Sastra; tasyan- 
tah: its goal. He who is capable of seeing it is VedantanayantadarSi. 
165 
An easy method of effecting such renunciation is 3s said to be vicara 
or earnest inquiry or discrimination. , , 
stam xafaramna 
aeamag gfe afore | 
mimafea afer aifaq 
Starwat a aaa MET UGE 
chayasarire pratibimbagatre 
| yatsvapnadehe hrdi. kalpitange | 
yathaétmabuddhih tava nasti kacit © 
jivaccharire ca tathaiva mastu i 
As you do not identify your 4tman with the shadow of . 
your body, in its reflection (in a mirror ete.) or when it is 
seen in a dream, or when you imagine it in your mind, so 
too do not identify it with your living body. 
For the same reason that you do not have the sense of the ‘T’ 
(atmabuddhi) in the shadow cast by your body. in its reflection seen 
in a mirror etc., in your body seen in your dream state, in a limb: 
of your body imagined by you in the waking state, SO too in the 
living body too give up the sense of the ‘I’. The idea is that in all 
these cases the respective objects are seen to be separate from the 
seer. 
1900 _ -VIVEKACUDAMANI 
166 * 
This sloka says that dehatmabuddhi (the identification of the 
body with the 4tman) should be given up by him who wishes to get 
out of the material sheath (the apnatney ances): 
aeradita aneaatgat 
MATa AACT FTAA | 
aaeaaed ate ai TIA 
usd a fad @ gadaret nee 
dehdtmadhireva nrnamasaddhiyam 
janmadiduhkhaprabhavasya bijam } 
yatastatastvam jahi tim prayatnat 
tyakte tu citte na punarbhavasa 4 
For men whose intellect rests on the asat (non-dtman), 
the notion that the body is the a4tman itself forms the cause 
_ for the rise of sorrows beginning with birth. Therefore, - 
7 put an end to this notion with effort. Once the mind is de- _ 
tached (from body, etc.), there is no possibility of being 
born again. 
 asaddhiyim: Of those whose intellect rests on the asad-vastu, 
ie., on what is anadtman being different from Brahman. 
dehatmadhih: deha eva atma iti dhih: the belief that the body 
itself is the atman. 
janmadiduhkhaprabhavasya bijam: that belief itself is the seed 
of the series of sorrows which include birth and death. For, birth 
and death are attributes of the body. 
As a man thinks that his body is ‘the atman, he believes that 
birth and death pertain to the atman. 
As this dehatmabuddhi is the source of all sorrow, it ought to 
be given up with effort, ie., by hearing the words of the guru, re- 
flection on them, and by contemplation based on dastra. 
jahi: give it up or destroy it. 
If the mind is detached from the body etc., there will be no 
mental activity and there will be no trace even of attachment to it. 
Hence, there will be no possibility of being born again. Vide what 
will be said infra: ahambhavasya dehe’smin nissesavilaydvadhi |)sava- 
dhanena yuktétmaé svadhydsGpanayam kuru (Sl. 285). Also, dehat- 
majnanavaj jranam dehaétmajianabaédhakam atmanyeva bhaved- 
yasya sa jevannapi mucyate (Siitra Bhasya): ‘He who has in the 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 191 
Atman the same idea which he ordinarily firmly holds that the body 
is the Atman, and which cuts at the root of this false identification, 
such a person is liberated even if he still lives in the world.” 
167 
Having shown that the annamaya-koSa (the gross material body) 
is not the atman, the guru, following the order of the Sruti, goes to 
show that the pranamaya koSa, the sheath of the vital airs also is 
not the 4tman. 
aitea: qsatacsadtss sreTt MAT ATTAITT BY: 7 
VAUAAAAAASTT: TATASA ae RATY T q: AC 
karmendriyaih pancabhirancito’ yam 
prano bhavet prénamayastu kosah | _ 
yenditmavan annamayo’nupirneh 
pravartate’sau sakalakriydsu | 
This prana in.combination with the five organs of action 
constitutes the pranamaya-koga. Permeated by it, the anna- 
maya koga gets its life by the prana entering. into it and en- 
gages in all kinds of action. | ) 
karmendriyaih paficabhih: by the five karmendriyas: organs of 
action called the speech, hands, feet, the excretary organs and the 
genitals which are responsible respectively for speaking, taking, 
moving. about, excretion and sexual pleasure. — are born of 
the rajoguna of the five elements beginning with akas | 
aiicitah: made up of. 
The effect of the combination of the five elements in their rajas- 
aspect is prana or breath. It is the wind (vayu) which moves about 
inside the body. The pranamayakoga is named after it. 
koSah: sheath. Covering the 4tman with the urges (dhar- 
mas) of hunger and thirst, it is the obstacle for the awareness of the 
d4tman which is ever free from hunger and thirst. It makes the man 
feel: Iam thirsty;I am hungry. (i.e., instead of realising that thirst 
or hunger are prana-dharmas, he attributes them to the ‘T’, the 
atman). | 
yendtmavan annamayo'nupiirnah: Here the guru refers to the 
meaning of the Sruti: tenaisa pirnah, sa vé esa purusavidha eva, 
tasya purusavidhatim, anvayam purusavidhah (Taitt.): The anna- 
maya, praénamaya, manomaya, vijfianamaya and Anandamaya-koéas 
192 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
form a successive series. Whatever happens in the annamaya-koéga is 
wrongly identified as belonging to the atman by reason of its being 
pervaded by the pranamayakoga. So too with each successive koga 
by reason of the koga next to it pervading it. By the Sruti: tas- 
madva etasméd annarasamayaét anyo’ntara datma pranamayah 
(Taitt.): The pranamaya koéa is different from the annamayakoga, 
but its atmé is imbedded in it. It is. by pranamayakoéga that the 
annamayakosa becomes atmavan; if the prana envelops the body 
fully, the 4tma too is said to envelop it likewise. tasya purusavidha- 
tam anvayam purusavidhah: so enveloping the body, the prana as- 
sumes the form of purusa and the Atma too is said to be likewise. 
adtmavan: étmapratiphalanavan: reflects’ the 4tman, making the 
man identify it with the a&tman. The ground for this is that the 
pranamayakoéa is anupirnah: i.e., it fills the preceding annamaya- 
koSa being accessory to it. Vide the Sruti sa esa tha pravista & nakha- 
grebhyah, i.e., it has here entered. into every ‘part of it, from the 
nails. 
Being of that nature, it embarks on all actions for getting what 
is good and for avoiding what is evil. For the unintelligent (the 
acetana) always functions by its being acted on by what is intelli- 
gent (the cetana). If there is no connection with prana in any part 
of the body, as is well known, it ceases to function as a normal limb. 
In a dead body, as there is a total disconnection with prana, it be- 
comes non-sentient. The prana as a whole is a collective combina- 
tion; while it functions in the elements which constitute the body it 
is a distributive pervasion. But, both cases are effects of the action 
of rajoguna which goes to prove that the organs of action, karmen- 
driyas are moved by the pranamaya-koéa. 
168 | 
Now, that the pranamayako§a is not the 4tman is explained. 
wares stort arafaaret 
TRTNTHAT aTq aaa eT: t 
aenicnfacranta a axitezafase 
ea area a faraa fret azaea: 11 qe tI 
naivatmayam prénamayp vayuvikaro 
_ gantaganta vayuvad antarbahiresah | 
yasmat kincit kvapi na vettistamanistam 
svam vanyam va kificana nityam paratantrah 1 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 193 
This pranamaya koga can never be the atman. It is the 
effect of the wind. Like wind it goes in and comes out. 
As it is not aware of good or evil anywhere or at any time, 
either of itself or of others, and as it is eee (on some- 
thing also), it cannot be the atman. 
- wayuvikévah: This pranamayakosa is the effect of the activity 
of vayu: so it is not the 4tman. That is the conclusion of the argu- 
ment, what is to be proved. Reason for it: Like vayu, this prana- 
maya koga goes in and out. When there is inhalation, it goes in;. 
when there is exhalation it goes out. This is like the wind outside. 
This vayu which is the pranamayakoéga is characterised by activity 
and. is delimited. It cannot be the 4tman which is all-pervasive and 
actionless. The reason is: because it is active and delimited. The 
example is: like vayu, which is outside. : 7 sie 
By the latter half of the Sloka it is conveyed that, its being - non- 
intelligent and extra-dependent are similarly ‘the reasoris ‘for the 
pranamayakoga not being the atman. For, it does not apprehend 
anything dear or otherwise, joy or sorrow at any time or place, itself — 
or any other. Hence it is always dependent on ‘something else: 
It is also well known that the breath is controlled at. the time 
of pranayama. | | : 
Therefore, as the pienamayaknts is characterised by activity, is 
delimited, is non-intelligent and is extradependent, it cannot be the 
a4tman which is different from these features. If the pranamaya koéga 
were the atman, as. it is. ‘awake’ in dreamless. sleep, it must be aware 
of the intrusions of thieves etc. The Atman is supreme above all. 
To say that it is awake when its servants like the eyes etc., are asleep 
is improper. Therefore, this pranamayakosa can never be the 
atman. 
169 
Now the manomayakoga is explained. 
area ae AAT WANE: eUTq 
mitt Aare aeqfancaad: | 
dafetanoaats at ata 
aeqantaraqay fasrrdt a 11988 tr 
jranendriyani ca manasca manomayah syat 
kogso mamaéhamiti vastuvikalpahetuh | 
samjnddibhedakalanadkalito baliyan 
tatpirvakosamanuptrya vijrmbhate yah 11 
V.C.—I4 
194 | VIVEKACUDAMANI 
The organs of knowledge and the mind form the mano- 
maya koga which is the cause of the sense of the ‘T’ and of 
the ‘mine’ and of the varying conceptions. It creates differ- 
ences of name etc. It is powerful. It manifests itself as 
what pervades the previous pranamaya koéga. 
: jidnendriyani: the organs that perform the actions of hearing, 
seeing etc., the eye, the ear, the skin, the tongue and the nose. 
manah: the organ with which is associated desire, purpose, 
doubt, fervour etc. 
manomayah: the koSa called by that name. It is called mano- 
maya and not Srotramaya etc., as the activities of all organs are ‘de- 
pendent on (determined by) the mind, and because during the dream 
state, the mind is active even though the sense-organs are not func- 
tioning. Further, as each of the organs functions by virtue of the 
_sattva guna in its particular manifestation while the mind functions 
by the collective manifestation of that guna, it is to be understood 
that they are all included in the same kosSa. A man says: I hear; 
I desire; I see; I touch; I taste; I smell; I desire; I determine etc. 
In all this, there is the sense of the atman which is said to do these 
things. The Sruti also says: tasmddva etasmat pranamayat anyatara 
atma manomayah (Taitt.): “The manomaya functions as if it were 
the 4atman beyond this pranamaya.” So this manomaya kosga too 
appears as if it were the 4tman. Hence, the name koéga to it. 
maméahamiti vastuvikalpahetuh: The effect of this is described. 
It is the cause of speaking of things and of itself as ‘mine’ and ‘I’. 
It produces the sense of the ‘I’ in the body and the serise-organs, 
and the sense of the ‘my’ in the house, land etc. The mind is of 
the nature of determination and doubt. | 
samjiddibhedakalanadkalitah: The form that this sense takes is . 
referred to here. samjia means ‘name.’ ddi: includes form. Things 
are distinguished variously by their names and forms. A thing is 
called ghata, kalasa, kumbha depending on its size. Colour is black, 
green etc. Thus, this distinction of form and colour pertains to all 
objects. All modifications relating to sound (name), and object de- 
pend on the mind. In the world there is no object devoid of name 
and form. Hence the world is dependent on the mind for its activity. 
baliyan: Powerful because bondage and liberation depend on 
the mind. Jfdna-Sakti is not found in the annamaya or the prana- 
maya koga. _Hence, manomaya koSa is-said to be powerful. In the 
VIVEKACUDAMANI ~ 495 
absence of connection with this, there is no connection wee | the 
atman, too. | 
tatpirvakosam: anupirya vijrmbhate: Its earlier koga is praina- 
maya koga. The manomaya koga pervades the pranamayakoéa, itself 
pervaded by the vijmanamaya koga. So pervading, it does all 
actions. Vide the Sruti: sa vé esa purusavidha eva tasya purusavi- 
dhatém anvayam purusavidah (Taitt.), which says the same thing 
170 
How the manomaya kog’a makes for bondage is explained. 
qsateaa: qeatara giata: 
Strat fararsqarcat | 
HSACAAT TELAT HT: 
aataaistia: aga TSAR Uv Yo tt 
pancendriyaih parcabhireva hotrbhih 
praciyamano visayajyadharaya | 
jajvalyamdno bahuvdsanendhanath 
| manomayognih dahati prapancam || 
The’ manomaya koga is the sacrificial fire. The five 
_ organs are the sacrificing priests. They pour into the fire 
the oblations of the sense-objects. The various vasanas are 
the fuel. With these the manomaya koga burns out the 
world. | | 
The manomaya koéga is explained by the analogy of a sacrifice 
for getting sense-pleasures. It is stated to be a sacrificial fire. The 
organs like the ear are the sacrificers. The objects which come again 
and again are the oblations of ghee in the fire. The residual im- 
pressions of sense-pleasures (visaya-vasandh ) are the fuel. 
The five organs, the ear,:the skin, the eye, the tongue and the ; 
smell are. the hotrs or the sacrificers. They perform the action of 
throwing the havis (the oblation) into the fire. Sound, touch 
colour, taste and smell are the sense-objects (visayah). They 
are the clarified butter whose continuous flow feeds the fire 
Each particular organ throws its: particular visaya in the - fire 
of the mind. If the fuel is present, the flow of the clarified butter 
inereases the flame produced on the fuel of the various vasanas; 
pracityamanah: made to grow: Vasana is defined thus: drdhabhava- _ 
naya tyaktapurvaparavicdranam yadadanam padarthasya vasanad sG 
prakirtita: “That is called vasana which makes for spontaneous 
196 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
recall of an object in the mind by previous intense thought of it and 
without reflection of its antecendent and consequent.” Though the 
visayas are binding agencies, they are wrongly thought of as giving 
pleasure and they are sought after. The vasanas are the dry fuel. 
If there is no fuel, mere flow of clarified butter will not produce a 
lasting flame. So too, in the absence of vasands, the visayas will not 
make for bondage. Flaming brightly and without break by the. fuel 
of vasanas, the fire of the manomayakoga burns the world; it redu- 
ces it to ashes, i.e., makes all men undeserving to attain their objec- 
tive (of moksa). | 
171 ae 
That the manas is the cause of bondage is explained affirm- 
atively and negatively (by the methods of anvaya and vyatireka.) — 
a wecafaar aaratstetcaa 
nat ota waareaga: | 
afer faad anc fart 
fagfenasfery anc faaead 909 0 
na hyastyavidyd manaso’tirikta | 
mano hyavidya bhavabandhchetuh | 
tasmin vinaste sakalam vinastam 
_vijrmbhite’smin sakalam vijrmbhate 1 
There is no avidya apart from the mind. The mind 
clearly is avidya, the cause of the bondage of samsara. 
_ When that is lost (stilled), everything is lost (stilled). When 
it (reappears and) grows, everything reappears and stows, 
(into consciousness). | _ 7 
In dreamless sleep there persists the primal avidya (rida or 
karana-avidya). Yet, there is no bondage at the time. For the mind 
alone which is the effect of that avidya makes for bondage. In 
dreamless sleep the mind is stilled. So there is no avidya apart from 
the mind. Hence, the cause of the bondage of samsara is avidya 
and, being its effect, the mind only. If the mind is functioning, 
there is bondage in the shape of identification with the body etc. 
If it is not functioning, this identification does not exist. Thus, both 
by the method of anvaya (accordance) and of vyatireka (diver- 
gence), manas is seen to be the cause of the bondage of samsara. 
The same idea is explained in the second half of the sloka: when 
the mind is lost, i.e., stilled, everything is stilled. For, it is well 
known that there is no (awareness of the) world in dreamless sleep. . 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 197 
When the mind reappears and grows into functioning, everything 
acquires growth (ie., as one gradually regains full consciousness 
after dreamless sleep, the world grows into one’s EONS cIOUERERS); 
hi in the first line indicates conclusiveness: niscitam. 
hi in the second line means yatah: because. 
vinaste: visesena nirvésanam naste: when it is lost (stilled) 
with no vasands or residual tendencies. 
172 
The same is explained more fully: 
caret saara quite TaraeTT aiteartz fasd ® WA va aay UL 
aaa sraeafa at fas: acaadaraat faaerort WR i 
svapne’rthasinye srjati svasaktya 
bhoktradi visvam mana eva sarvam | 
tathaiva jagratyapi no visesah 
tat sarvametan manaso vijrmbhanam || 
In the absence of external objects in the dream, the mind 
alone creates everything, i.e., the enjoyer etc., by its power. 
So, too, there is no difference in the waking state. ant fan 
that is only an expansion of. the mind. 
It is first dealt with by the anvaya method. The sruti tedvhis 
that the activity of the mind in the absence of (external) objects is 
the dream state. At that time, in the minute tubular fibres of. the 
body more slender even than a hair, mountains, rivers, oceans etc., 
are ‘seen.’ This is not possible as such, as the sense-organs like the 
eye are not functioning. Hence the mind cannot go out. through 
them. So the objects existing outside the body cannot be perceived. 
But, they appear to have their locus outsidé due to the vasanas (resi-. 
- dual tendencies) persisting in the mind. Really, they do not exist as 
such. Hence the expression arthasinye: in the absence of ( material ) 
objects. In dream state of such kind, the mind creates by its own 
power, ie., by the reflection in itself by its tendencies, all the objects 
of the world of (dream) experience. | | 
‘The question may be raised: If the jiva is the experiencer, 
how can it also be the experienced object? In the absence of expe- 
rienced object, there can be no enjoyer. The mind is the cause of 
the creation of experienced objects; it implies the experiencer, and 
it must be taken that it creates the experiencer; for, the experiencer 
and the experienced objects are correlatives. When there is no 
198 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
experienced, there can be no experiencer and (conversely) in the 
same way, as in the dream state, in the waking state also the mind 
alone creates everything. There is no difference. Hence.the whole 
universe is the expansion of the mind. 3 
vijrmbhanam: expansion, activity. 
173 
The same meaning is confirmed by the vYyatireka or negative 
method. 
quant aaa seitt danfés finfag aaoated: 
Hat Aa HloTa TA Fat: sieve Umed 1 ARISE Weg T 
susuptikéle manasi praline 
naivasti kincit sakalaprasiddheh | 
ato manahkalpita eva pumsah | 
samsara etasya na vastuto’sti || 
It is well known that there is nothing in dreamless 
sleep when the mind is stilled. Hence the samsara is a 
creation of the mind. It does not exist in reality. 
In the state:of dreamless sleep, the mind is bereft of its changes 
and remains in its bare causal form. At that time there is no 
(experience of the) world. This is well known to everyone. For a 
man waking fron: dreamless sleep says: “I was not aware of any- 
thing while I was sleeping.” Hence this samsara of this man in 
bondage is only a creation of the mind. vastutah: paramarthatah: 
from an ultimate standpoint, it does not exist. For when the mind is 
active, the world-objects are ‘perceived’ in dream and waking states. 
When the mind is not (functioning) in dreamless sleep, they are not 
_ ‘perceived’. When the clay is there, there is the pot; when the clay 
is not, there is no pot. Even so, in the absence of the mind there 
is no. samséra. Thus what was said in the previous sloka: tasmin 
vinaste...... is further explained HSS: 
174. 
By the example of the cloud it is ccisined that the mind has 
these two opposite effects. 
SIT aaa Ae: qaectag stat | 
TAA weTa ser: HAAAT HeeT 1 Vo 11 
. viyund. niyate meghah punas tenaiva liyate | , 
manasaé kalpyate bandhah moksas tenaiva kalpyate 1; 
VIVEKACODAMANI — | 199 
The clouds are brought together by the wind, and they 
are again dispersed by it. Bondage is created by the mind 
and liberation is also brought about by itself. 
The meaning is clear. 
175 
In the subject of the illustration, me causes of bondage and of 
liberation are explained. 
aeterdfaad ofemcca ut 
aeatia aa Fed TAS THAT | 
aveqne faray qfaura qratr- a 
ad fadtaafa aT TF TAT G4 
dehadisarvavisaye parikalpya raégam 
badhnati tena purusam pasuvad gunena | 
vairasyamatra visavat suvidhaya pascaid 
enam vimocayati tanmana eva bandhat 11 
Producing attachment to objects like the body etc., it 
(mind) binds a man with a rope as if he were an animal. 
Later, the same creates aversion for them and liberates him 
from that self-same bondage. a 
_ dehddisarvavisaye: In the body and obj ects of sense perceptielt 
like sound, touch, sons, ete., The attachment to sound etc., is | origi: 
nated in the body. Hence it is said: the body etc. 
_tasmin: In all sense-objects commencing from the body. 
“vigam parikalpya: creating strong attachment. By that pie 
of attachment, binds the man as if he were an animal. | 
- badhnati: binds ie., makes him unfit to attain the supreme 
-state that he desires. 
Then, later, the same mind that caused the bondage produces 
aversion to the objects commencing with the body as if they were 
poison. This it does by reminding him of their injurious. propensi- 
_ties. Producing this aversion firmly, it liberates the man effectively 
from the bondage symbolised by objects like the body etc. It brings 
about a state of being established in Brahman whereby never more 
will arise attachment to the body ete. 
176 
The Guru concludes the discussion on the cause of bondage and 
liberation. | 
200 ; VIVEKACOPAMANI 
TATA: BTN seat: 
qereq alereq a ar fae | 
TueT et: Afloat TTT: 
witeeq Ba: PaCHRAATA 11996 11 
_tasméin manah kadranamasya jantoh 
bandhasya moksasya ca va vidhane | 
bandhasya hetuh malinam rajogunaih 
moksasya hetuh virajastamaskam MW 
So the mind is what produces bondage. or liberation in 
a person. The mind being fouled by the raj ogunas is the 
cause of bondage. Its being free o rajas and: tamas is br 
cause of lberation. | | 
For the aforesaid reason, of this person, the mind alone is the 
cause of the production of bondage or liberation; vide: mana eva 
manusyanam kadranam bandhamoksayoh. 
 vidhane: utpadane: in producing. 
Replying to the objection as to how the same thing may be the 
cause of opposite effects, it is said: the effects of rajoguna are 
diverse. They make one an. extrovert (bahirmukha). The rajo- 
dharmas are kaiia, krodha, lobha, ie., desire, anger, avarice, etc., 
The plural form “rajogunaih” is used to indicate the several rajo- 
gunas or to show that actions effected by rajoguna are of various 
kinds. A mind fouled by these is the cause of bondage. The pure 
mind is devoid of rajas and tamas. A mind completely free from 
_Yrajas and tamas is the cause of liberation. Hence, though the mind 
is identical, due to differences in the qualities, opposed causations 
arise in different times. So this is not a contradiction. | 
177 
~The Guru gives the reply to the diiéstion’h how purity of mind as 
cause of mokga is to be attained. 
fade-dena-qunfatereaararrerer wat farses 
wacuat afsaar aqateareat qereat safacternd TR CONT 
viveka-vairdgya-gunatirekat 
Suddhatvamasddya mano vimuktyai | 
bhavatyato buddhimato mumuksoh | 
tabhyam drdhibhyam bhavitavyam agre | 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 201. 
By attaining purity through the cultivation of firm dis- 
crimination and uncompromising renunciation, the mind 
gets qualified for liberaton. So, a seeker for liberation 
must first be firmly established in them. __ 
vivekavairdgyagunatirekat: Discrimination and. renunciation are 
qualities that will yield beneficent results. atireka or atisayah in 
them means firmness in discrimination and supreme unyielding 
renunciation. By such firm discrimination and austere renunciation, 
by the conviction that Brahman is the only truth and the world is 
mithya, desire will not arise for the worldly objects which are all 
mithya. So detachment from oe upto Brahmaloka is hailed 
as praiseworthy. 
- guddhatvamasadya: attaining purity; only he who is not subject 
to desire ( kama) is said to be pure. 
The mind qualified by those two virtues, attaining such purity 
and absence of defilement; it helps to get rid absolutely of all traces 
of bondage; for it ceases to be extrovert (bahirmukha) and is firmly 
set cn Brahman. Thus, the mind of firm discrimination and uncom- 
promising renunciation is the cause of liberation. So the buddhi- 
man i.e., the intelligent man who understands the means (to libera- 
tion) perfectly, who desires the end-result of liberation must be 
unswerving in the possession of these virtues. For with reference 
to desire for means, the desire for fruit is the cause. If the per- 
son who desires liberation at first acquires with effort discrimination 
and renunciation, it is as good as declaring that the end-result (of 
liberation) is not denied, that it is TERA DORIS | 
178 
After stating that discrimination and renunciation are the means 
to withdraw the mind from sense-objects, the Guru proceeds to show 
that an object which produces a sense of danger makes for’ with- 
_ drawal from it. For, if a man mistakes a diamond for a mere bit 
_ of glass, he is not attracted to it and does not go to pick it. So 
too a fearful object produces fright and hinders approach. So; with 
great compassion, the Guru turns the mind from sense-objects by 
_ producing the sense of fear for them. | 
wal ate reas: fawarceqafag 1 
Baa T TVG Areal A TAAA: 11 Voc 1 
mano nima mahévyaghrah visayéranyabhiimisu | 
caratyatra na gacchantu sadhavo ye mumuksavah || 
202—Ci. VIVEKACUDAMANI 
A terrible tiger called the mind wanders in the vast 
forest of sense-objects. Let not the good persons who seek 
salvation go there. | 
The sense-objects themselves are the forest. For, they are the 
combination of numberless evil effects. Vide the Srutis: visaydrn- 
stesu gocardn (Katha.). In those forests a fierce tiger called the 
mind wanders at will. In accord with the Sruti: paraéici khani...... 
(Katha) sliding towards sense-objects is natural to the mind as 
water flows to a lower level. By the Sruti bandhaya visayasaktam— 
the attachment to sense-objects makes for bondage—a great calamity 
then befalls the jiva. Hence has it been declared in the Gita: ‘sangat 
sanjayate kamah kaémat krodho’bhiiayate 1 krodhét bhavati sam- 
mohah sammohat smrtivibhramah smrtibhramsat buddhinagah bud- 
dhinasat pranasyati 1\ : “From attachment arises desire, from desire 
arises anger, from anger arises delusion; from delusion loss of 
- memory; that leads to extinction of buddhi which ends in destruc- 
tion.” Hence those who are sadhus, good persons, those who desire 
liberation, should beware of straying into the forest of sense-obj ects. 
To attain liberation, let them restrain the mind from sense-pleasures. 
Vide the Sruti: kascit dhirah pratyagatmanamaiksat durttacaksu- 
ramrtatvamicchan: (Katha.). “A wise (brave) man desiring im- 
myrteltty, turning his eyes inward, saw the inner atman.” 
: | 179 
Previously, it was said there is no avidyA apart from the mind 
(nahyastyavidya manaso’tirikta). Further explaining it, its bind- 
ing nature is described in these four slokas. | 
WA: Te FATA CAST AAA FT Hl: | 
matvanisrraraary TOPRATRTRAT FAT 1 Q08 1 
manah prasite visaydnasesin sthiilatmand siksmataya 
| ca bhoktuh | 
sariravarndéramajétibhedén gunakriyahetuphalani nityam || 
It is the mind which always produces for the jiva (who 
is the enjoyer) the experiences of all sense-objects in the 
gross and subtle form. . The distinctions of body, varna, 
4srama and caste, qualities, actions, causes and effects are 
always mind-produced. 
‘The mind creates the objects of experience. In the person’s 
waking state, in their gross form, this creation is effected through 
. the experience produced with reference to objects through the sense- 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 203 
organs presided over by their respective deities. In the dream state, 
when the sense organs cease to be active, all objects of experience 
are created in a subtle form that can be apprehended only by the 
pure witnessing consciousness. Answering the question what are 
these objects, it is-replied: the mind creates the manifold distinc- 
tions of kind like the body, the varna. the agrama and the caste. 
Distinctions of body refer to the differences of divine, animal and 
human forms. The varne distinctions refer to those of brahmana, 
ksatriya, vaisya and stdra. The 4srama distinctions refer to the 
brahmacarya, garhasthya, vanaprastha and samnyasa. It also 
creates distinctions of body like deva and manusya and of jati like 
devatva etc. As in dreamless sleep,® i.e., susupti, the mind does 
not exist (ie., does not function), these differences: are not there. 
So, it follows that these distinctions are all creations of the mind. So 
too are the qualities, sound, etc., actions like throwing forth, which 
pertain to those effects. Their objects like pot etc., their actions, 
all these are always created by the mind. There is no other cause; 
for in the absence of the mind, nothing exists. Sarira. bhedah 
-may also be understood in two ways: as differences of body, varna, 
asrama and jati or as differences in the body. 
 prastité: utpadayati: originates; creates. 
bhedadh: prakarah: modifications. 
180 
aintagray faut ag fxasrorifraey esas b . ws sons 
ae wate waa AATAFUT GATTI 1 Y¢o i 
asangacidripamamum vimohya 
dehendriyapranagunair nibadhya | 
aham mameti bhramayatyajasram 
manassvakrtyesu phalopabhuktisu 1 
The atman (jiva) is pure intelligence unattached to 
anything. Binding him by the cords of the body, sense- 
organs and vital airs, disabling him from understanding his 
real nature, the mind leads him up and down with a sense 
of ‘agency and possession (‘I’ and ‘mine’) among the objects 
produced by his actions. 
The manas is the subject of action. The atman is asanga cit; it 
is devoid of all attachment; its form is infinite intelligence. This 
atman is deluded by the qualities of the body, the sense-organs and 
33 and in samadhi. 
204 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
the vital airs. It is made incapable of comprehending its real nature. 
It is made to identify itself with the body, sense-organs and vital 
airs, and to think of their properties by the sense of ‘my’. Then 
it is led up and down always in the process of agency and enjoy- 
ment of secular and vaidika actions performed by it. As it is said: 
a person acts to enjoy; and to be able to act, he enjoys (eats). The 
gruti says: dtmanam ced vijiniyait ayamasmiti piirusah kimicchan 
kasya kémdéyo Sariramanusamjvaret (Mund). “If a person realises 
that he is the Paramatman, desiring what and for whose benefit will 
he suffer pains in the body?” Hence one who has realised his 
essential nature as unattached and as cidananda, desires nothing, nor’ 
does he do any action. For, agency and enjoyment are bound up 
with attachment to the body and the sense-organs. That attach- 
ment to the body is to be traced to the mind. For, it is not seen in 
dreamless sleep as the mind is stilled and does not function then. 
Avidya by itself'in its own nature cannot be the cause of bondage 
except in association with the mind. Hence, the cause of bondage is 
‘to be traced to the mind only. 
181 
Now is explained that through bondage, the manas is the cause 
of sorrow and suffering. bes 
aemreaaineregeg tafe: 
 MeNTAaURATATg afeae: | 
THETA eae isfaafant - 
wratfaq:aea fraraad 1 9¢7 
adhydsayogat purusasya samsrtih 
| adhyasabandhastvamunaiva kalpitah 
-rajastamodosavato’vivekino 
janmadiduhkhasya nidanametat || 
A man’s involvement in samsiara is due to super-imposi- 
tion. The bondage of super-imposition is created by the 
mind only. It is the primal cause of. the griefs of birth and 
death for the man of noe disc mueation oven uP in rajas 
and tamas. | | | 
rajastamodosavatah: of the aviveki nee is ataracienseal by the 
two. defects of rajas and tamas, which are the cause of avarana and 
viksepa (concealment and projection) who is devoid of the sense te 
discriminate between the a4tman and the non-atman. | 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 205 
adhydsayogét: by-mistaking the things which are anatman for . 
the atman. | | | 
samsrtih: the succession without intermission of birth and 
death. | 
By ie term. adhyésabindha it is sisiesed that the adhyasa 
(super-imposition ) which is the cause of samsara is to be traced to 
the mind. The bondage itself is of the form of adhyasa. By the 
text: manah prasite, it is said that the body with the senses is 
born of the mind. The import is that adhydsa is the creation of 
the mind. Through the adhyadsa which is the cause of the succession 
of birth and death and the flow of-samsara by them, the mind is the 
primal cause of all kinds of griefs constituted by birth, death, old 
age, disease ete. . | 
nidanam: adi kéranam: primal cause 
182 
aa: sigaatsfaert ofesarereaair: to 
aaa read fared aratararesaay 1 9C2 I 
atah prahurmano’vidyam panditastattvadarsinah 7 
yenaiva bhramyate visvam payunevabhramandalam T 
So the wise who know the truth have declared that 
the mind itself is avidya. It is by it that the universe is 
tossed about like the clouds by the wind. 
tattvadarsinah: those who are given to realise the truth. 
panditah: those who have learnt the Vedanta; the great 
scholars. | _ : 
Therefore, as the mind is the cause of samsara, they call the 
mind itself avidya. For, the mind is the effect of avidya. Also, 
mere avidya by itself cannot be the cause of samsara. _ | 
pra in prahuh: is to show that it is appropriate to say that 
manas alone is avidya. | 
The reason for that is stated. By the manas, the entire uni- 
verse, i.e., all the jivas are tossed about, i.e., by wrong apprehension 
they are led up and down. Illustration for this; even as the clouds 
in the sky are scattered by wind in all directions. 
Now what should be done by a seeker for liberation. is. stated. 
206. VIVEKACUDAMANI 
—6183 
—e HS AAT AAT | 
fang afa aafera afac: BCHSAAA 11.903 tt 
tanmanassodhanam kiryam prayatnena mumuksuna | 
visuddhe sati caitasmin muktih karaphalayate \; 
Therefore, the man. who earnestly desires liberation — 
must purify his mind. If the mind is purified, liberation 
is as easily realised as a fruit in the palm of one’s hand. 
tat: for the reason stated earlier, i.e., as sams&ra arises through 
adhyasa to a person affected by. rajo - and tamo-gunas. 
mumuksunéi: by one who desires liberation. 
prayatnena: by great effort ; prakrsta-yatnena. 
“‘manassodhanam: removal of rajo- and tamo-gunas which affect 
the mind. : 7 
ca in caitasmin indicates the reason: yatah itt. . 
etasmin: in this mind bereft of rajo- and tanio-gunas and which 
is predominantly of sattva nature, | 
muktih karaphalayate: liberation paeames visible as clearly as 
fruit in the palm of the hand. 
184 | | 
The method of purifying the mind is explained. 
aasara fade wt frisa VAT TACHA | 
wessat ATA ACS THETA a aatit ag: 1 qex nN 
moksaikasaktya visayesu ragam 
nirmilya samnyasya ca sarvakarma | 
sacchraddhaya yassravarnddinistho 
‘rajassvabhavam sa dhunoti buddheh | 
By concentrated dedication to the desire for liberation, 
if one gets rid of all attachment to objects, renounces all 
actions and is firmly given to Sravana (hearing from a 
competent teacher) etc., with faith in Brahman (Sadvastu), 
he completely destroys rajas-nature of the intellect. 
moksaikasaktyaé: By supreme dedication to liberation only, i.e., 
Neecrasubeak sakti: dsakti: strong attachment. 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 207 
visayesu ragam nirmilya: completely uprooting attachment to 
the body etc., in the false belief that they would give happiness; 
giving them up completely by rooting out the egoistic sense. 
samnyasya ca sarvakarma: sarvakarma: i.e., the niskama 
(actions without desire for the results), the nitya (the obligatory) 
and the naimittika (seasonal) duties. Giving up the niskaima, the 
nitya and naimittika karmas; samnyasya: giving them up abso- 
lutely; svaripato’pi parityajya. , 
-Sacchraddhayé: by earnestness for (dedication to) to Brahman, 
that sadvastu which cannot be sublated in any of the three periods of 
time; or, unswerving earnestness in the Sat, by faith in the words of 
the guru and Vedanta. 
sravanadinisthah: one continuously habituated to hearing, 
meditation and reflection (Sravana, manana and nididhyasana). 
rajassvabhévam sa dhunoti buddheh: completely eradicates 
the rajas nature of the buddhi which is a power of distortion. Where 
there is attachment to the body etc., one does actions. When there 
is karma (action), there is deflection of the buddhi. By eradicating 
attachment, all actions are given up and for an earnest person direct- 
ing his mind inward, there will be no occasion for deflection of the 
mind. Hence it follows that sravana etc., must be done by a sarn- 
nyasin who is free of all attachments, with earnestness for getting 
rid of the defects to which the buddhi is prone. 
dhunoti: __ksalayati, nitaram naSayati: completely destroys. . 
185 7 
Now the anadtma-nature of the manomaya (ko§a) is concluded. 
aaa ahs HaCTTIAT 
wranaear oforirararet | 
qrarermarq faaaragat: 
geet fg Z TRATAAAT FT FEE! WIC UN 
manomayo napi bhavet paratma 
hyddyantavattvat parinamibhavat t 
duhkhaétmaktvat visayatvahetoh 
drasta hi drséyatmataya na drstah }} 
The manomaya koéga cannot be the Paramatma as it has 
a beginning and an end, as it is subject to modifications, as it 
is of the nature of suffering, as it is an object. The seeing 
subject cannot be the seen object. 
203 VIVERACOUDAMANI 
Parétmaé: ‘Paramatma. 
| The manomayakosa cannot be the Paramatmi. The reasons for 
this are given together here. : 
| (1) ddyantavattvat: As it has a beginning and an end? it sttaine | 
extinction (laya) in dreamless sleep and arises in waking etc. So. it 
cannot be the atman which has neither beginning nor end. | 
(2) parindimibhavat: as it is subject to modifications viz., kama, 
sainkalpa, vicikitsé, sraddha, asraddha, dhytih, adhrtih, hrih, bhih, 
dhih. So, it cannot be the 4tman which is avikarin, not sa ar to 
modification. , 
(3) duhkhatmakatvat: Its nature is compacted of duhkha, seit 
- Hence it is controlled and purified. It has been shown that all grief 
arises from adhyasa. Therefore the manomayakoga cannot be the 
atman which is of the nature of bliss. 
(4) visayatvahetoh: The Sruti says: anyatramand abhivam 
nadraksam anyatramana abhiivam nésrausam (Brh.) “My mind was 
elsewhere; I did not see; my mind was elsewhere, I did not hear.” 
Because it is an object of cognition by the witnessing consciousness 
and as it is the visaya, a cognised object, it cannot be the atman which 
is the universal witness. | | 
drsta hi drsydtmataya na drstah: The seeing subject is nowhere 
known to be the seen object. Hence, both when it is functioning and 
otherwise, the mind is perceived by the witness as existing or non- 
existing. The seen and the seer cannot coexist in the same thing. 
The mind is the seen. So, it cannot be the a4tman which is of the . 
nature of the seer. Thus, that the mind is 4ndtmi is established. 
186 
‘Now the vijfianamaya koga is explained. 
qladgitaa: ard aafa: waar: | 
faarrarrater: card Ta: MATHTLAT WCE It 
buddhirbuddhindriyaih sirdham savrttih kartrlaksanah | 
vijndnamayakosas syét pumsah samsaérakaranam. || 
Buddhi. with its organs of knowledge and its actions 
having the characteristics of an agent is known as the 
vijnanamayakosga.. This vapnrosy ene is the cause of 
samsara. 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 209 
sauna sardham: With the five jnanendriyas namely — 
the ear etc. 
sardham: saha: along with. 
savrttih: With vrtti, ie., with the modification of the mind that 
makes for determinate knowledge. | | 
kartrlaksanah: Which has the quality of a karta i.e., which is 
cf the nature of knowledge, desire and action. | 
vijnanamayakosassyat: it is ealled by the name of vijidénamaya- 
koéga, eae: 
_ By pumsah etc., its effect is stated. It is the cause of samsara 
of the person. Vide the éruti: ‘sa samanassannubhau lokavanusai- 
carati, sadhih svapno bhitva dhydyativa leliyativa (Brh.) The same 
antahkarana when it is subject to doubt is called the manas. When 
it is modified in the form of determinate knowledge it is called 
buddhi. There the mind functions as the instrument and the buddhi 
as the agent. For one does an action only after deciding. The 
relation between the mind and buddhi is of precedence and succes- 
sion. Hence the vijnanamayakosa is spoken of separately after 
speaking about the manomaya koga. Otherwise, as the five jfianen- 
driyas function in both, the difference between thé two cannot be 
apprehended. Vide the Sruti: tasmdd va etasmin manomayat anyo’ 
ntara atma vijnanamayah (Taitt.) Therefore, the vijianamaya atma 
is different from the mano-maya. Here too the same idea is con- 
aie “we x 
187 
_aeqeafowenfafrarerfier: 
“faanreda: seataarz: | 
arafaarary sag haarel 
aefeafesateread HAA 4c 0 
anuvrajaccitpratibimbasaktih 
vijndnasamjnah prakrter vikérah | 
_ jranokriyivan ahamityajasram 
dehendriyddisvabhimanyate bhrsam U1 
This vijfignamayakoga has power of. reflection of the 
caitanya which it accompanies. It is a modification of 
prakrti (avidyé). It is characterised by knowledge and 
action and always identifies itself with the body, the organs 
etc. 
210 | VIVEKACUDAMANI 
Buddhi is the effect of the action of the aggregate of the five 
elements. The cit is reflected in it in its place. It is the reflection 
of the Paramatma in immediate consecution (or pervasion). Its 
Sakti (or power) is of the nature of illumination. For, the reflection | 
of a luminous body is also luminous. The reflection of.the sun in a 
mirror etc., illumines dark places like clefts in the ground which the 
sun’s rays cannot penetrate. | 
anuvrajaccitpratibimbasaktih: _ buddhi is endowed with cit Sakti 
by the pervasion of the cit. 
vijidnasamjiah: Hence, that whose name is vijfiana. Vide the 
Sruti: vijianam yajnam tanute (Taitt.): It is buddhi that is the 
doer of actions like yajfias and yagas. 
_prakrtervikarah: modification of the milaprakrti, i.e., of avidya. 
This koSa is the effect of avidya as the siksmabhiitapaficaka (the five 
subtle elements) is the product of the combination of sattva elements 
and this suksmabhita-paficaka is the effect of avidya. So, this koéa . 
is the effect of avidya in a successive series. | | 
jnanakriyaévan: jana and kriya which are its modifications; of 
the form of inquiry into objects, contemplation and going to other 
worlds; that which has such jfiana (knowledge) and kriya (action). 
dehendriyaddisu: in the body and the organs. It was declared 
previously: antahkaranametesu caksuradisu varsmani | ahamitya- 
bhimanena tisthatyabhasatejasé |; ($1. 105). The attachment of the 
jiva with the body etc., cannot take place without buddhi. The 
Jiva too is compacted of the upadhi of buddhi. The ecaitanya ac- 
quires a sameness with the buddhi. Hence it is that the caitanya 
is spoken of as non-distinct from jiva. In consequence, in waking 
and dream states it is always considered as ‘I’. This leads to the 
expressions: I am a man: I am stout; I go; I stand; I cross over: I 
see; I hear; I breathe in; I breathe out. Thus, by the identification 
(of the &tman) with the vijianamaya koga, the fact of that koga 
being endowed" with the jfidna is explained. 
188 & 189 | 
The kriyavattva (agency) of vijfianamayakoéa is explained. 
AASHINSTAETATAT SATAAASAARTLAST | 
aufa wataagaaed: paraquat a acaotty TR CCl 
SG fafaancata ataq asa aratta fata sada: | 
aeag famaaaea TUCAATAAAM: TAZ WASNT: 11. 9¢8 Ui 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 211 
anddikalo’yamahamsvabhavah 
jivassamastavyavahdravodha | 
karoti karmanyanupirvavasanah 
punyanyapunyani ca tatphalani || 
bhunkte vicitrasvapi yonisu vrajan 
ayati niryatyadha ardhvamesah | 
asyaiva vijfanamayasya jagrat-. 
svapnidyavasthah sukhaduhkhabhogah T 
This sense of the ‘I’ is without beginning. It is called 
the jiva and carries on all activities itself. By previous 
 vasands, it also performs actions and experiences good and 
evil and their effects. Born in various bodies, it comes and . 
goes, below and above. To this vijnadnamaya koga belong 
the waking and dream states and the experiences of joy and 
sorrow. | | 
In the previous Sloka it was said that the vijfidnamayakoéa is a 
modification of prakrti (avidya) (prakrtervikarah). Being a modi- 
fication of prakrti, it may be argued that it must be said to have a 
beginning. Yet, in mahapralaya, vijfiiana remains in the causal 
subtle form. Buddhi has the tendencies of previous karmas as its 
locus. If it is totally destroyed, re-creation will not be possible. 
At the time of creation in accordance with: the declaration of the 
éruti: “anena jivenatmana”, ISvara said in the tksana-Sruti that “He 
should enter into the world and create names and forms.” More- 
over, till videhakaivalya (release after death) arises, there is no 
complete destruction of buddhi. Hence, buddhi too which is the 
cause of samsara must be said to be anadi (beginningless). The 
attachment to the present body and its organs should also be said 
to be beginningless. For, in the previous embodiment there was a 
like attachment to the body and organs then existing and so on in 
infinite regress. : 
anddikdlah: that about which it cannot be stated when it began. 
ahamsvabhavah: that jiva ie, the buddhi in which the cit is 
reflected that identifies itself with body, indriyas, etc., as ‘I’. It is 
the instrument of all worldly activities. In accordance with the éruti: 
 vijidnam yajiam tanute, karméni tanute’pi ca. (Taitt.), it is the 
agent of all secular and religious activities. That is further ex- 
plained by the word anupirvavasanah: whom purvavasanas, the ten- 
dencies of former lives accompany.. Vide the érutis: tam vidydkar- 
mani samanvarabhete pirvaprajaa ca; punyo vai punyena karmani 
bhavati paipah papena (Brh.); punyakarmas are those ordained in 
22 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
the astra. apunya karmas are prohibited karmas. The jiva per- 
forms actions prescribed in the Sastras and those prohibited by it and . 
the neutral karmas like eating and sleeping. 
bhoktrtvam is then explained. tatphalani: the effects of the 
prescribed and prohibited karmas. The jiva becomes the experi- 
encer of joy and sorrow being born out of the 84 lakhs of wombs 
of gods, creatures and men. For that purpose, he goes down to hell 
etc., goes, forth to heaven ete. He speaks of his 4tman which does 
not act in any manner (which is quality-less, nirdharmaka) in the 
words: I am awake, I sleep, I slept, I am happy, I am unhappy, 
attributing to it the qualities due to wrong identification (of the 
atman with the vijmanamaya kosa). 
jagratsvapnadyavasthah: of this vijfianamayakoéa, the states of 
waking, dream, etc.; ddi (etc.) is intended to include susupti and 
samadhi. | 
| sukhadubkhabhogah: experience (anubhavah); the experience 
of joy and grief. - i. 
190 
iidihanseiiebusiians aad aate | 
fasrratentsaatasrare: TPCTATAATy TA | TWAT: UU 
wat waaay solace qzenit: dacla WAT I qWZ0 US 
- dehadinisthagsrama-dharma-karma- 
gupdbhimanah satatam mameti | 
| vijninakogo’yamatiprakasah | 
prakrstasannidhyavasaét paratmanah || 
ato bhavatyesa upadhirasya 
| yadatmadhih samsarati bhramena 11 
This vijianamayakoSa always considers as its own the 
qualities of the body pertaining to the nature, acts and quali- 
ties of the several aSramas. It is very luminous as it is in 
exceedingly close proximity to the Paratman. Therefore, 
it is the upadhi of the dtman, deluded by which it (the 
atman) is subject to samsara. | Pig 
dehddi: adi is to include the indriyas. like the eye, the prana 
etc. | ) | 
dehiddinisthasrama-dharma-karma-gunabhimanah: The asrama 
etc., which pertain to the body etc., dehddi: by ddi etc., (body ete.), 
are signified the sense-organs like the eye and also the breath. 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 213 
asramah: brahmacarya etc., dharma: being a man, being a brahmana 
ete., karmani: secular actions like standing or moving; religious 
actions like utterances of mantras; gunah: being short or tall, or be- 
ing of good or evil qualities. In all these there is a sense of ‘mine’ 
when the buddhi in which the effulgence of the atma is reflected com- 
bines with indriyas, the deha etc.; then it super npOsee on itself 
the functions and qualities of the ‘deha etc. | 
- pardtmanah: of the nature of the inner Atman. The buddhi by 
itself is acetana, jada. Why then is the expression pardétmanah used 
with reference to it? The answer is by the Sruti ‘cetanascetana- 
nam’: the buddhi being like cetana is extremely close to the Para-_ 
- matman which is of the nature of cit which is alone (without a 
second), free from impurity and unattached. 
In the case of other indriyas there is no direct contact with the 
caitanya. As there is special direct proximity with the supreme 
caitanya, this koSa does not depend on anything else for the refiec- 
tion (of the atman) in it. The idea is that in the case of the other 
organs there is no direct and immediate proximity to the atman. 
Hence this vijianamayakoga which is of the form of buddhi is very 
effulgent and this upadhi is the cause of the distinction as jiva. It 
is the primal cause of agency for action and enjoyment which qua- 
lities reside in the jiva. Hence, the atman with the serse of the 
“T” undergoes the afflictions of agency for action ete., and gets in- 
volved in samsara due to delusion. | 
191 
The same itself is further explained. 
aise faa: IT gas CHTCTTSAUT: 1 
HECTARE Hel  ACAUTARTET: 11-989 UN 
yo’yam Vanda pranesu hrdi sphurat svayamjyotih | 
kitasthah sannatma karta bhokta bhavatyupadchisthah 1\ 
This 4tma which is compacted of vijiana which is self- 
effulgent and shines in the heart near the pranas, being im- 
mutable, becomes a doer and enjoyer in the midst of the 
upadhis. 
pranesu hrdi shaded svayamjyotih: pranesu does not mean ‘in 
the pranas’. It is ‘simipya saptam?’, like the pdsdne vrksah: tree in a: 
stone, ie., tree near a stone. prdnesu means near the eye etc. As 
_ the reference of ‘ is attached to many things, in the context of 
King Janaka’s question to the sage Yajfavalkya: ‘Which of these 
214 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
is the 4tma?’ and the answer to it: ‘Prana stands for indriyas and 
the vital airs and the atman is not said to be any of these which are 
near it.” Similarly, the buddhi too is near the prana etc. But there 
is a difference which is referred to by the expression: hrdi sphurat 
svayamjyotih. Buddhi is what envelops the caitanya jyotis. which 
shines in the lotus of the heart, which, while not capable of being 
illumined by anything else, itself illumines everything. This vijfia- 
namaya caitanya is never found to exist in the jiva apart from bud- 
dhi since from the beginning till the moment of release it is known 
as vijndnamaya. Or, by the rule that ‘mayat’ also indicates one’s 
_ own self it may be spoken of as the form of vijnana (vijianasvaripa). 
Such an atma is said to be kitastha i.e., it stands for ever like 
an anvil without undergoing any modification. It is without change. 
Yet, getting identified with buddhi with its function of knowing and 
action, it becomes tainted by avidya and becomes an actor and an 
experiencer, even as due to delusion, a crystal appears red by con- 
tact. with a red cclour. | | 
kufasthassan: api is to be added as kiitasthassannapi: though it 
is kiitastha. | se : ce 
192 
| The same is made clear: 
Cad: Gaara HAY GeTHTgT 11-982 1 
svayam paricchedam upetya buddheh . 
taditmyadosena param mrsitmanah | 
sarvatmakah sannapi viksate svayam 
svatah prthaktvena mrdo ghataniva | 
By the defect of adhyadsa (false identification) of the 
mithyatman, namely buddhi, the atman, which is the all, — 
attains limitation and looks upon itself as different like pots 
from the clay. | 
myrsatmanah: of buddhi which is of the nature of mithya. By 
wrong identification with buddhi which is of the nature of mithya 
by virtue of adhyasa and not by its real nature, though by itself 
it is of the nature of all (Vide the Srutis: idam sarvam yadayamatma 
(Mund.); sarvam khalvidam brahma (Chand.), it seems to attain 
VIVEKACUDAMANI — 215 
diminution. Clay is the material of ali mud pots. There is no mud 
pot apart from clay. Yet, they are seen (spoken of) as if different 
from clay. So too, the one universal atma seems qisparare by 
virtue of association with buddhi as ‘I’, ‘he’, ‘this’, ‘you’ etc., 
though, being the material cause of all, there is nothing different 
from it. 
193 
This meaning is explained with reference to the (apparent) 
changing nature of what is changeless and the expression kitasthas- 
sannitma (being unmoving and unchanging like the anvil). 
Vaaaa TIM TCA 
caorfrerataaartar TAT: | 
aatfaarcmtanticataa aa 
aaneqisty oz: eqRTATA 1983 ut 
upddhisambandhavasat paratma- 
pyupadhidharmainanubhati tadgunah 
ayovikdranavikarivahnivat 
sadaikaripo’pi parah svabhavat \\ 
Though of the same form, and without any change, by 
virtue of association with upadhis, the real 4tman too, as if 
of the nature of the upadhis, acquires its qualities even as 
the fire which has no form appears in the form of iron. 
When a piece of iron is heated red hot in a smithy, it is. beaten 
into different shapes as long, round ete. The fiery heat and the iron 
become so intimate that people- attribute to the fire the different forms 
of the iron and say, the fire is long or round. This is due to delusion 
which confuses the fire with the iron. So too, the Paramatma get- 
ting conjoined with the upadhis, attributes to itself the qualities of 
the up&dhi, like acting, and enjoying. Vide Ssrutis: dhydayativa, 
lelayativa (Brh.). When the buddhi thinks or changes, the atman 
thinks that it changes. It appears as if it has qualities of the upadhi 
in the forms ‘I do’, ‘I am happy,’ ‘I am unhappy’ etc. In real fact, 
it is by its own nature, by virtue of its saccidénandasvariipa, nityasud- 
dhabuddhamuktasvabhaéva, eternal, pure omniscient, and free. In 
the example of fire and in what is exemplified the Paratman, being 
of the same nature, devoid of change is the common factor. 
At the beginning of the Sloka, the words ekariipo’pi vikarasin- 
yo’pi: ‘though always of the same nature and devoid of change’ 
should be prefixed. | 
216 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
194 and 195 
‘faeq sara— | 
VATTITTT AISeT TATA: TCA: | 
aaaaatacary atest seat 11 98 Ut 
araisea Siterara ste. frreat wata data: 
a facta sate: Ha F silat az "4a tt 
Sisya uvdca: | | 
bhramendpyanyatha va'stu jivabhavah paraétmanah {| 
tadupddher andditvat nainader naga isyate 1) 
ato’sya fivabhavo’pi nityo bhavati samsrtih | 
na nivarteta tanmoksah katham me Sriguro vada 
The Sisya said: 
Let the assumption of jivahood by the Paramatma under 
the influence of the upadhis be due te delusion or otherwise. 
That upadhi is beginningless. Of what is beginningless, 
there can be no destruction. Then, the atman’s jivahood 
will be eternal. How then can there be freedom from sam- 
sara? Teach me this, O Guru! | 
Let the jivabhava (jivahood) of the Paramatma which is not a 
samsarin, and super-eminent be due to delusion ur as a matter of 
fact. By the li aitation it is subject to, it is known as the vijidnamaya 
koSa. But it is said ‘anadikalo‘yam ahamsvabhavah’ (sl. 188) “this 
sense of ‘I‘ness (jivahood) is without beginning”. By this, it becomes 
beginningless like the atman itself. What is beginningless cannot 
be destroyed. As the upadhi which is responsible for jivahood is 
beginningless, its destruction cannot take place. So, the jivahood 
of the Paramatma will be eternal; it will not be annihilated. When 
the jivahood is eternal, samsara will be eternal. Then, how will I 
attain freedom from samsara? Oh Guru! teach me this, | 
‘vada: upadisa; instruct me. 
196 
sinesara— 
arqages eqar fagy aaa aes | 
“sraforat at waft sia atigerretar 199g u 
Sri Gururuvica: 
_ semyak prstam tvaya vidvan savadhanena tacchrnu — 
praminiki na bhavati bhrantyad mohitakalpanaé 1) 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 17 
7 The Guru said: Learned one! You have asked a good © 
question.. Listen to my answer with attention. The imagi- 
nation (of samsaritva to what is asams&ri) cannot be valid - 
as it is due to delusion. 7 
Oh intelligent One! ‘You have asked a good question. | si to 
the answer to it attentively, i.e., without your mind straying to other 
subjects. Srnu: Srutva avadharaya, ie., listen and determine. 
mohah: the absence of the knowledge which must be acquired. 
bhrantya mohitakalpanad: The false imagination that has arisen 
due to delusion, tamasa quality. 
- Really, the atman is of the nature of pure (untainted) iritelli- 
gence. Due to the strong delusion born of ajnana of the individual, 
there is the imagination (attribution) of being a samsarin to what is 
not a samsarin. This cannot be valid. For it arises out of the 
ajnana which generates the delusion and relates to a condition of the 
impossibility of right Boece een to one under the pees of amore | 
(delusion): 
197 
vita fart cargen fafoaqed fread: | 
Tea AMAT Atearead 11990 Ul 
bhrantim vind tvasangasya niskriyasya nirdkrteh | 
na ghatetirthasambandho ‘nabhaso nilatadivat Me 
The atman is unattached, actionless ina formless. 
Without delusion there can be no connection of it with the 
objects of the world even as blueness has no connection 
with the sky. 
‘tu’ is for emphasis, asangasya of what is really devoid of any 
Sanga (association). The gruti says: asango hyayam purusah (Brh.): 
“the atma is unattached”. That it is so unattached is verified 
in the state of dreamless sleep. Again, the gruti says: niskalam nis- 
kriyam (Svet.) indicating that the 4tma is actionless and unchanging. 
The smrti avyakto’'yam acintyo’yam avikaryo’yamucyate (B. G.): 
“This is said to be unmanifested, this is said to be beyond thought, 
this is said to he unchangeable”, is to the same purport. It has no 
form as indicated by the sruti-na tasya kaéryam karanam ca vidyate; 
asthilam ananu (Brh.): “It has no effect or cause. It is not. big nor 
small.” Without delusion, i.e, without the wrong identification 
of the atman in the sthila, stkema and kdrana Sariras, the atma 
218 _ VIVEKACUDAMANI 
can neither be said to be a thing or object of perception. It is ever 
unattached, non-acting like the sky which, being without form, is 
wrongly said to be of blue colour. The same is conveyed by Sri 
Sarhkara in his bhasya: apratyakse’ pi hyakage balastalamalinatadya- 
dhyasyanti: “Boys (people) without discrimination superimpose 
black, yellow, blue etc., on the invisible sky”. Even as blueness 
etc., are not true, so too are all these predications about the atman 
caused by delusion and are not valid. . It is to be understood that the 
sky does not become blue merely by imagination. : 
198 
_Making the same clear, by the next two Slokas, the annulment of 
samsara is explained. The real nature of the atman is explained in 
two ways through Sruti and the realisation of the wise; this is done 
to prove mithyatva teppearentel or phenomenal) character of the 
jiva. 
taeg xeetatorenieae NAAT STET TE: | 
ACA ATHY STATAY FT Aeat AAMT ACAI TARTATT 12980 11 
svasya drasturnirgupasyakriasya = 
pratyagbodhanandaripasya buddheh | 
bhrantyad prapto jivabhavo na satyo 
mohaipiye nastyavastu svabhavat 11 
This atman (the seer or saksin) is quality-less and 
actionless and is realised within as Knowledge and Bliss 
Absolute. The jivahood of this 4tman is an imagination by 
the delusion of buddhi and is not true. As it is by nature 
untrue, it vanishes with the annulment of the delusion. 
drastuh: of the drasta or the witness (saksin. ) 
nirgunasya: of what is devoid of any quality. | 
akriyasya: of what is actionless, devoid of any change. 
pratyagbodhanandaripasya: that which is of the nature of bliss 
of inmost knowledge. — 
Of such an atman, the jivabhava is imagined by wrong identi- 
fication of the 4tman. It is not true, ie., it is not that it is impossible 
of sublation. The delusion is destroyed by the realisation of one’s 
real nature. 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 219 
mohapaéye: by the destruction of ajiana by the realisation of 
the truth arrived at by study of Sruti and by listening to the upadega 
of the acarya. When truth is realised, the ajnana is destroyed and 
the delusion born of it also is destroyed. Upon the annihiliation of 
this moha, the imagined objects which are super-imposed too cease 
to appear as before. 
199 
The fourth quarter of the previous sloka is explained. 
ataq wifeteatazared Fear 
fremapieafeaaea TAT 1 
eave oat warfare 7a 
wrectiet Ta aatshert THT 148s UI 
yavad bhrantistavadevadsya satta 
mithydjnanojjrmbhitasya pramadat | 
rajjvam sarpo bhrantikalina eva | 
bhranter nage naiva sarpo’sti tadvat i\ 
Its (jivabhava) satta (existential character) persists so 
long as there is delusion as it is born of. mithyajiana. The 
serpent in the rope endures only during the pendency of 
the delusion. When the delusion is destroyed, there is no 
serpent. So, too, here. 
To explain the mithyatva (phenomenal) character of any effect, 
the reason is explained. This avastu (what is not real object) is the 
product of ajfidna. This ajfidna can be destroyed by the correct per- 
ception of the basis on which the super-imposition is made, i-e., of the 
adhisthana. As long as there is delusion arising from non-discrimi- _ 
nation between the adhisthina and aropita (the basis on which the 
super-imposition is made and that which is super-imposed on it), the 
existential character (satta) of the super-imposition remains. An 
example for it is given. The serpent in the rope. Due to ignorance 
of the rope, due to delusion which will vanish by perception of 
rope, what is seen in front is not understood in the form of the 
words ‘this is not a serpent.’ It is only during the pendency of such 
delusion that the mistaken notion ‘this is a serpent’, persists. When 
. there is clear and distinct perception leading to the awareness: ‘this 
is not a serpent, but a rope’, the delusion in the form ‘this is a serpent’ 
is destroyed. Then there appears no serpent. So, too, till the rea- 
lisation of the truth, ‘I am Brahman’, the delusion of samsara persists 
due to the influence of the primordial ajfiana (milajfiana). As a 
220 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
matter of fact, there is no samsara at any time. It appeared due to 
delusion like the serpent in the rope. When the truth is known, the 
apprehension of that appearance too vanishes. Brahman alons re- 
mains by itself. Upon the realisation of one’s real nature, ajfiana 
and its effects—all are destroyed. For, it is said: adhisthdndvageso 
hi nasah kalpitavastunah: “Upon destruction of an imagined object, 
there remains only the basis on which the super-imposition has been 
made.” 
200 & 201 
In sloka 194, the Sisya expressed a doubt in the words: tadupé- 
dherandditvat na anddernisa isyate: “As the upadhi is beginning- 
less, its destruction cannot be affirmed.” The guru felt that the 
answer to this doubt had not been clearly understood by the Sisya. 
Taking up that topic, the guru provides the answer to it in the fol- 
lowing two and a half glokas. 
satacaataarar: aracarta adcad | 
seqarat q faarat anfaeaerarata 1 200 1 
Tale caer agae fareate i 
sree at fred srrara a SST 
saraeta feeder: srraraea atfara: 1120911 
andditvam avidyadyaéh kdryasyadpi tathesyate |, 
utpanniyim tu vidydydm dvidyakamanddyapi | 
prabodhe svapnavat sarvam sahamilam vinagyati | 
anddyapidam no nityam préigabhdéva iva sphutar’ 
andderapi vidhvamsah pragabhavasya viksitah T 
The beginninglessness of avidya and its effect is dec! : 
_ lared. When right knowledge arises, though beginningless, 
the effect of avidya vanishes along with its root cause even _ 
as dream and its cause vanish on waking. , 
Though avidya is beginningless, it is not eternal, even _ 
as antecedent non-existence is not eternal. For though it — 
is beginningless, the destruction of antecedent non-existence | 
is seen. 
What was told by you that upadhi is beginningless is even so. 
Beginninglessness is affirmed, as of avidya, also of the vijianamaya 
koga which is the effect of avidya. Avidya is one. But the objects 
of creation are manifold. This manifoldness requires a like mani- 
foldness in the upddhi responsible for it. God is common to all. 
‘beings and is supremely merciful. For His manifold creation. He 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 221 
needs a variegated upadhi. Therefore, whether one likes it or not, 
buddhi too which is its cause must be held to be beginningless. 
Now, the guru speaks about its, cessation. This effect of avidya 
is destroyed along with its root cause when correct knowledge 
dawns. This knowledge arises from the Upanisads, and is of the 
nature of prama (as opposed to bhrama), which is the direct intui- 
tive perception of the adhisthana or substratum. : 
The word tu in the second line of sloka 200 is intended to negate 
the opposite view that there is no destruction to what is beginingless. 
avidyakam: means ‘the result of avidya’. 
anadyapi: though beginningless, i.e., though postulated to be 
beginningless to account for the activities of creation etc., it gets 
destroyed along with its root cause sleep. On waking all dream 
objects disappear. Not only do the dream objects disappear, but 
the root cause, namely, sleep too entirely disappears on waking. 
So too on waking to samyag-jfiana, the primordial avidya disappears 
with its associations. Like light and darkness, vidya-and avidya 
are opposed to each other. Likewise sleep and waking. When 
-avidya is destroyed by vidya, then buddhi which is the effect of 
avidya is also destroyed (avidya is the cause of the perception of 
plurality; vidya gives the perception of oneness). Therefore, the. 
srutis declare: tatra ko mohah kagsokah ekatvamanupasyatah (isa.): 
“Whence is grief or delusion for him who sees oneness?” yatra sar- 
vam atmaivabhit tat kena kam pasyet (Chand.): ‘Where every- 
thing is the 4tman, what can be perceived and by whom?” yatra nan- 
yat pasyati nanyat Srnoti nanyat vijdniti. sa bhiima (Chand.): 
“Where one does not see any other thing, does not hear any other 
thing, does not know any other thing, that is infinite”. When that. 
all-inclusive knowledge arises, the avidya which’ is the cause of the 
variegated sams&ra is destroyed: from its roots. Like the tree 
Withering away when the roots are destroyed, when aiays is des- 
troyed, its effects buddhi etc., also fade away. 
When sleep is lost, pleasure and pain experienced (reflected) 
in it do not attach to the man who has awakened. Even so, to the 
man of true wisdom do not attach the experiences of samsira which 
arose during the pendency. of avidya: for their ground has dis- 
appeared. 
By the expression anddyapi etc., the guru gives an illustration 
from the standpoint of the opponent who contradicts the view that 
even for what is beginningless there is an end. 
222.—ts VIVEKACUDAMANI 
idam: this avidya with its effect, though without beginning is 
not eternal, i.e., it is not the non-counter-entity of destruction (na 
naSsapratiyogi). The logicians (Tarkikas) accept antecedent non- 
existence of an object (pragabhava) as being without beginning. But 
this pragabhava is destroyed by its counter-entity when the object 
is produced. This too is accepted by the logicians. So, too, here. _ 
‘Here it may be argued: ajfiana may not be destroyed, though it is 
beginningless and a positive entity. In the example given, antece- 
dent non-existence (pragabhava) though beginningless, is not a 
positive entity. It is abhava. What I refer to is what is both 
beginningless and positive. Ajfiana is beginningless and positive: 
not beginningless and non-existent. It is anddi-bhava. Therefore, 
antecedent non-existence cannot be the example to prove that what 
is anddi-bhava is liable to destruction. 7 
It is replied: When the pragabhava (anterior non-existence) 
of a pot is spoken of, it does not refer to the total non-existence as 
such of the pot, but is the antecedent state (avastha) of the pot. 
‘pragabhéva means pragavasthabhava, anterior condition before pro- 
duction or, in the case of the pot, its pirvavastha. Though beginning- 
less and positive, when its effect, the pot appears, this pragavastha 
vanishes. So it can be given as an example. Even logicians have 
agreed that the antecedent state (avastha) is not abhava, a negative 
entity, but bhava, a positive entity. 
The Gita also says that what is truly existent cannot disappear: 
nabhavo vidyate satah. Bhava or existence is of two kinds. It may 
have either trikdlabadhyatva-bhavatvam and arthakriydkaritva-bha- 
vatvam. One is what cannot be sublated in any of the three periods 
of time; the other relates to that kind of existence which has a prag- 
matic value, ie. is useful to bring about an effect. Avidya — 
and its effects are liable to destruction; they need not have sattvari- 
pabhavatvam or an existence which is of the nature of absolute sat. 
Avidya is bhavariipa, a positive existential entity in the sense that it 
produces effects. 
Avidya and its products are accepted to be beginningless relying 
en the declaration of gruti. There is no point in referring to experi- — 
ence what can be known only from égruti. Apart from éruti, it can- 
not be learnt that a thing is without beginning and without an end. 
In respect of the example, namely the atman, this character is learnt 
only from sastra. In respect of avidya etc., the érutis say: jivesava- 
bhasena karoti, ‘the jiva and Igvara are the products of the reflection 
caused by avidyd. Maya avidyd ca svayameva bhavati: Maya and 
VIVEKACUDAMANI | 233 bt om 
avidyé are unproduced i.e, they shine by themselves, Thus it 
is declared that avidya is anadi, beginningless. bhuyascante visva- 
mayanivrttih (Svet): “Again, at the end the cosmic maya dis- 
appears.” Thus the destruction of avidyad too is learnt from éruti. 
Hence the beginninglessness of avidya and its destruction are declared 
by Sruti. There is no occasion for any doubt in respect, of this. 
Moreover, when a man says: ‘Till now this was not known by 
me; now it is known,’ there can be no question as to since when it 
was unknown. Thus the beginninglessness of ajnana and its des- 
truction by jfiana are established by experience. Of what is begin- 
ningless and endless, there is no example apart from atman. There- 
fore, there is no occasion for any comparison. 
The common statement is that the pot does not exist before its 
production in the shreds which are the indispensable cause of the 
pot. This is called the antecedent non-existence of the pot ( praga- 
bhava). This antecedent ncn-existence. is destroyed on the produc- 
tion of the pot. Thus the non-existence which was beginningless 
before the pot was produced disappears upon the production of the 
pot. So, too, on the springing up of jfana, ajfiana though beginning- 
less, is destroyed.. When that ajhana itself is destroyed, where will 
its effects remain? 
202 
In the next Sloka it is shown that when the upadhi is cestoyed: 
jivatva, the effect of the upadhi, too, vanishes. 
maqam aateqararafa 
sitacd 7 aaa eaqea FTSATT 11 QoQ 
yadbuddhyupadhisambandhat parikalpitamatmani 1 
fivatvam na tato’nyattu svaripena vilaksanam 11 
Jivahood which is imagined in the a4tman due to associ- 
ation with the upadhis is not real; for the atman is really 
different from it in its essential nature. 
atmani: here means in the Paramatman. 
buddhyupadhisambandhaét: by association with the upadhi 
which is the effect of the connection of avidya with the atman. Bud- 
_ dhi itself is the upadhi. This identification of the atman with that 
with which it is associated is brought about by ajnana. This associ- 
ation is of the nature of mithya. 
224 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
tatah anyat: what is other: what is satya, real. svariipena vilak- 
sanam: As the atman is by nature asamsiarin, not subject to samsara 
etc., it is different. 
na tu: not at all. | 
In gloka 194, the gisya raised the doubt: bhramenapyanyatha- 
vastu. fivabhavah pardtmanah meaning “Let the association of 
jivahood with the 4tman be due to bhrama or false idea or for some 
other reason. Jivahocd, however, is a reality even as the com- 
bination of lime and turmeric produces redness which is real. To 
dispel this idea in the éisya’s mind, the guru says that jivatva itself 
is imagined in the atman due to the association of upadhi and that, 
apart from it, there is nothing which is by nature different from it. 
203 | 
It is now pointed out that by virtue of the gruti asango hyayam 
purusah (Brh.): ‘This purusa is unattached”, this association with 
buddhi should be said to be unreal. 
dara: Fae qzeat fava: | 
 fafaafadtaea aeasaTta AFTAT R03 1 
sembandhah.- svaétmano buddhya | mithydjnd napurassarah | 
vinivrttir bhavet tasya samyajjninena nanyatha \) 
This association of one’s atman with the buddhi is 
preceded by incorrect knowledge. Its disappearance will 
arise by correct knowledge; not otherwise. — 
One’s atman is without parts. So association etc., cannot be 
predicated of it. Where two things. are associated, the qualities of 
either cannot be apprehended in the other. (eg. where an 
object is placed on the table, there is association or samyoga asia 
the table and the object. But the qualities of the table or the obj 
are not by that association apprehended on the object or the tal “i 
respectively.) When the iron and fire are associated, we say the 
iron burns, the fire is long. This arises by the super-imposition of 
the quality of the one on the other. Between the buddhi which has 
the quality of kartrtva (doership) and the 4tman which has the 
quality of caitanya (intelligence), the identification arises from super- 
imposition of the qualities of one on the other. The super-imposition 
which leads to a wrong sense of the identity between the bearers of 
the respective qualities arises from the super-imposition of the qua- 
lities of one on the other. (dharmadhydsat dharmyadhydsah). This 
identification is to be traced to ajfiana which is of the nature of 
mithya. 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 225 
This association arising from ajfiana is removed by correct know- 
ledge. The identification of the serpent with the rope etc., is annul- 
led by the correct knowledge cf the rope. There is no other method 
for the removal of the product of ajiana. 
| mithydjianapurassarah: This may be split into either mithyd 
ajndna purassarah or mithyd-jidna purassarak. In the. former case 
it means that this connecticn arises due to the causal ageney of 
ajfiana which is mithya (mithyf ca tat aj#dnam ca). Hence, the ulti- 
mate cause of this connection is the primordial ajnana (malajnana) 
which is mithya. In the latter case, it means that this connection 
has for its causal agency delusion or bhranti jfidna which arises from 
wrong identification (tadatmya) between &tma and buddhi. Such 
bhrantijfiana or mithyajfiana is the cause of. this connection. Both > 
meanings are in order. | 
| | 204 ; 
The person tainted by bhrama (delusion) and pramdéda .(care- 
lessness) cannot determine what is samyag-jnana or true knowledge. 
The nature of samyag-jfana is shown | in 1 aceordance with Sruti which 
is free from any defect. _ | 
 MgTeRRcafaet RASA MARAT Qos 
| brahmatmaikatvavijainam samyajjnanam srater satam bi 
The opinion of Sruti is that the knowledge of. oneness 
of Brahman and 4tman is samyagijiiana. 7 
ekatvam here means non-difference. (tasya) vijianam: anu- 
bhavah: experience. The experience of this non-difference between ~* 
the two, Brahman and atman, is samyagjiana. This is affirmed by 
the gruti texts: tattvamasi (Chand. ):.aham brahmdasmi, (Brh.); aya- 
matma brahma (Mund), prajndnam brahma ( Ait.); sa etameva puru- 
sam brahma tatamapasyat (Ait.); sa yascayam puruse yascasdva- 
ditye sa ekah (Taitt.); esa ta Gtma anturyamyamrtah; esa ta atma 
sarvantarah nanyo to’ sti drasta nanyo’to’sti srota mdayo'to’ sti manta- 
nanyo’to’sti vijndta, sa va. esa mahanaja atma yo’yam viyngnamayah 
pranesu hrdyantarjyotih purusah (Brh.). These texts deny the diffe- 
rence between jiva and Brahman. in Oe 
How this sense of non-difference will ; arise is s explained next. 
 TSCRATSRR: grufiadaaa faoufa | 
aat fade: BAT: NeANRATAATEHAT: 11 20% 1 
_ tadatmanitmanoh samyagvivekenaiva siddhyati | 
oe tato vivekah kartavyah pratyagatmatmasadatmanoh Wo 
That samyajjfidna (referred to in glcka 204) arises by 
discrimination betwixt dtman and anatman. Therefore, dis- 
crimination must be madé between the inner atmani ( pratya- 
gatman) and the non -real (asat) Atman. — ie 
7 vivekena (by discrimination) by understanding the difference 
between the two in the same way as milk is understood to be dif- 
_ ferent from water. When the knowledge that two things are dif- 
ferent arises, the non-understanding of difference which is the 
cause of super-imposition will not exist. As super-imposition is an- 
nulled or does not exist, the mind is not affected by proj jection or 
viksepa. Then the mind ceases to be extrovert. It turns inside. 
and by the processes of gravana, manana, and nididhydsana, intui- 
tively perceives (gets the saksatkara) of Brahman which is the in- 
nermost reality, viveka being the cause of samyag-jnana. _* 
_asadatma means mithyabhiita-atma, the dtma which | is mithys. 
pratyagdtma: the Atma which is inside all the sheaths; sarvan- 
 tarah atma. 
The asadatma and the pratyagatma should be distinguished from 
each other by thinking of their distinction, with the help of Sruti 
and of reasoning taught by the acarya which thought subserves the 
process of knowledge and is of the form of cogitation. 
"That, when that is done, the pratyagatman shines clearly is 
ceri with the help of an example. | 
Wet TeEqaeged Gea HH THEA I 
aat atta careenta atarara HETH: 1 20G UN 
jalam parkavadaspastam pankapaye jalam sphutam - 
yatha bhati tathatmapi dosabhave sphutaprabhah il 
As water which is associated with mud is not clear, but 
becomes clear when the mud is removed, similarly, when 
what affected it is removed, the 4tman too shines clearly. 
Muddy water is not clear as it is mixed with mud which is 
foreign to it. When the clay is removed, unmixed with what is 
different from it, water appears clear. So, the atman too i.e., the 
VIVEKACUPAMANI 227 
Paramatman too, in the absence of what- tainted it, appears clear 
and bright as the limitless intelligence (akhanda-caitanya-prakaéa). 
In accordance with the gruti “salila eko drasté” (Brh.), like water free 
_ from impurities, unaffected by any trace of the anadtman, it shines 
by itself. er, ae bha: cena a, 
207 
Making the same clear to convey that one should strive for 
shining (by oneself) unaffected by the anatman, the guru says: 
wataqat @ aware: equndtfataed WaT: | 
eat farce: Y aeaita CaTaaTAA: “aneagentaarga: 1 Ros 
asannivrttau tu sadétmanch sphutapratiretasya bhavet praticah 
tato nirdsah karaniya evasadatmanah sidhvahamadivastunah | 
Only on the disappearance of what is not real will there 
be the ascertainment of this, the pratyagatman. Therefore, 
the expulsion of the unreal atman (asadatman) made up of 
_ aharhkara and other things must be completely effected. 
_ etasya: ‘of this’ in the gloka, indicates the evacuate nearness of = 
the pratyagatman: 7 gy 
| praticah: sarvantarasya: of what is inmost of all. 
sadatmanah: of the pratyagatman or the Paranisian which is 
unsublatable in any of the three periods of time (The words Prat- 
-yagatman and Paramatman are interchangeable from the Advaitic 
_ standpoint). | ite 
7 sphutapratiti: its shining unmixed by anything other than | 
— itself. | ; 
asannivrttau: when the annamaya and other sheaths Raye ceased 
to appear to consciousness. 
- tu: means eva: only; i.e., the pratyagatma will not une when = 
the annamaya ko§a etc., appear to consciousness. | 
tatah: therefore. 
- asadatma: mithyatma, what is not the atma. 
| ahamadivastunah: from all things beginning with aharhkgra. 
For, all things from aharnkara to the body are the cause of delusion 
about the nature of the 4tman. They conceal the true nature of the 
atman. Till this- anatma ceases to appear on the basis of (as) 
228 | VIVEKACUDAMANI ~ 
aharmkara etc., covered by them, by stern discrimination, every one 
of the sheaths should be expelled from consciousness with the con- 
viction: this is not my atman. It has been said earlier in the work: 
pancdnimapi kosandm apavdde vibhatyayam suddhak , nitydnandgi- 
karasah pratyagripah parah svayom jyotth\, (gl. 153). “When 
the five sheaths are removed, this (Atman) appears in all its purity, 
of the nature of eternal bliss, inmost mm one,:supreme and self- 
effulgent.” Out of the feeling that the sisya should attain complete 
liberation, the guru who is the ocean of compassion explains this in 
many ways. There water covered over with moss was given as an 
example; here is the example of water mixed with mud which is 
_ totally different from it. This is intended:to bring about in all ways 
the awareness of the difference of the anatman. 7 
208 
Now is esneidaed the proposition that the vijaanamaya Koga is 
not the atman. 
wat ara TURAT zata feearaT TET HT 
fanriarnecarea oftfeoncagan: t 
qeqrarg eafaartecarenriaeat fea Esa Rod Ul 
- ato ndyam paradtmd syat vijndnamayasabdabhak { 
vikaritvatjadatvacca paricchinnatvahetutah | 
drsyatvad vyabhicadritvannanityo ‘nitya isyate 1 
- This which is called by the name vijianamaya cannot | 
| be the Paramatman. Because, it is liable to change, it is 
 insentient, it is limited, it is an object of perception, and it 
is not cometary preset The non-cternsl js not said to be 
eternal. — 
atah: for the reasons that are to be told. 
- Because of its liability to change, its initia: its limited 
character, its perceptibility and its inconstancy, this koga’ which is 
referred to by the name vijnanamaya kosga cannot be the Paramatma 
or mukhyadtma. Like a mirage, it is. only seemingly real. It is drs- 
tanastasvabhavah: It appears, but does not abide as it appears. 
Vide the Sruti: nityo nityinam (Katha.); and the sitra; nityatvdcca 
tabhyah: “By the reason that ii gets eternal liberation, the atman 
which is nitya cannot be the vijianamaya koSa as the latter by its 
| changeability is anitya ( non-permanent). ns 
‘Vijidnamayakosa_ is different from the wtman banned like ‘the 
gross body it changes, it is insentient, it is limited;.it is perceived, 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 329° 
it is not constant. The plurality of reasons is for the production 
of deep conviction that.it is not the atman. They are given again | 
and again in indifferent ways to produce firm awareness of its 
anatmata (not being the atman) seeing that, though there are all 
these reasons, yet, people attribute dtmatva to it by their delusion. 
vikdritvam: destructibility. 
- jadatvam: not being self-luminous. 
paricchinnatvam: not being all-pervasive. 
drsyatvam: being an object of consciousness. 
vyabhicaéritvam: here liability to become non-existent; pete 
the counter-entity of non-existence. | | 
209 
Now the anandamayakoga is explained. _ 
araranfataraa feared: afaeaaiafraant 
CUTATAAAT: frorfarrora: CqaCTTASTANTT: 
— prearana faata afaarararaeq: tad 
agar avafa aa are agama: sad faa 11 208: 7 
inandapresibabacnbucianth urttistamojrmbhita — 
_ syadinandamayah priyddigupakah svestarthalabhodayah L 
punyasyanubhave pibhati krtinamanandariipah svayam 
bhiitva nandati uae sddhu tanubhrnmatrah 
prayatnam vind ul 
The anandamayakoSa is the modification of avidya and 
appears as a reflection of the 4tman which is compacted of 
absolute bliss. Its attributes are pleasures etc. It arises on 
the obtaining of a desired object. It shines by itself as joy 
_ to those people on the fruition of their merit, when, with- 
out any effort on - their part, presunre? a aa a. feeling | 
of joy. 
: anandapratibimbacumbitatanuh: the body ‘(here | svariipa, | 
nate) of a person modified by the reflection ef the ananda which | 
is the nature of the Paramdtman. . | ges 
tamasa: by avidya, 
| tamojrmbhita: produced by tamas or avidya. The modifica- 
tion (of the 4tman) which is. wrought by avidya will be the ananda- — 
-mayakoga. For making it clear the: guru carries it to the mind by 
230 VIVEKACODAMANI 
_ the words ‘priyadigunaxa’ in accordance with the gruti: tasya priya- 
meva sirah, modo daksinah paksah, pramoda uttarak paksah, dncnda 
atma, brahma pucham pratistha ( Taitt. ). ; | 7 
The meaning is: that modification which has for its parts the 
_ pleasure of seeing, getting and enjoying of seen objects, ranging from 
the dear to the delightful. , 
By the word svestah the vemporary nature of = attributes is 
indicated. a ; | 
_ svestérthah: an object desired Vs (dear to) a person; sons, 
friends, sounds, etc., are included. | : 
labha: getting. It includes seeing and enjoyment. 
udayah: production. 
The kosa which arises by the getting etc., of an object desired | 
by one is referred to as svesiarthalabhodayah. | 
krtiném: of wise persons (ie. _ those who have wisely done 
meritorious deeds. ) ) | . 
punyasyanubhave: One the experiencing of the effect of meri- 
- torious deeds which are poised for the production of their fruits. 
vibhati: It shines specially at this time. (The idea is: the 
anandamayakoéa is a modification of the 4tman by. avidya. Its parts 
are what is dear etc. It is produced by the seeing, getting and en- 
joyment of a desired object which may include sons, friends, sounds, 
tastes, ete. It arises on the fruition of meritorious deeds done by a. 
| wise man). | 
- The same ‘is elaborated further. 
tanubhyrnmatrah: sarvo’pi: All embodied persons. 
praydtnam vind: without effort at the time. 
| punyasyanubhavah: indicates that the act should have been 
done earlier. 
When being of the nature of Ananda (or enjoyment), the person : 
enjoys well, then his connection with mapa is to aa under- 
- Stood. It will be said in $l. 371: o 2 £99 
dehapranendriya manobudhyadibhirupadhibhih I 
_“yairyair vyrttessamayogah tattadbhavo’sya yoginah Uh 
“As the yogin is ‘conjoined with the upadhis, the body, the 
breath, the mind and the intellect, he is modified accordingly.” 
VIVEKACUDAMANI | 231 
- Thus the modification of avidya of the form of sukha which arises 
in the state of waking and dream by reason of punya is called the 
dnandamayakosa. Of that also, certainly there is a veil, or conceal- 
ment of one’s true nature. For, when that arises, there is no un- 
tainted and permanent sukha free from upadhis. This is clear. 
Therefore, the following statements declare that it is to be discard~ 
ed: na prahrsyet priyam prapya: “One should not go into ecsta- 
cies on getting what is desired.” atmanam harsasokabhyém satru- 
bhydmiva narpayet: .“One should not give: oneself to joy and — 
sorrow as to enemies.” hrsto-drpyati drpto dharmam atikramati: 
“The happy man is proud; the proud man transgresses dharma”; har- 
simarsabhayodvegaih mukto Yyassa ca me priyah: “He is dear to Me 
who is free from joy, anger, fear and excitement.” (B.G.) — 
By the word punya here is to be understood the remote conse- 
quence of an act (done in this or previous lives) for the sake of a 
desired result (kamyakarma). When it is said: Mukti is not ob- — 
tained without merit of actions done in hundreds of crores of lives. 
the reference is to the yogins. In the case of ordinary mortals, their 
actions are a mixture of punya and papa. Those of the yogins are _ 
aSuklam and akrsnam, neither of the nature of punya nor of papa. 
In respect of others, it is of three kinds: punya only, or papa only, 
or a mixture of the two. vrttindm anuvrttistu prayatnat apratha- 
mddapi adrstadvi sakrdabhydsa samskérasacivid bhavet ( Yoga 
Sitra), which means “the modifications of the mind may be suc- 
cessive to.the actions that we originally performed or it may be due 
to the repeated practice of our actions in previous lives aided by 
the residuary impressions (samskdras) and the adrsta based on it.” — 
Punya acquired by karma will not lead to liberation. Yogajapunya 
reveals by the power of jnana the bliss (Ananda) which is uncover- 
ed by ajnana by destroying the concealing agency, namely ajnana. 
Such an ananda is not of the nature of a koga' (sheath) as the modi- _ 
fication is without any contamination by tamas or ajnana. 
Having said that the modification in the form of bliss which is 
contaminated by tamas or ajnana is called the A4nandamaya koéga, its 
abundance in dreamless sleep is then shown. For the sukha experi- 
enced in susupti is not the result of punya. (The effects of punya 
are experienced either in jagrat or svapna). It is the bliss of the 
essential nature of the 4tman modified by avidya. When the punya 
begun to be experienced every day vanishes (from consciousness), 
then arises the daily pralaya (the cessation of waking or dream con- 
232 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
sciousness functions which means susupti). For, it is said in the 
Sutra Bhasya: adrstamapi PRPOE Ose TUE AATe na pralayaprasid- 
dhyartham. | 
arraaaatiney gat eafereneat 
cara a feezdaetatfaat 1 2qo tl 
dnandamayakogasya susuptau sphirtirutkata I 
svapnajagarayorisadistasandarsangdina We. | 
- The anandamayakoéga is fully manifested in dreamless 
sleep. In the waking and dream states it is evidenced a 
ilttle due to the seeing etc., of desired objects. 
utkaté: high manifestation. At that time (in susupti) there is 
no admixture of duhkha. But it is not essential bliss (mukhya- 
nanda) as it is covered by ajna ana. In waking and dream, there is 
a little manifestation due to seeing etc., of desired objects. The 
‘ete.’ here includes getting, enjoyment and possession. During 
waking and dream, the mental modification is subject to destruction 
as it is directed to different objects of perception. But in susupti 
there is no other object to produce a mental modification. Hence 
the sukha is abundantly experienced in it. , 
7 21) 
, The guru proceeds to expen that even this inandamayakosa is 
not the atman. | ts 
AMAA: TAT a sigafieerere oe 
BUMARA: FHRATATAT RereetreTIgR URq9 
“naiviyamadnandamayah paratma 
sopidhikatvat prakrter vikarat | 
‘karyatvahetoh sukrtakriydadyd 
 vikdrasanghatasamahitatvat |) 
This a4nandamayakoséa is not the supreme atman. Be- 
eause, it is produced by limitations (it is connected with - 
_upadhis); it is modification of prakrti, it is an effect of good 
deeds; it is associated with groups of other modifications. 
This 4nandamayakosa is not at all the mukhyatma. |The reasons 
for it are given. 
sopadhikatvat: as it is conditioned being produced by the sight 
of desired objects. es ‘S 
prakrtervikarat: as it is a modification of avidya which is the 
orc (mila) prakrti, the modification ee about by tamas 
Hana) being of that nature. 7 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 233 
_sukrtakriydyadh: of good deeds. 
_ sukrtakriyayaéh karyatvahetoh: as it is the effect of good deeds 
(done previously). In sloka 209.it was said: punyasydnubhave 
vibhati: it appears when the effect of punya is experienced. It 
must be taken that the modification by avidya in the form of sukha 
during jagrat and svapna is the result of punya. 
vikdrasanghatasamahitatvat: as indicated in gloka ‘209 by the 
word ‘priyddigunaka’: of the nature of priya etc., and-in accord- 
ance with the Sruti: ‘tasya priyameva sirah’ (Taitt.). it. is pro- 
_ duced by the combination of the elements of seeing, getting, enjoy- 
ing, all making for sukha. ‘sukhakaravrtti’ means the modification 
(of the Atman) arising from the mixture of tamas and’ sattva when, 
due to punya, the desired object is seen and obtained. It expresses 
itself in the form ‘I am happy’. During enjoyment it is of.the form: 
‘Who other is equal to me? I sacrifice; I give; I enjoy’ etc. Or, it 
may be because it is produced by the modifications of meritorious 
desired objects. | 
212 
The next Sloka refers to what ought to be done after the analysis 
and discrimination of the five kogas. 
qsararafa ater faad after: Fat 
cfar serrate : erat ateredisafercat MRI 
pancdnamapi kosanam nigedhe yuktitah krte | 
tannisedhavadhih sdksi bodharupo’ vasisyate { 
-. Upon the elimination by analysis of five kogas, on. the 
culmination of such elimination, the witness of the form of 
pure intelligence remains. | | 
—-:paicénémapi kasa asinam nisedhe: . When each koga is successively 
eliminated saying, ‘this is not the atman,’ the end or what remains 
after these negations as the substratum of all negation is the wit- 
ness. or oe = : . 7 
3 avadhih: that until which the negation is made; the extreme 
limit. = a 4 es 
| tannisedhavadhih: until the saksi, witness a is the subsite: 
tum of all is reached. 7 
sdksi: the word ‘witness’ implies that there is something which 
is witnessed. But when everything is negated there is no object: 
to witness. So saksi-is an ‘as if’. Really it.is an objectless subject.. : 
234 | VIVEKACUDAMANI 
bodharipah: Kevala nirvisaya-jmana-svaripah; the one pure in- 
telligence without any object. 
213 
It is now said that that alone is the mukhyatman (essential 
atman). 7 
aisaAAl taysatla: Tantafasewst: | 
 Waeaaaerent afataaret farsa: ni 
aarra: & fasta: carencaa faairaar 11293 Ul 
yo'yamatma svayamjyotih paicakosavilaksanah | 
avasthatrayasdksi san nirvikdro niranjanch | 
saddnandah sa vijneyah svatmatvena vipascita 1) 
This 4tman which is self-effulgent, distinct from the five 
koSas, the witness of the three states without change, un- 
tainted, which is always of the nature of ananda, that is to 
be known by the wise as one’s true atman. : 
‘That which remains is this A4tman’ (yah avasisyate ayamatmé) 
is the connection with the previous Sloka. The explanation’ of the 
nature of the Paramatman is finalised by the identity between the 
beginning and the end of this discussion (the ee and upa- 
samhara). Previously in sloka 122 it was said: | 
asti kascit svayam nityam ahampratyayalambanah 
avasthatrayasaksi san pancakosavilaksanah 1| 
What was begun by this and the succeeding Slokas there; is now 
explained by the process of the negation of the five koégas and the 
affirmation that the atman is distinct from them. : 
It (the &tman) is the witness of the waking and other states, it 
cannot be sublated; it is devoid of modification; it is undefiled; it is . 
always of the form of Ananda. This ought to be understood by the 
person skilled in discrimination as being his own essential nature. It 
is the substratum which remains after the negation of all those on 
which the atma (atmatva) was imagined. In accordance with the 
Sruti ‘brahmapucchampratistha’, its true nature is that it is as the 
supreme Brahman.” 
Therefore, it has been said in the éruti: “If a person thinks that 
Brahman is not, he himself becomes non-existent. If he knows: 
Brahman is, he is known to exist really”: asanneva sa bhavati asad- 
brahmeti veda cet . asti brahmeti cedveda santamenam tato viduh 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 235 
When Brahman is one's own nature, if one thinks it is not existent, 
he himself becomes asat. If he thinks differently, i.e., if he thinks 
that he is not Brahman, but identifies himself with the kogas, when © 
the koSas are negated as above, then the result will be a state of 
nairdtmya for him, i.e., he will have nothing to call his atman. 
214 
Farea sara 
freanaa fafede “ee Tsay 
aaivad fam fatwa a oeareaa g an uN 
faaa fay acafea carnata A fates Te chal 
$lsya uvica: 
mithyatvena nisiddhesu kosesvetesu payicasu | 
sarvabhavam vind na pasyamyatra he guro 1; — 
yijneyam kimu vastvastt svdtmanatra vipascita 1 — 
The Sisya said: _ | 
Oh Guru! When these five koSas are negated as ‘being 
-mithya, I do not see anything except absolute void. What 
then is there to be known by the wise man as his 4tman? © 
- The meaning is clear. 
215 & 216 
ATTA | 
aarad raat faza fargottsfa dca 
aenita feared TANTATSTACET 1294 1 
at TATAATaT TIT ATAAAA | 
TATA afrare fafa gear ayer MRqVE ED 
Sri Gururuviéca: 
satyamuktam tvayai vidvan. nipuno’si vicarane | 
ahamadivikdraste tadabhavo’yamopyatha 4) 
sarve yenadnubhiyante yah svayam nanubhiyate 1 
tamatmanam veditadram viddhi buddhya susiikemaya u 
The Guru said: ere | 
Learned one! You have spoken truly. You are clever 
in enquiry. He by whom the modifications of the aham- 
kara (the ego) etc., and also their negations are perceived, _ 
but who is not himself perceived, learn that by your sharp 
236 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
. intellect, as the knower who is the a4tman. | 
- satyamuktam: You have spoken according to your understand- 
ing, | 7 a 
You are clever in enquiry. You have analysed in such a way that 
whatever appeared more or less do not now appear, ie., have been 
negated by you as not being the 4tman. Thus praising the pupil and 
commending his intelligence, the Guru proceeds to convey the subtle 
truth. 
ahamddivikaraste iadébhave’ etaniaiiie aes ahamadivikarah: 
those modifications earlier in. the form of ahamkara etc. .... 
atha: Now. | 
tadabhavo’pi: The absence of what were cognised earlier. 
sarve yendnubhiyante: All the modifications, namely aharmnkara 
etc., that were experienced previously, and now the negation of all 
of them, i.e., those that were experienced previously (by false) identi-° 
fication and are now experienced separately aé their negation. 
--yassvayam nanubhiiyate: that which is not a. an oa ect of 
Know that to be the knower, the witness of all, the 4tman by 
your subtle one-pointed intellect, which has no other object. 
_ 217 
The same is further explained for better understanding. © 
ego ul 
tatsdksikam bhavet tattadyad.yad yendnubhiyate 1 
kasydpyananubhitarthe saksitvam nopapadyate 1 
Whatever is experienced by any one has that person 
as the witness to it (séksikam). In respect of an object 
which is not experienced by any one, there is no ‘meaning 
in speaking ofa witness who. perceives. 
Whatever becomes an ‘obj ect of experience (perception) by an- 
. other has that other as its witness (sdksi). You have said: I do 
not perceive anything except absolute nothing (sarvabhdva). That 
means that you perceive ‘absolute nothing’. So the sarvaébhdva that 
you perceive becomes sdéksikam for you. That saksi (who perceive 
absolute nothing) is yourself or the ftman. The reason for this is 
‘VIVEKACUDAMANI 237 
given. Where there is no perception, one cannot be said to be the 
witness (saksi). For, a witness is one who merely looks on with- 
out doing pce : 
Having ‘enunciated this. general rule, the guru applies it to the 
present context. 
arat eaarferat rat aaeeaaTTT \ 
aa: TE CAE ATT NEATEAT A AAT UVSC 
asau svasiksiko: bhaévo yatah svenanubhiyate . 
atah param svayam siksat pratyagatma na cetarah 11 
This non-existence is self-witnessed. For, it is perceived = 
by the self. Hence, the self that witnesses is itself the 
supreme Self, not anything else. | 
: This non-existence (abhava’ ) of all the modifications. beginning 
with the aharnkara is self-witnessed. Svasdksikah means that of 
which the self is the witness. The reason for that is this: because 
even after the negation of the: five koSas by one’s self, it ( sarva- 
bhava, total non-existence) is perceived by the self which remains 
after the negation. The criterion for it is urged: I do not perceive 
anything except complete non-existence (sarvabhava). When it is 
said ‘except non-existence of everything, I do not perceive any- 
thing’; it means: . ‘I perceive non-existence of eve rything.’ ‘That 5 non- 
existence becomes the object of perception. ‘You’, says the gur 
addressing the éisya, ‘are its seer’. Hence the inner self (pratya- 
gatma) is the direct eternal seer. Vide the sruti: yat saksada- 
paroksét brahma (Brh.). That is the param Brahma, supreme 
‘Brahman; na ca itarah:-not. anything else, i.e., it is not other sh 
Brahman, not at all. 4, 4.488. Hes ee 
219 
The same meaning is further clearly explained at length. 
| vache SEE aioe erewaret ~ hy 
- hi tin ili ye ue 
jégratsvapnasuguptigu sphufataram. .yo'sau. -samujjrmbhate _ 
pratyagripataya sadahamahamityantah. sphurannekadhé | 
nainikaravikarabhajina imam pasyannahamdhimukhan 
nityinandacidatmana sphurati tam viddhi svametam hrdi iy 
238 —C VIVEKACUDAMANI 
| Know that in thy heart as thy Self which very clearly 
- manifests itself in the states of waking, dream and dream- 
less sleep, which shines always in the same form inside lead- 
ing to the awareness of ‘I’ which perceives these modifica- 
tions of various forms like aharnkara and the intellect and 
_ which is self-effulgent as the eternal blissful consciousness. 
pratyagrupatayd: being the absolutely innermost. 
sada ekadhaé: always in the same identical form. 
ahamahamiti: as ‘T’, I’ (as distinguished from the perceived 
things and modifications which are refferred to as ‘this, this’: idam, 
idam). 
sphuran: svayamprakasamanah: self-effulgent. 
ahamdhimukhaén kosan: the koégas beginning with aharnkara 
etc., ending with the body. | a 
néinikadravikdrabhajinah: those modifications which are of 
different kinds relating to the organs and their location. They are 
subject to these vikaras; so nanaripa, of various forms. | 
vikarabhajinah: the modifications (vikarah) refer to birth, ex- 
istence, change, growth, decay and death. 
As the ahamkara which is spoken of as antahkarana is trans 
formed into the body etc., it also is included in ine SOUP: of nana 
karavikaras, various modifications: 
| tman: these objects which belong to the category of the wi : 
: man pasyan: making them objects of perception. That which 
shines clearly in the three states of jagrat, svapna and susupti cha- 
racteristic of all creatures. 
sphutataram: very clearly. 
yo’sau: asau: is used to indicate distant reference in the éloka. 
samujjrmbhate: shines independently of anything else. 
nityanandacidatmana sphurati: shines in the heart as the self- 
effulgent, permanent and blissful. | ae Oi * 
pratyaktaya: Though it is distant for the unlearned, know this 
as what is very close to thee. 
viddhi: know. 
~VIVEKACUDAMANI 239° 
220 | 
The guru next proceeds to answer the question why the witness 
of all states, the 4tman cannot be thus distinctly and clearly known 
and proceeds to show with an example that delusion is the cause. _ 
gales fafanaatafary 
areteaaal vata wad 1 
wear faataraqarfrded 
aurea seth aead 1 RQR0 MN 
ghatodake bimbitamarkabimbam | 
adlokya mudho ravimeva manyate | 
tatha cidabhaisamupddhisamstham 
bhrantydhamityeva jadobhimanyate }1 
The fool, looking at the reflection of the sun in the 
water contained in a jar, thinks that it is the sun itself. 
Even so, the stupid man, by his delusion, imagines that the 
reflection of the cit in the upadhi is his atman. 
The fool looking at the reflection of the sun in . the water thinks 
that it is the sun itself. He has not the knowledge = that the sun is. 
different and that this is its reflection. So too, the reflection of 
_ the cit in the upadhis like buddhi etc., is thought to be the atman 
due to aviveka i.e., it is understood differently from its nature. — 
221 
But really, 
Re wel aqreaafare 
fagia wa fafa atemast: 1 
defeqnecataataraanars: 
caurerant fagat Tat TAT T RW 
ghatam jalam tadgatamarkabimbam 
vihiya sarvam divi viksyate rkah Ll 
tatasthitah tattritayavabhasakah 
svayamprakaso viduso yatha tatha tl 
_ Apart from the pot, the water and the sun’s Sti: in 
it, the real sun is seen by the learned in the sky indifferent 
to these three and illumining them. So too here. 
The sun is reflected in the water contained in a pot. | There 
are three things here: the pot, the water in the pot, and the re- 
240 “VIVEKACUDAMANI 
flection of the sun in the pot. The sun shines beyond all these, is 
self-effulgent and is seen in the sky. 
-tatasthitah: indifferent to them all (udasinah) ) who remains 
beyond these three; beyond the pot, the water in it and the reflection | 
in the water. | Bak oesa fa ees 
Reason for this: tattritayavabhasakah: eiadeiak inter three, 
namely the pot, the water in it and the reflection in the water: 
svayamprakasah: what.cannot be illumined by anything other 
than itself. | 
yatha divi viksyate: as is seen in the sky. 
tatha: so. ee ee 
222 & 223 . 
¢ fag fafafarqat 
feqoa gat fated. agrary RETA TAS USa te 
Rarer aaafseerrg 1 R23 
| spree fra ere RTE: V 
 fanta arae fraeriad | 
gare faareer facet fare: NQ2Ziul 
deham dhiyam citpratibimbametam 
- visrjya buddhau nihitam guhaydm | 
drastaramatmanam akhandabodham 
sarvaprakdsam sadasadvilgksanam {1 
nityam vibhum sarvagatam susiksmam 
antarbahigsinyam ananyam atmanah | 
viynaya samyan nijaripametat 
puman vipapma viraja vimrtyuh | 
Discarding the body, the buddhi and the reflection of 
the cit in it and realising well the real nature of the atman 
which is the seer, which is unlimited consciousness that is hid- 
den in the buddhi, which is all-luminous, different from sat* 
and from asat,* which is eternal, infinite, omnipresent, ex- 
tremely. subtle, which has neither interior nor exterior: and 
which is not other fron: Brahman, a man becomes sinless, 
_ free from rajoguna, and immortal. 
'* In the special sense‘ ‘expiemed in the commen 
VIVEKACUDAMANI ys 
deham: The gross body which is like the pot in the illustration. 
_dhiyam: the buddhi which in its pure state and in a subtle 
form is seen inside like the water in the illustration. | 
guhayam. citpratibimbam:.. this reflection of the consciousness 
(cit). which appears as ‘I’ in the buddhi, which is like a cave by 
reason of its ccncealing power and its liability to many wre ideas 
and actions. 3 
_ visrjya: shandoniag it; abandoning the reflection’ of the cit 
which appears as ‘I’ due to delusion. 7 
drastéiram: as in the example of sun’s reflection in the pot- 
water, him who is indifferent to the three, but illumines them. _ 
détmanam: the atman who is inmost to all these, who illumines 
those three and is the witness of all. 
akhandabodham: who is of the nature of unlimited knowledge. 
Therefore svaprakdsam: self-effulgent: for, he is the illuminer of 
everything. 
sadasadvilaksanam: sat means what is perceived (pratyaksam: 
fire, water and earth-—tejah, apah and annam). ast not PateNee: 
apratyaksam, namely air and space, vayu and Akasa. ; 
etadvilaksanam, different from these. sadasad may mean vyaktam 
(patent) and avyaktam (not patent). So sadasadvilaksanam would 
then mean different from the patent and the latent. 
nityam: devoid of limitation. by time. 
vibhum: devoid of spatial limitation. 
sarvagatam: associated with all as their upadana (material). 
siiksmam: yet subtle i.e., difficult to comprehend as it is de- 
void of form etc.. Vide the Sruti: esa sarvesu bhitesu gidho’tma na 
prakasate (Katha): ‘This 4tman does not. shine being concealed in 
all objects.’ : a Mes 
29 = 
aniarbahissinyam: without anything inside or outside. Vide 
the Sruti: anantaramabahyam (Brh.) ananyamdimanah: not cther 
than the atman, i.e., Brahman. Vide the Sruti. ayamadtma brahma 
_(Maénd.): “This atman is Brahman”. Also on account of the rea- 
sons stated earlier. Or, that from which there is nothing. different, 
ie., without a second. 
vijndya samyak nijaruipametat: understanding the real. form. 
(the nature) of the atman. : 
V. C47 
2420 | VIVEKACUDAMANI 
puman: he who earlier understood differently. 
- vipapmd: he from whom sin has gone away. Vide the Gita: 
jianagnih sarvakarmani bhasmasit kurute’rjuna: “Oh Arjuna, the 
fire of jiana reduces all karmas to ashes”. The reason for that is 
given: virajah: devoid of rajoguna. Being established in the quali- 
tyless Brahman and being of the nature of Brahman, bereft of rajo- 
guna which is the cause of grief. 
vipapmad: sinless: sin (papa) includes also merit (punya). 
Punya too by its making for bondage is an obstacle for liberation. 
(For, another birth is necessary to enjoy the result of punya). 
Hence, being devoid of karma which is the cause of birth. - 7 
vimrtyuh: deathless, i.e, being devoid of samsara associated 
with death. That means not liable to fall from one’s true nature. 
| bhavati is to be understocd at the end.. vide the statement in 
the Sanatsujdtiya: pramaidam vai mrtyum aham bravimi: “IT speak 
of inadvertence (wrong ee as death”. 
| 224 
Therefore, 
farts sareeat faafeaa 
eat afeers fafa afeae 
areaistet Tar waaerya: 
faa taqearana aaa: PVRw 
visoka anandaghano vipascit 
svayam kutascinna bibheti kascit | 
‘nanyo’sti pantha bhavabandhamukteh — 
vind svatattvdvagamam mumuksoh 1} 
A wise man, free from grief, compacted of bliss is. not 
himself afraid of anything from anywhere. To the seeker 
of liberation there is no path for freedom from bondage of 
samsara other than the realisation of one’s. true nature. 
visokah: without grief. Hence dnandaghanah: he whose wel 
frame is bliss, i.e., of the nature of untainted bliss. 
_ vipagcit: one who knows everything. 
kutascit na bibheti: As he realises Brahman which is the all, 
he has no fear from any quarter; for there is no second object to 
cause fear. . 
VIVEKACUDAMANI | 243 . 
_ Therefore, for one who desires release (moksa) which is the 
realisation of permanent incomparable bliss, untained by grief, there 
is no way for liberation from the bonds of samsara apart from under- 
Standing one’s own real nature, i.e., as one essentially is. 
229 
Having thus setenuined the nature of what is designated as 
‘Thou’ Tvam as the witness of three states of consciousness, as. dis- 
tinct from the five koSas and..as unattached, the guru proceeds to 
determine the nature of what is designated by ‘That’ Tat.and to ex- 
plain ‘at length in the traditional method the identity between the 
two which is the main thesis of all the Upanisads. ‘To this end, he 
makes the following introduction. 
wentaacataar wWaalerey BIT | 
aefgetaaracs ET ATTA TA: NV 
brahmabhinnatvavijiianam bhavamoksasya karanam | 
yenadvitiyaminandam brahma sampadyate budhak 11 
The realisation of one’s non-difference fram Bishmar as 
is the cause for liberation from samsara. -By’that the wise 
man attains (becomes) Brahman which is without a second 
and is supreme bliss. ; 
brahmabhinnatvavijidnam: direct intuition of the truth ‘I am 
Brahman’. | 
bhavamoksasya: of liberation from samsara. 
karanam: by that realisation the wise man attains or becomes 
Brahman without a second, without difference, arid blissful. Vide the 
srutis: brahmavidipnoti param (Taitt.), brahmavid brahmaiva 
bhavati (Prasna). The knower of Brahman (he who has imme- 
diate knowledge, aparoksa jiana of Brahman) attains the Supreme. 
_ The knower of Brahman is Brahman only. In accordance with the 
sruti: asato ma sad gamaya, mrtyurvd asat, sad amrtam, mrtyorma 
—amrtam gamaya, amrtam mé kuru ityevaitadah (Brh.). “Lead me 
from non-being to being; death is non-being; being is immortality; 
lead me from death to immortality, make me immortal: being Brah- 
man itself is liberatitn.” | 
226 — 
- To the one eho doubts how liberation from samsara can arise 
from being Brahman, it is replied: 
244 VIVEKACOUDAMANI 
| maraed aaa fagraadat JA: | 
~ fasreaeaa: RENT TEMP HACAHTT: URW 
brahmabhitastu samsrtyai vidvan navartate punah 
vijndtavyamatah samyag brahmdbhinnatvamatmanah 
One who has become Brahman does not again return to 
samsara. Therefore, the 4tman’s non-difference from Brah- 
~ man has to be well realised. 
_ He who has penlised Brahman does never iacniaa: to samsara. 
Vide the Sruti: na sa punaravartate (Chand.): “He does not 
return again.” Therefore, the Atman’s non -Surerence: from Brab- 
man must be realised firmly. 
tu in Sloka is used in affirmation. - 
227 
By speaking of the mithya-character of the world, the guru pro- 
ceeds to explain the nigprapaficatva of Brahman, being the anti- 
thesis.of the world. - 
wea aT we faye a eaateaan t 
framranca seantan facat wafer 1 2200 0 
satyam jranam anantam brahma visuddham param 
svatassiddham | 
nityanandaikarasam pratyagabhinnam nirantaram jayati 14) 
| Brahman is absolute existence and knowledge. It is | 
_ infinite, pure, supreme, self-established, compacted of eter- 
_nal bliss, non-different from the inner atman, and remains _ 
absolutely without parts. | ee 
Jt is not sublated in any: of the three periods of time. It is , self- 
dpeat It is not limited by space, time or another abies ect; for; it 
is all-pervasive, eternal and without a second. 
visuddham: free of, impurities, native or acquired. 
' param: beyond maya. . - 
svatassiddham: self-existent. In the abundance of its reality, | 
it does not need to be established by anything else. 
nityanandaikarasam: it is of the nature of - = bliss un-— 
ae by any dubkha (grief). 
VIVEKACUDAMANI | 245 
jivabhinnam: non-different from Jiva. 
_nirbhedam: undivided ( akhandam). | 
jayati: such Brahman exists in its superlative excellence. 
Thus the Real has been clearly indieated. 
228 
One apes of infinitude, being devoid of limitations by any ob- 
ject is expounded. 
afed qed eqenTaraea aeAAISHTATA | 
at gruafen fafaer AeaeTTACAMTTGSMTATT URS 
sadidam paramédvaitam svasmadanyasya | vastuno’bhavat j 
na hyanyadasti kincit samyakparatattvabodhasudasiyam l. 
This Sat is the supreme non-dual reality as there is no 
other object different from it. In the high state of realisa- 
tion of the supreme: Truth. properly there is nothing» which 
is other (to it.). 
_ This Brahman that we speak of exists; Benes it is called ak. It 
is absolutely non-dual. The absoluteness of non-duality means that 
it is devoid of even the identity of quality and the bearer of the 
quality (guna and gunin). dvayorbhdvah dvita; dvita eva dvaitam,; 
na vidyate dvaitam yatra, tat bhedasinyam: The being two is dvita; 
dvita itself, duality itself, is dvaita. Where dvaita is non-existent, 
that is bereft of difference. The absence of two-ness means being 
devoid of difference. 
svasmadd: The reason is the aiscnee of an object aehieke is other 
to it. If there were an other, then difference will arise. Hence non- 
dual (advaitam). It may be asked: How can difference be denied 
when there are several jivas in the world, some higher and some 
lower? It is reminded by the use of the word vastu (what exists) 
that they have no absoluteness from the point of view of real exis- 
tence. For, being imagined, there can be no difference. The rope 
cannot be said to have a second object with itself in view of the 
_ imagined serpent. If the world objects etc., were absolutely | real, 
then they must shine (be found to exist) for ever. Since they are 
not so, they are not ultimately real. Hence it is said in the Sloka: 
“In the state of the perfect realisation of the supreme Truth”. The 
word ‘samyak’: ‘perfectly’ is used since till now it is understood to 
be otherwise by ajiiana, i.e., in that perfect condition of illumination 
ef the supreme Truth. Vide the sruti: yatra naényat pasyati, ete., 
(Chand): “where one does not see another, ete.” | 
246 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
‘hi’ in the Sloka means, because there is not anything which is 
an other, as there is absence of an object different from itself, this 
which exists is absolutely non-dual. 
229 
That even in the state of ajfiana, this world is not other than 
Brahman is explained as determined by the dictum: tadananyatva- | 
marambhanasabdadibhyah: “The non-difference of them (i.e., of the 
cause and effect) results from such term as ‘Origin’ and the like. 
(B. S. II. i.14)’? 34 
uted eet ferret AATST TTT 
AAT ART TUCATATTATATAT ST, RR qu 
yadidam sakalam visvam nanaripam pratitamajnanat 
tatsarvam brahmaiva pratyastésesabhavanidosam. }) | 
This entire universe which, due to ajfiana appears to 
be of many forms, all that is Brahman only freed of all 
defects of understanding. 
This world which, due to ajfana appears of various forms is 
what is imagined. All that is only Brahman free from all kinds of 
imaginings. 
7 230 | 
Through mud ete., it is explained with an example. 
weaTayasy yer a fits: Hraislea aaa J HTS TT | 
a ered qanfer Hea: RAT AN TATTATAS 11 BR HI 
_ mrtkaryabhito’pi mrdo na bhinnah | 
kumbho’st? sarvatra tu mrtsvaripat | — 
na kumbharipam prthagasti kumbhah 
kuto mrsé kalpitanimamiatrah 1) 
Though a modification of clay, the pot is not different 
_ from clay as it is of that substance all..over. There is no 
. separate entity of the form of. pot apart from the clay. 
Therefore where is - the. pot which is merely an imagined 
“name? 
Though an effect of clay, the pot is not different from clay; | 
for, it ‘is of the nature of clay everywhere—at the bottom, at the 
OD cee 
34 “The ‘effect is the universe diversified in space etc., and the: cause is the 
supreme Brahman. In reality, it is known that the effect has non-difference from, 
Le. non-existence in isolation from that cause”.—Sri Sarmkara Bhasya. 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 247 
top, at the sides. In fact, everywhere, clay of the form of a 
bulging belly etc., is called pot. The form of the pot as black etc., 
does not exist separately from clay. Apart from the form of the 
clay, there is no special form for the pot. The clay possessing a 
certain form is called pot; there is no separate form for the part | 
apart from the clay. According to the Sruti: vdcérambhanam 
vikiro nimadheyam (Chand.) (the name is only a matter of speech), 
the ‘pot’ is only an imagined name. Therefore, where is the form 
in the pot different from the form of clay? The word ‘pot’ has refe- 
rence to what is only imagined. Even as Devadatta is one individual 
only whether he has contracted his hands and legs or has extended 
them, and is not different in the two cases, so too the pot does not 
differ from clay. | 
231 
For clear understanding, the same is explained again: 
amfa afgaaan eared geeg desifad a aad | 
BAN ae: safer Ca tare Ra Hea TTT A RAV 
| kenapi ‘mrdbhinnataya svaripam | 
. ghatasya samdarsayitum na sakyate | 
ato. ghatah kalpita eva mohat 
mydeva satyam paramérthabhitam }; 
It is not possible for anyone to show the form of the pot — 
apart from the clay. Hence, the pot is imagined only due — 
to delusion. Clay alone is the abiding reality of the pot. 
_ kenapi: by any one. Or, even by Brahma (‘kah’ standing for 
Brahma). The real nature of the pot cannot be shown apart from 
the clay. Therefore, (what is called) a pot is imagined as different 
only by delusion. Therefore, clay alone is the primary meaning of 
pot. Vide the Sruti: mrttiketyeva satyam (Chand): “truth is that 
it is clay only”. It exists before the pot came into existence and 
will subsist after it is destroyed. 
232 — | 
Having shown by the illustration of the clay and the pot that 
._ the form does not exist apart from the matter, that is applied to 
the subject for which this is the illustration. 
248 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
AEM THT ACT AaTAAaTT aciisera fer t : | 
wetter at ate a cer Atel fatateat frikeracrsreg: 11 232 0 
sadbrahmakaryam sakalam sddaiva 
sanmaétrametanna tato’nyadasti | 
astiti yo vakti na tasya moho 
vinirgato nidritavatprajalpah L. 
All that is the effect of Sat. Brahman is Sat i (Beehitwas) 
always. It is pure Existence; there is nothing apart from 
it. If one says these is (something different), his delusion 
has not vanished, and he prattles like one in sleep. | 
- Brahman is of the form of pure Existence. All its effects begin- 
ning with the sky are always Brahman. According to a different 
view, the pot is said to be the effect (of the combination) of potshreds 
ete. That is, though the pot is an effect and though it is different 
from the potshreds, it is said. to be an independent real refuting 
the received view that the effect has no reality apart from the 
cause. It is said that. the case is not like that. This is brought 
out by the use of the word matram in sanmatrametat. .'The word is 
used to show that the pot is only clay ultimately whatever might 
have led to it in the intervening stages. Even as the pot is clay only, 
so too the sky etc., ate Brahman only, not different from it. Nothing 
which is an effect has reality apart from its material cause and as 
Brahman is the material of everything, different from it nothing has 
existence. Hence in the sruti mrttiketyeva satyam, stress is laid on 
the word iti; i.e., the pot is real only as clay, not by its form. | 
| Similarly, going further, aay is the effect of its material, the quin- | 
tuplicated (paficikrta) elements. It is not existent apart from them. 
It is true only in virtue of them. The Sruti says: yadagneh rohitam 
ripam tejasastadripam, yacchuklam tadapam, yat krsnam tadan- 
nasya, apagddagneragnitvam vicdrambhanam vikdro némadheyam 
trini rupadnityeva satyam’ (Chand.) “In the case of fire, what is red 
in it is by virtue of the tejas element in it; what is white in it is by 
virtue of the water element; what is black is by virtue of the earth 
element. The composite character. of fire has disappeared in its con- 
stituent elements. The name fire is merely a matter of words: the 
truth is that it has three forms.” So the elements (fire, water, earth 
ete.) are so called in the non-quintuplicated (apaficikrta) state. 
When they are separated ultimately earth exists as water; water ‘as 
firé; it (fire) as air; that again (air) as sky; and that again (sky) as 
sat. Hence, nothing is real apart from Brahman’ which is of the 
VIVEKACODAMANI | 249 
nature of sat, Hence, the expression ‘sanmatram’.35 Hence also ‘it 
is clearly. stated eng sete ‘than it there is is nothing we is 
other.” , ace 
When this is sthe fact, of him who says that the universe begin 
ning with the sky etc. exists as real, delusion (ajfiana) has not 
vanished. It is like the prattling of a sleeping man. It is even as 
one in sleep speaking something or other unconnected. Therefore, 
to say that effect exists apart from its material is to speak without 
- the knowledge which can be produced only after careful nendateys 
| 233 
The meaning conveyed in accordance with ies Chandogya 
Upanisad is shown as having an identity with the Atharva-éruti. 
aqad favafreta areit 
silat qasratrcsr atest | 
aeatade aera fe fart 
anfiestare fasaretiiaea W233 tt. 
brahmaivedam svisvamityeva vani 
 Srautt brite’tharvanistha varistha , 
tasmadetad brahmamatram hi vigvam 
nadhisthanad bltnnatéropttasys 1 
~ That all this universe is Brahman is the’ supreme 
' declaration of the Atharva Sruti. Therefore, this universe — 
is Brahman only. There is ho difference of the ‘superim- 
posed from the substratum. _ 
Srauti: Pertaining to Sruti. Generally it means the word of the 
Vedas. Here it refers.to what is stated in Atharva Veda. Or, it 
may mean what is told by Atharva to his eldest.son: | 
This supreme pronouncement of the Veda of the form: brahgnai 
vedam visvamidam xaristham: “This universe ‘is’ the’ Supreme 
Brahman”, says that ‘this entire universe ’ is Brahman only. By 
the particle ‘eva’, ‘only’, the existence of anything separate is denied. 
Therefore, it is said: ‘all this universe is Brahman only” 
hi indicates conclusiveness, certainty. 
‘The super-imposed imagined object is not different from the 
substratum. . But it may be doubted that Brahman and the world 
35 In the Taittiriya Upanisad the process is. spoken’ of paficthaviina as earth, 
water, fire, air and sky. In *the Chandogya Upanisad, it. is: referred to as trivrt- 
karana (triplication) as earth, water and fire. The two are synonymous, the pur- 
pose being’ to express the breaking up of a composite whole into its elenients. 
and, ‘effect palation ee Brahman aaa ajfana and preter 
to the Advaitin the effect alone is the same as the cause. But by 
the rule that dropita is non-different from the adhisthana, this doubt 
is dispelled.*° | 
234. | 
‘Having negated the reality of the world on the. basis of sruti | 
it is further negated on the basis of accordant reasoning. 
aed atz EUTEATE ATTRA 
“araertaras iting: eat | 
Saeed are. fet ARIAT RAY 
satyam yadi sydjjagadetaddtmano” 
 nantatvahanirnigamdpramanaté | 
asatyavaditvam apisituh sydt Tae 
naitattrayam sdédhu hitam mahatmaném ue 
If this world were real, the infinitude of the 4tman will 
be affected: the Vedas will be rendered unauthoritative; 
‘Igvara will be proclaimed.a speaker of untruth. These. three 
are neither good nor desirable to the great. | 
If this visible world is real and not imagined, en: the infinitude 
of the &tman. will be impaired. For, the atman is devoid of limita- 
tion by another object (It is vastupariccher ya the world is — 
not imagined, but real, then the atman will be. delimited (by the | 
world) and will not be unlimited or infinite. 
. Af it is contended: ‘Well, let the infinitude. ‘ef the atman so, 
_ the Veda will become invalid. The Veda says: sdtyam jna 
brahma@ (Taitt.): “Brahman is. existence, intelligence poy infin: ni- 
tude”, What it conveys will be negated. _s 
If it is said:. ‘Let this happen; this is not unwelcome’, then God 
who. is supremely dear, who is omniscient, will be associated with 
speaking what is not true.37 : | 
If it ‘is further said: ‘Let that happen’, this will not be _accep- 
table to.the mahatmis, the astikas. The mahatmas are those who, 
by virtue of their knowledge of gruti and instruction by a guru, have 
%6 Jiva, léa, v viguddha cit, the distinction between jiva and iéa, avidya ‘and its 
. connection with cit are beginningless. Jivah, iéah, vi isuddhad cit-tatha Hivesayor- , thid ,. avidya taccitoryogah sadasmaékam anadayah | 
"37 For the. Vedas are said to be the very breath "of God. He is. said to > has le 
eclared them at. the beginning of each kalpa. . 
VIVEKACUDAMANI | 251 
abandoned the idea that the 4tman is the body composed of by the 
five koSas, and who, by their direct intuition of Brahman, have their . 
antahkarana conditioned by the expansive consciousness of Brahman. 
These three (namely, the impairing of the infinitude of the 
&tman, the invalidation of Sruti and the aftribution of false speech 
to Ivara) are not desirable. The idea that the world is Teal will 
contradict the experiences of realised souls. 
235 — 
_. he Bhagavad Gita is iste as authority for the mithyatva of 
the world. 
feat negara mq arg asaafera: 1 
areata wart” wate caahaag 11 834 U1 
isvaro vastutattvajio “na ciham tesvavasthitah 1 
na ca matsthani bhitan?”’ tyemeva vyacikathat 1) 
Isvara who knows the truth about things declared: ‘I am 
not in them nor are the beings in Me.’ | 
Ivara knows the truth of things by virtue of fesse of ajnan 
in Him and as He is free of the defects of delusion etc. By the 
words: matsthdni sarvabhitani na ciham tesvasthitah; na ca mats- 
thani bhitani pasya me yogamaisvaram: ‘All things are in Me and 
_ Iam not in them; the things are not in Me; see My divine maya,’ If it 
is doubted that the two are contradictory ideas, the Lord reconciles 
_- the seeming contradiction by saying: ‘See my divine maya’. Maya 
here means the power to make what does not exist as if it exists. and 7 
vice versa. This capacity itself is what is called mithya.. The nature 
of mithya consists i in a thing not being where it appears and in appear- 
ing where it is not. This is the meaning of the two expressions 
‘exist in Me’ and ‘do not exist in Me.’ . | 
In this context, the Bhagvan said: maya tatamidam sarvam 
jagadavyaktamirtina: ‘By Me all this world is pervaded, My form 
unmanifested form. ‘All this world is pervaded by Me having the un 
manifested form. This world is pervaded by Me as its adhistha: 
(substratum). In the Sruti, sage Yajifavalkya was asked: ‘In what 
is the Supreme established?’: sa bhagavah kasmin pratisthita iti. 
The answer was given: svamahimni: ‘in its own excellence’, yadi 
va na mahimni: ‘or not in (its) excellence’. Thus | is indicated that 
38 What follows is a free summary of this por tion L of the commentar y on this 
gloka as it is couched in technical language. 
252 _ - ‘VIVEKACUDAMANI 
the Supreme is supportless. Thus, by saying na cdham tesvavas- 
thitah: “I am not established in them”, the delusion that the mo 
reme has the world as its support is removed.. 
maya tatamidam sarvam appears to be like the statement dhi- 
mena vydptam grham: In that statement grha will be the adhara 
(the support) and dhiima the adheya (that which is supported). In 
the same way Bhagavan’s statement would mean that the jagat is 
the Aadhara and He is its adheya. But maya tatamidam sarvam is 
not to be understood that way. For, He can have no adhara save 
Himself, as conveyed by the aforesaid sruti. From all this it follows 
that Brahman is the adhisthana and the world is the aropita. ~The 
dropita.is not different from the adhisthana. Hence the world (as it 
appears) is declared to be mithya only. | | 
236 
The reason for holding that the world is mithya is conveyed in 
this Sloka. 
afe acd wafera FTATTTSEAATT | 
aatqerad fafeaqaisad Tactaeqay 1 23 Ul 
~ yadi satyam bhaved visvam susuptavupalabhyatam 
— yannopalabhyate kificid ato’sat svapnavanmrsé |) 
If the world is real, let it appear in the state of dream- 
less sleep also. As itis not at all perceived in dreamless 
sleep, it is false like a dream. 
What is real must shine (must be perceived ) always, like the 
atman. If the world is real, let it appear also in dreamless sleep. 
According to the remembrance, ‘I did not know anything’, nothing 
at all is perceivéd in the condition of sleep. As dream which is not 
perceived in waking state is unreal, so too here. ‘asat’ here means 
msi, false, unreal, not non-existent like the horns of a hare. But 
as. it is of the nature of what is perceived and later disappears, it is 
mithya or non-real. | | 
237 
Now that the world does not exist apart from Brahman. is con 
clusively stated. 
ate: IISA ET HTT: 
sferarraren iat Far AIT 1h Ra NY 
' VIVEKACUPAMANI | ae 
 atah prthan nasti jagat pardtmanah 
. prthakpratitistu mrsé gunahivat | 
e Gropitasyasti kim arthavatta , 
adhisthanamabhati tatha bhramena tl 
Therefore, the world does not exist separate from 
Brahman. The appearance of separateness is false, like a — 
serpent appearing on a rope. What is the reality of the 
super-imposed? It is that the substratum appeate like it 
due to delusion. 
As, like the dream, the world too is not perceived always, ‘it 
is not real, separate from Brahman. Like the rope-serpent, it 
appears in the state of worldly experience as separate like the pot 
etc. Even as the serpent superimposed on the rope is false, so the 
world too (super-imposed on Brahman) is. false. . That what is super- 
imposed is false is proved also by its inability to produce its appro- 
priate effect, arthavatta. Does the super-imposed have the quality of 
producing its appropriate effect? No. (That is, the rope-serpent 
is false also for the reason that it will not sting). Then how does 
it appear? It is the substratum (rope or Brahman).:.that .appears 
due to delusion (as serpent or the world). In the case of a delu- 
sion, seeking for its appropriate effect is a futile attempt. | 
238 | | | 
That the world is not different from. Brahman is Fthe: con- 
firmed by another example. | 
ere Uae Waa: Tete 
wera aera fe afar: | 
Fadar wat wea wat 
caretiqd wert ATTA TREY 
bhrantasya yadyad bhramatah pratitam — 
brahmaiva tattad rajatam hi suktih | 
idamtayé brahma sadeva ripyate 
tvaripitam brahmani namamitram }| 
Whatever appears to a deluded man under the iiifiueincs 
of delusion is Brahman only. For, the silver is really the _ 
mother-of-pearl. Whatever is referred to as “this”, is the 
reality (substratum) that is Brahman. Whatever is super- ne 
imposed on Brahman is only a matter of name. — eee 
‘Whatever | appears to a deluded man in his ddlusion is only the 
254 VIVEKACUDAM 
substratum that is Brahman. For, the ‘silver’ that is seen to shine 
on the seeming mother-of-pearl from ignorance of the mother-of- 
pearl, is only the mother-of-pearl. Similiarly, what is super-imposed 
on Brahman turns out on inquiry to be Brahman only which appears 
as ‘this’ and that too is a matter of words as taught by the ‘vacdram- 
_ bhana’ gruti (Chand). , 
239-242 
sarerarerafagiaafad 
PrerereTaraTaETETY 1 R38 T 
_ ‘waif: eid faleated nec uw 
 aigaretagcaasd fafancana | = — Raerevefarrtd at aca fageen: Ts permet a ree | 
AAATAAT AE qo AEE: WTR At 
atah param brahma sadadvitiyam | 
. _ visuddhavijnanaghanam niraijanam 
 ~prasintamddyantavihinam akriyam 
nirantardnandarasasvariipam |; . 
_ nirastaméyakrtasarvabhedam 7 = 
| nityam dhruvam niskalamaprameyam le 
aripamavyaktamandkhyam avyayam 
jyotth svayam kifcid idam cakasti1; __ 
jratrjnanajieyasinyam anantam nirvikalpakam | 
kevalékhandacinmatram param tattvam vidurbudhap 
aheyamanupadeyam manovacémagocaram bo ; . 
aprameyamanddyantam brahma pirnam ‘mahanmahah aT 
- Therefore, the Supreme Brahman is the real; without a second; 
compacted of pure intelligence; free from defect; serene; without 
beginning and end; actionless; of the nature of unremitting bliss; 
free from all differences wrought by maya; permanent; unchanging; 
pure; beyond the faculty of reasoning; formless; subtle, without . 
name; immutable; such an effulgence, Brahman, shines, | | 
| VIVEKACODAMANI _ 256 
The wise know it to be devoid of the trichotomy of the knower, 
knowledge and the known; limitless; without variety; as pure in- 
finite intelligence; as the supreme Truth. | 
__ It can be neither thrown away nor taken up; it is beyond mind 
and speech, immeasurable without beginning or end; it is Brahman 
which is superlatively full, the Light of all lights, | 
As the world has no separate reality, as it is only a name by 
virtue of its being a super-imposition, therefore, the supreme Brah- 
man is unsublatable not having a second of a different kind. It is 
_ pure knowledge without an object, untouched by ajfiana. It is with- 
out change having neither birth nor destruction. It is with-— 
out form being all compacted of limitless bliss. 
nirastamayakrtasarvabhedam: That from which, or that in 
which all differences wrought by maya have been cast off. There- 
fore, without difference i.e., devoid of like cr internal differences. 
nityam: permanent having no beginning or end. Being action- 
less, it is permanent, unchanging; firm; taintless; partless; beyond 
(ordinary) knowledge; devoid of anything being needed to illumine 
It; formless (Vide the Sruti: asabdam asparsam ariipam avyayam 
(Katha.) “not liable to sound or touch, formless, and undecaying” 
and also the teaching: “it is not apprehended by sight” (na caksusa 
grhyate): therefore subtle. By the word anakhyam, it is conveyed 
that It is beyond speech: devoid of name; for a genus (jati), a qua- 
lity (guna) or an action (karma) or relation (sambandha) cannot 
be predicated of It to warrant any activity respecting It (and to 
justify Its being given a name). 
avyayam: undecaying. 
jyotih svayam: ‘Self-effulgent; not iHuminable by any other — 
thing. 
This something which cannot be spoken of in words shines. 
In order to firmly establish the conviction of the ‘Sisya in It, 
the guru repeats Brahman’s characteristics quoting éruti. It is de- 
void of the trinity of the knower, knowledge and the object of know- 
ledge. That is because It is limitless, without the three kinds of 
limitation of. time, space, and object. It is nirvikalpa, that is, not — 
admitting varying conceptions. It is pure limitless intelligence only, 
free from association with all kinds of upadhis, unlimited, pure 
jfiana only. The wise know It as such a supreme truth. As It is 
one’s own atman, It can neither be discarded nor taken up. It is. 
256 VIVEKACODAMANI 
unattainable by mind and speech. Vide the sruti: yato vdco nivar- 
tante apraépya manasa saha (Taitt.). ‘That from wince words Te- 
turn, without attaining It along with the mind.’ | 
_ @prameyam: incomprehensible to the ordinary intelligence; but 
enveloped (attainable) by a mind modified (disciplined) by -hearing 
the scriptural texts and the words of the guru (Sravana), reflection | 
(manana) and profound meditation (nididhydsana). 
anidyantam: without the limitations of time and place; there- 
fore the full or plenary and big; which makes the sun etc., shine 
(mahah means lustre; jyotih which is Brahman). , | | 
Thus the Tatpadartha has been clearly analysed. 
| 243 a. | 
After examining and determining the significance of the two 
padarthas, Tvam and Tat, the guru proceeds to deal with the mean- 
' ing of the sentence: tat tvam asi. | | 
| TeaIaTea ae aATaTAT: 
aera: witeat: afacary | 
. NT aatercaratiat aea- 
| Reena oferta: Thee 
tattvampadabhyam abhidhiyamanayoh 
-krahmatmanoh sodhitayor yadittham | 
‘Srutyad tayostattvamasiti samyak 
ekatvameva pratipddyate muhuh 1 
| Of Brahman and atman (Jiva) thus indicated by the 
_words Tat and Tvam and whose meanings have been thus 
examined and determined, the oneness alone is repeatedly 
well established by the Sruti—Tattvamasi. 
| In the sentence Tattvamasi, by the word tat ‘Brahman. as quali- 
fied by creatorship etc. (preservation and dissolution) of the world 
is conveyed. By the word tvam the atman as qualified by the 
mental states of waking etc. (dream and dreamless sleep) is indi- 
cated. As such ‘they are the Isvara and the jiva. These two terms, 
tat and tvam have been examined as aforesaid and they are found 
to be of the nature of pure intelligence. By the expression Tattva- 
masi, as there is no difference, absolute identity between them is 
affirmed clearly nine times in the Chandogyopanisad. 
VIVEKACUDAMANI | | 257 
pratipadyate: is affirmed in the succeeding sloka; uttarena: 
“py what follows’ is understood. | 
| 244 
Gad attafaaaty areaat: 
| farertsatrafaegetren: | 
wartaaraea WaT: 
 mrEAureat: GTATTAaE: UXT 
aikyam tayor laksitayor na vacyayoh | 
nigadyate ‘nyonyaviruddhadharminoh , 
- khadyotabhanvoriva rajabhrtyayoh | 
___kiipamburasyoh paramanumervoh 7 
a These two (Jiva and Igvara) are of mutually oppused 
- qualities like the glow-worm and the sun, like the servant - 
and the king, like the well and the ocean and like the atom © 
and the earth. By the sentence tattvamasi identity is « 
affirmed between them taking, not their literal meaning, © 
but their implied meaning. : 
In the matter of limited knowledge and pmnisciencs: the exam- 
ples of the glow-worm and the sun are given as the one is of very 
limited brightness and the other is of unlimited splendour. In the 
matter of one who is ordered and the one who orders, the example 
of the servant and the king is given. Vide the Sruti, dhisdsmdat 
vateh pavate. “By fear of him the wind blows” etc. In the matter 
of limited joys and unlimited bliss, the examples of well and ocean 
are given. In the matter of being particular and universal, the ex- 
amples of atom and the earth are giveri. Taken in their literal mean- 
- ing, as they are of opposed natures, there cannot be any identity 
between Jiva and Iévara. But in their implied meaning, their iden- 
tity is understood in accordance with the canons for determining the 
purport of a ‘sentence like the beginning etc., of a discourse. 
245 | 
The reason for their mutual opposition is given. 
aatfacnnsaaarfernferay 
T aaa: aferaqrfirte: 
— §aeq arar agattaatet 
aiaeT Bret YT TST BLT: Awa I 
V.C. —18 
258 | VIVEKACUDAMANI 
tayorvirodho’yam updadhikalpito 
na vastavah kascidupédhiresah -| 
iasya maya mahadadikaranam | 
jivasya karyam srnu paficakosah 1 | 
The opposition between them is imagined on account of 
their upadhis (limitations). This upadhi is not real. Listen! 
Maya which is the cause of mahat etc., is the upadhi of 
Igvara; the five sheaths which are the effects of Maya are 
the upadhi of jiva. | 
This opposition between the two words in their. literal - sense 
which militates against their identity is imagined as a result of 
upadhi. It is not real, ie., not inherent. By the expression ‘upa- 
dhiresah’ the nature of the upadhi is given. Maya is given as the 
upadhi of the tatpadartha, viz., igvara. It is the cause of the entire 
world compacted of mahat, aharhkara, the five tanmatras etc. The 
_ five sheaths constitute the upadhi of the tvampadiartha, the jiva; vide . 
the égruti: karyopadhirayam jivah kdéranopddhirisvarah (Svet).: 
“this jiva has the effect for his up&dhi; igvara has the cause for His 
upadhi.” | 
- -$rnu: listen. 
246 
wataqtal asitaarera: 
arqatara A IY a Sita: 
UG atereg weed dem: 
aaa TAY T TAT Hawa 
 etavupaddhi parajtwayostayoh 
samyan nirdse na paro na jivah | 
rajyam narendrasya bhatasya khetakah 
tayorapohe na bhato na raja 
When these upadhis of the lévara and the jiva are 
effectively removed, there is no Igvara and no jiva. A king- 
dom is the symbol of a king, and a shield, of a warrior. 
When they are removed, there is no king or warrior. 
These two, maya and the five koéas are the upadhis of Iévara 
and the jiva respectively: vide the érutis: ndtra kacana bhidasti, 
neha nénasti kivicana (Katha.); asango hyayam purusah; asango nahi 
sajjate (Brh.), ete. ‘There is no difference here; there is no mani- 
foldness here; connectionless, it does not attach to anything etc.” 
VIVEKACODAMANI | 259 
When, as conveyed bv these Srutis, which deal with the tat and tvam 
padarthas, their respective upadhis are completely removed, then 
there is no Isvara or jiva. Both are of the nature of pure intelligence 
and there is no differentiating mark between them. The examples 
for these are given. The kingdom is the upadhi or differentiating 
mark of the king, the shield of the warrior. When they are taken 
cff, in their absence there is no warrior or King. | 
247 
To the question, how the removal of the upadhi is to be effec cted 
it is answered: 
ward aren gta afaecag 
frcafa sain afead gar 
| afarararargtaaaca 
aalfaura: HteT FAA TES 
-athata ddesa iti srutissvayam 
nisedhati brahmani kalpitam dvayam ; 
 Srutipramdandnugrhitayuktya | | 
tayornirasah karaniya ittham 1 
By the words ‘Now, this is the injunction”, the sruti dy 
itself forbids the imposition of imagined duality in Brahman. 
The removal of the two (upadhis) is te be thus effected by | 
reasoning supported by sruti texts. ae 
By the words athdta ddesah neti neti ( Brh): “‘this is the injunc- 
tion as not (this), as not (this),” the Sruti forbids the attribution of 
duality in Brahman. The meaning of the word iti is idam, ‘this’. 
Duplication (in the form neti neti) is to prohibit the attribution of 
reality to all perceived objects. Whatever is apprehended as ‘this’ 
is not existent being different from the substratum—not being self- 
existent. As the sruti itself forbids the supér-imposition in this 
manner, the elimination of the upadhis of the form of maya (in res- 
pect of iSvara) and the five kogas {in respect .of jiva) must be done 
by reasoning supported by the declarations of sruti. The negation 
must be effected in the manner to be explained presently. — | 
| 248 
Tart gecearerag cquaea 
qe aa ATTRA ‘saute 
wa: TRAE HT TET: nee 
260 _ -VIVEKACUDAMANI — 
neaam nedam kalpitatvanna satyam 
rajjau drstavydlavat svapnavacca | 
ittham drsyam saédhuyuktyd vyapohya 
jreyah pascdd ekabhavastayor yah 1 
This is not (real), this is not (real), because it is im- 
agined like the serpent in the rope and like (objects seen in 
a) dream. Thus eliminating by proper reasoning (every- 
_ thing) seen, their identity must be understood. 
By the first ‘idam’ in ‘nedam’ (na idam) is to be understood maya 
which is the upadhi of ISvara; by the second ‘idam’ the upadhi of 
jiva, namely, the five kogas. The negative is used twice to indicate 
that each of them must be eliminated. Maya is the cause, the five- 
fiold sheaths are the effecis because they are the imagined. So 
neither is real. The sruti: bhiiyascante visvamaydnivritih (Svet.) 
“again at the end there is an extinction of cosmic maya”, declares 
that maya is subject to destruction. That the five-fold sheaths are 
liable to perception and vanishing (drstanastasvabhava) has already 
been explained as they are not continuous and persisting in the three 
states of consciousness. The Gita also says: mémeva ye prapadyante 
maéyametam taranti te: ‘Those who take refuge in Me only cross 
_ this maya.” That maya belongs to the perceptible category is de- 
clared by the Sruti: te dhyaénayogadnugaté apasyan devatmasaktim sva- 
gundair nigidham (Svet.): “Those who have pursued the dhyana yoga 
perceived the Sakti of the Supreme concealed by His qualities”. 
Hence, it is clear that the upadhi in the form of maya does not. really 
exist. For, if it were real, it will not disappear; vide the Gita which 
says: ndabhdvo vidyate satah: “That which is sat (real) will rot 
become non-existent”. Even so, the five-fold kaSas too are not real 
if properly examined. For, the intelligent pupil said earlier, ‘I do 
not see anything except universal void’. Therefore, like the serpent 
seen (imagined) in the rope and like objects seen in a dream, neither 
of the afuresaid upaddhis is real. Thus, having eliminated by proper 
reasoning based on Sruti all that is seen, then, the oneness (identity) 
or non-difference of the two limitational aspects of pure intelligence 
is to be known. | a 
Sadhu yuktyé: Sruti-anusgarinya yuktya: by reasoning in 
accordance with Sruti. ekabhdivah: bhedabhavah: absence of dif- 
ference. a cy : 
249 
aaed at serra qaedt aatceqesazacafags | 
et HAT T aasageat farqrariwada wewq ure 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 3 261 
tatastu tau laksanayd sulaksyau 
tayorakhandaikarasatvasiddhaye | 
néilam jahatud na tathajahatya 
kintibhayarthaikatayaiva bhavyam I 
Therefore the two terms (That and Thou) are to be 
properly understood by their implied meanings in order to 
to obtain the import of absolute identity between them. 
This is to be done neither by total rejection (of the literal 
- meaning) rior by total non-rejection; but by a combination 
of both. 
tatah: therefore i.e., Because after the rejection of what is 
merely seen (namely the apparent duality), the identity between 
them (the tatpadaértha and the tvampaddrtha) is to be known only 
from gastra. These two being thus thoroughly examined (all upadhis 
being eliminated. from them), they should be properly understood 
by reference to the appropriate implied meaning (laksana), by a 
proper understading of the word and its meaning in the context of 
‘the import aided by memory. laksnaya gakyasambandhah laksana; 
taya: by the secondary or amPUee canine, sulaksyau: must be clear- 
ly established. 
In this connection, the following definition of laksand is given 
in Sri Sankara’s Svatmaniripana: méandntaroparodhat mukhydar- 
thasyaparigrahe jate/mukhyavinikrte’rthe yd vrttissatva laksand 
prokta|| This means: If, by reason of its contradicting some other 
criterion, the literal meaning is not to be accepted, that mental modi- 
fication (understanding) which is connected with the literal mean- 
ing is called laksané. i.e., when the literal meaning cannot be 
adopted due to its being contradictory to other criteria of truth, 
and when by itself it does not make sense, the mental modification 
by the words not in dissonance with primary meaning is called — 
laksana. In the present context the identity between the qualified 
substantives (‘that’ and ‘thou’) is contradicted. Therefore, two 
atmans (tha Jivatman and the Paramatman) shculd be understood 
divested of their qualities and then, there will arise the identity of 
the respective substantives. This is further explained as follows in 
the Svétmaniripana: “The literal meaning of the word tvam ‘thou’ 
relates to the imposition of the features of the body, the senses etc., 
on the jivatman and to the attribution of doership (kartrtva) etc., 
to it. That understanding of the witness of the body and the senses 
and which is distinct from them is the implied meaning of ‘thou’. 
That which is to be understood by the words of the Vedanta, that 
262 | VIVEKACUDAMANI 
which is the material cause of the entire universe and which is end- 
owed with omniscience is the literal meaning of the word. tat ‘That,’ 
the Intelligence (caitanya) which is free from ali kinds of limita- 
tions, which transcends the universe, which is ever pure and non- 
dual, which is indestructible and which is to be known by realisa- 
tion is the implied meaning of the word ‘tat’.” It is also said: ‘‘One 
is an object of perception; the other is beyond perception. One 
has a second; the other is all-comprehensive. The two are opposed 
to each other. Therefore they are to be reconciled by their implied 
meanings.” The word ‘thou’ refers to what is an object of percep- 
tion and the word ‘that’ refers to what is beyond perception since the 
sense of the ‘I’ is absent in respect of it. Similar is the case with 
the universality of Isvara, and duality and particularity of jiva. It 
may be argued: ‘Thus the two are mutually opposed. How can they 
be reconciled into an identity? This is not warranted by other 
canons of reasoning’. In this situation, the two words are to be 
understood divested of their accretions and with reference to their 
implied meanings in consonance with their import as indicated by 
the six criteria for determining it. 
Laksanas are of three kinds: jahallaksand, ajahallaksana and 
jahadajahallaksand. In the present context, the third is to be 
adopted. 
tayorakhandaikarasatvasiddhaye: . For the. proper understand- 
ing of the combination of words so as to comprehend the unlimited 
unitary significance. The Vaékya Vitti says: samsargo va visisto va 
vakydrtho nétra sammaiah; akhandaikarasatvena vakyartho vidu-. 
gam matah: “The meaning of a sentence is not to be apprehended 
‘by the mere combination of meanings (padartha ) or the meanings 
of words taken separately and then combined. The wise interpret 
it on the basis of unlimited identical significance.” [In the one case, 
the connection of the meaning of the two words (padartha-sam- 
bandha) is the meaning of the sentence. For example, in the sent- 
ence ‘ghatam dnaya’: bring the pot, its meaning may be either ‘ghata- 
karmakam 4nayanam’, bringing has the pot for its object of activity, 
or ghata-anayanayoh karmakriyabhavah’, the relation of the pot and 
bringing, corresponds to the object of action and the process of 
action ] 
(The idea is that the words in a sentence may. be understood 
. from the point of view of the combination of meanings or from the 
pont of view of connected meanings. The former is samsarga and 
_ VIVEKACUDAMANI | 263 
the latter is visista. This interpretation of a sentence does not, how- | 
ever, apply in the case of ‘tat tvam asi’. Here there is neither com- 
_ bination between the meanings of ‘tat’ and ‘tvam’ nor is it a case of 
connected meanings of ‘tvam’ and ‘tat’). 
Jahallaksanaé is thus explained in Svatmaniripana: Rej ecting 
the literal meaning in its entirety, some other meaning consistent 
with it is to be understood. | 
Jahati laksand (or J ahallaksanaé) is as in gatgaéyam ghosah, a 
hamlet on the Ganga. Here. it is not proper to say that the hamlet 
of the cowherds indicated by the word ‘ghosah’ is on the floods in- — 
dicated by the word ‘Ganga’. So the word ‘ganga’ has to be under- 
stood as meaning the bank of the Ganga. But if it is said that it is. 
to be understood as ‘Gangatire ghosah’, ‘hamlet on the Ganga bank,’ 
then it will become ajahallaksand. If it is said to mean ‘tire ghogsah’ 
(omitting the word Ganga), the literal meaning with reference to 
Ganga will not be conveyed and so it will be jahallaksana. In the 
‘present context, it is said in the loka ‘nalam jahatya’, that it is not — 
to be understood on the basis of jahallaksana. For, one part of the 
literal meaning is adopted. That means that the rule of jahallak- 
sana, that the literal meaning is to be entirely Rejected is not ful-. 
filled. | 
In the same way, janatntenes too will not apply here for the 
understanding of the unlimited unitary essence. Ajahallaksana has 
for its import both the literal meaning and the implied meaning. 
Hence it is said that which conveys another meaning without dis- 
carding the literal sense is called ajahati laksana (or ajahallak- 
sana) as in ‘the red gallops’. Red, understood literally as merely 
a colour cannot be said to gallop. So, it is to be understood in its _ 
implication as referring to a horse which is red. In the object quali- 
fied by the word ‘red’, the quality ‘red’ is taken without being dis- 
carded. ee it is ajahati i.e., the literal meaning is not dis- 
carded. | 
In the present context (of tat tvam asi) the literal meaning is | 
rejected. So, it is not to be understood on the basis of ajahallak- 
sana; but it is to be understood as conveying both jahad and ajahal- 
 Jaksan& in order to get the sense of absolute identity between them. 
The character is thus explained: Where one part of the literal mean-. 
ing is rejected, and the other part is conveyed, that is jahadajahal- 
laksana as in so’yam dvijah: “He is this twice-born”’. Here ‘he’ 
(sah) refers to what is not now seen, but was previously se 2n; ‘this’ 
264 | VIVEKACUDAMANI 
(ayam) refers to what is now seen. The distinctions of ‘that’ and 
‘this’ are omitted and the reference is made to the remaining feature 
' ‘twice-born’ which is identical in the two cases. In the expression 
‘tattvamasi’ what is now seen (pratyaksa) and what is not seen 
-(paroksa) are to be discarded and the sense understood after such 
rejection. Indicating the ‘cidvastu’, i.e., the pure intelligence, by 
the word ‘asi’ (art), the identity between them is conveyed. Thus 
jahadajahallaksana refers to an understanding which rejects one part 
of it and retains another. In this context, this is to be adopted for 
the proper understanding of the combination of the words tat (that) 
and tvam (thou). 
| 250 & 251 
The same is explained prefacing it by an illustration. 
a tazatsaratg aaa fasgaat maqeq Head 1 | 
wa TM avandia area faeraatqaaa facar URKON | 
ase farrraaat aaa: wavsata: Titled a: | 
Ua AeTaTeaTAT Bea pane ili ut 244 uN 
sa devadatto’yamitiha caikata 
viruddhadharmamsam apasya kathyate 
 yatha tathad tattvamasiti vakye 
viruddhadharman ubhayatra hitva 1 
 samlaksya cinmatrataya sadétmanoh 
_ akhandabhavah pariciyate budhath | 
- evam mahav dkyasatena kathyate 
_ brahmatmanoraikyam akhaydabhavah 1) 
As in the sentence ‘This is that Devadatta,’ the identity 
is stated rejecting the opposed qualities, so too in the sent-_ 
ence ‘That thou art’, rejecting the opposed qualities in both 
words, the character of the real atman as being limitless 
intelligence is experienced by the wise. Thus the identity 
between Brahman and the atman and their unlimitedness 
is conveyed by a hundred great scriptural declarations. 
In the sentence ‘This is that Devadatta’, the word ‘that’ refers 
to being qualified by another place and past time. The word ‘this’ 
refers to being qualified by this (present) place and time. As the 
‘qualifying epithets are quite different, the identity of the qualified 
terms does not seem to stand to reason. The sentence conveys that 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 265 
Devadatta seen in some other place and time in the past has now 
come here. This being understood, the purport of the sentence is 
to indicate that it was the same person who was seen there and then 
that is seen here and nov’. Therefore, the opposite qualities of 
‘there’ and ‘then’, and ‘here’ and ‘ now’ implicit in the words ‘that’ 
and ‘this’ in This is that Devadatta’ are discarded, the substantive | 
‘Devadatta’ alone is retained. Even as identity — between the two 
(‘that’ Devadatta and: ‘this’ Devadatta) is affirmed denying the dif- 
ference, so too, in the sentence, ‘That thou art’. (Tattvamasi), ‘the 
causal upadhi of “that” (referring to iSvara being the cause of the 
origination etc. of the world)’ and the effect-upadhi of “thou” (re- 
ferring to the adventitious qualities of the jiva), the perceivability 
of the jiva and the imperceivability of the Paramatman, the univer- 
sality, that is paripirnatva of Igvara and the duality i.e. having 
another beside it—sadvitiyatva of jiva,—all these opposed features 
are discarded. The jiva and Isvara are apprehended as pure intelli- 
gence; their limitlessness, ie., their being devoid of limitation by 
other objects is experienced by the wise. Having thus taught the 
identity of the two (Brahman and jiva) with the aid of one text, it 
is said that the same is conveyed by a hundred Leg scriptural dec- 
larations (mahavakyasatena). 
pariciyate: anubhiyate: is experienced. 
252 
After stating the identity between the jiva and Brahman affir- 
matively, the statement conveying the same idea negatively is now 
explained. 
eas laraararawer fa CAAT SATATIANATAA | 
ait qaratatad sett watlg aceareraat aelay | 
marefacta faqzazem fafe TARATAAEVERTTA MER 
asthilam ityetadasannirasya — ee 
siddham svato vyomavadapratarkyam | 
ato mrsématramidam pratitam _ 
jahihi yatsvaétmataya grhitam | 
brahméhamityeva visuddhabuddhyad 
viddhi svamatmainam akhandabodham | — 
After rejecting this unreal in accordance with the scrip- 
tural texts ‘not gross’ etc., realise your atman, which is 
self-established and which, like the sky, is indeterminable 
Therefore, reject this (body) which you think to be the 
266 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
_ atman, as a mere mithya. Know your own atman, which . is. 
limitless cit by your purified intelligence. _ 
- ‘The texts asthilam ananu ahrasvam, adirgham (not gross, “not 
minute, not short, not long) , make the Sisya get over his wrong 
identification of the 4tman with the gross body, and teach the nature 
of Brahman. Therefore, the guru said: discarding all this seen 
gross body (by the criterion that the atman is not gross etc.), this 
self-established Brahman which is like the sky, is indeterminable, 
i.e., which cannot be understood except. by sastra, is to be experi- 
enced as the atman, atarkyam: Except by Sastra, by mere reason- 
ing its nature cannot be understood. | 
siddham svatah:. svatah siddham: being self-established as the 
witness of all rejections. 
vyomavat apratarkyam: impossible to be. reasoned like ie sky. 
For, it cannot be reasoned what is the limit of the sky. 
visuddhabuddhya: by intellect disciplined by reflection and 
meditation (manana and nididhyasana). 
svam atmdnam akhandabodham viddhi: | — your atean to be 
limitless intelligence. 
Therefore, the gross body etc., understood to be the atman on 
account of ajfiana are mere mithya. Discard that. 
mrsadbhitam: what is mithya—non-existent. 
- gahthi: discard. 7 
253 
For easy understanding, the guru instructs the disya briefy in 
the upadesa made by the Rsi Uddalaka to his son averanerd in the 
sixth chapter of the Chandogyopanisad. | 
Rend aH Veta aad woTadataa: 
aacaTaA Ta marenafird WATAAATAG | 
wenratied aa: Tt feat aed a wea cag 
MEATS ARTA TMT ARTA TTT 11 243. 
mytkaryam sakalam ghafadi satatam mrpmatramevabhitah 
tadvat sajjanitam sadétmakam idam 
sanmatramevakhilam 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 267 
yasmannasti satah param a tat satyam sa 
atma svayam 
tasmaét tattvamasi praséntamamalam brahmadvayam 
yatparam ij - 
Whatever is made of “clay like the pot, etc. is all 
through clay only always. Similarly, all that is the effect 
of Sat (Brahman) is of the nature of Sat and is entirely 
Sat only. Because there is nothing apart from Sat, that is 
the True, that is itself the Atman. Therefore, That thou art, 
the Supreme, the peaceful, the defectless, the non-dual 
Brahman. 
_mrtkaryam: that which is effectuated out of clay; that which 
has clay as its material cause: ghatadi: pot, spoon, pail etc., every- 
thing made of clay. 
satatam: In all the three periods of time. before it is made, 
after it is made and after it is destroyed. 
abhitah: entirely, in front, on top, behind, beiow and on the 
sides. | 
“-mrnmatrameva: there is nothing in it apart from clay. This 
has been explained earlier in glokas 230 and 231. Similarly, Ssruti. 
texts beginning with sadeva somya idamagra Gsit, ekameradvitiyam, 
tadaiksata tattejo’srjata tadapo’srjata tadannam asrjata (Chand.): 
“That sat, existence alone, dear one, was in the beginning, one only 
without a second; it saw (thought): it created fire, it created water, 
it created food;” and ending with sanmilah somyemah sarvah prajah 
sadayatanah satpratisthih (Chand.): ‘Dear one! All these are rooted 
in Sat, are based on and established. in Sat; teach that whatever is 
said to be ‘sat’ (exists) as in the words ‘ghatassan’ ( ghatah san) 
‘patassan’ (patah san), (the pot exists, the cloth exists), in all of the 
nature of sat is only Sat. This follows by the rule of samanadhi- 
karanya (of common reference to two words. )*? 
Because, apart from Sat namely the Supreme Brahman, there is 
nothing else as the material cause of anything in the world, the true, 
i.e., unsublatable in any of the three periods of time, that is the 
atman, your essential nature. As it is self-luminous, it is not depen- 
dent on anything. Therefore, it is non-dual i.e., devoid of any exis- . 
tential factor apart from its own existence. It is peaceful (praéanta), 
abiding in itself, i.e, unchanging. It is amala, untouched by taint 
of ajfidna etc. Thou art that Supreme Brahman. 
39 See Note on Samanadhikaranyam at the end. 
268 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
254 
frarafrcatsaerstavanratta at aT 
frat, agfeeria safe scearareraracaa: | 
AEA AAS WMCILHCTATM GATT AAT 
ACATA ALARA ANPAAAST HATEA ATTA Ut Wav Ui 
nidrakalpitadesakaélavisayajnatradi sarvam yatha 
mithyd tadvadihapi jagrati jagat svajnanakaryatvatah | 
yasmadevam idam Sarirakaranaprangdhamddyapyasat’ 
tasmat tattvamasi prasintam amalam brahmadvayam 
yat param \j 
The place, time, objects and their knower etc., project- 
ed in a dream during sleep are all mithya. So too, here, in 
the waking state, the world that is seen is a projection by 
one’s own ajnana. Likewise, this body, the senses, the 
breath, the ego etc., are all unreal. Therefore, That thou 
art, the peaceful (praSanta), defectless, supreme, non-dual 
- Brahman. | 
The Sruti says: na tatra rathaé na rathayoga na panthano bhavanti, 
atha rathan rathayogan pathah srjate: (Brh.): “There are no chariots 
there, or the horses or paths of the chariots. Hence, it, ie. maya 
projects the chariots, their movements and horses.” Induced by 
the power of sleep, place, time and objects etc., which appear in 
dream, the bodies and organs, all these are not apprehended on wak- 
ing. They are the effects of the defective condition of sleep. Though 
seen (in dream), they are lost (on waking). Whatever is seen and 
lost, drstanasta, is mithyé. Similarly, they are mithya here too in 
the waking state. The reason for this is that they are all effects of 
one’s own ajfana which hides the true nature of the atman as nispra- 
paca, ie., as the lone reality without the taint of the universe. Such 
ajiiana is called milajiaina, the primordial ajnana which conceals 
Brahman and projects the world. The world is the effect of this 
miilajmana. For it is said: ‘yadabodhid idam bhati, yadbodhad 
vinivartate’: “That by reason of Its not being known, this (world) 
appears; and which being known, this (world) disappears”. Vide 
also the texts: yatra tvasya sarvam dtmaivabhit tat kena kam 
pasyet (Brh.): ““Where to him everything was the atman, then what 
can be seen and by whom?” yadajifiénaprabhavena drsyate sakalam 
jagat yajjrndndllayamdpnoti tasmai jrinitmane namah “Obeisance 
to that jmanatman as a result of not knowing which the entire uni- 
verse is seen, and upon which being known it disappears”. The 
Mandikya K@riké also says: ‘jiate dvaitam na_ vidyate’: “If 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 269 
That (Supreme Reality) is known, then there is no place for duality”. 
The entire universe being thus mithya, the body, the senses, the 
breath, the aharnkara ete., which you previously identified with 
the atman, »eing subject to sublation, are all mithyad. So, as before, 
_ it is repeated, Thou art the peaceful, defectless, non-dual supreme 
Brahman. | 
255 
For continuous meditation on Brahman as indicated in sruti, the 
guru explains the truth about Brahman in ten verses and intimates 
the identity between the jiva and Brahman. 7 
ofattfagetiaget anreamateatrry | 
auarefaqaaata wat aal acaafa araarenta REN 
jatinitikulagotraduragam naimaripagunadosavarjitam | | 
desakdlavisayativarti yat brahma tattvamasi bhavayitmant yy). 
Meditate in your mind that you are that Brahman 
which is far from caste and family and lineage, which is free 
from the limitations of name and form and is beyond space, 
time and objects of sense. | 
jatinitikulagotradiiragam: jati: castes like Brahmana etc., nitih: 
established proper order; kula: race or family. Brahman transcends 
the distinctions of castes like Brahmana etc., of family, of gotra etc., 
as they pertain to the gross and the subtle bodies. Vide the Mundaka 
text: yattadadresyam agréhyam agotram avarnam. 
nimaripagunadosavarjitam: vide the Sruti: ‘akdso ha vai nima 
namarapayornirvahita te yadantara tad brahma’ and ‘kevalo nir- 
gunasca’ (Chénd.). The ca in the second text: ica an easel indicates 
that it is also ‘nirdosa’ free from any taint. 
The word ‘ananta’ in the Sruti ‘satyam jndnamanantam brahme’ 
shows that It (Brahman) is devoid of the three kinds of paricchedas 
or limitations pertaining to deSa, (place), kala (time), and vastu 
(other objects). Brahman transcends desa, kala and visaya. Hence 
It is said to be ‘degakalavisayativarti’. Thou art that Brahman which 
is like this. Meditate on That in thy intellect as identical with thy- 
self. 
atmani: buddhau: in the intellect. 
| 256 
wat aNeaTMttat Mat faroatrayy: 
wefaquarante seq ag wer eae MTATERET 1 GS T 
270 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
yatparam sakaluvdgagocaram gocaram vimalabodhacaksusch ; _ 
as ac anddivastu yad brahma tattvamasi : 
bhavaydtmani ti - 
That Brahman which is absolutely superior, beyond all 
speech, but which is within reach to the eye of intelligence, 
free from every defect, which is compacted of pure cit and 
is beginningless, That thou art. Realise That in thy mind. 
yat param: that which is superior to everything. 
sakalavégagocaram: beyond the reach of all speech. vide the 
Sruti yato vaco nivartante (Taitt.): Because even the Upanisads 
explain it only by implication (laksana: 
gocaram vimalabodhacaksusah: attainable by that eye of wisdom 
which is free from defect; i.e., attainable only by jaana; vide éruti: 
jnanaprasddena visuddhasattvah tatastu tam pasyate niskalam 
dhyayamanah (Mund.). | 3 | 
Suddha cidghanam: Suddha: nirvisaya: that cit which does not 
refer to sense-objects. Or, that which is both pure (Suddha) and 
compacted of cit (cidghana}; of the nature of Jnana free from every 
limitation (upadhi). 
anddi vastu: that which is that eternal true Being, 
Thou art that meslly: Meditate qn It in the mind. 
257 
asfaelafamiin atfnggifad 4 chifiewnfr 
aqacadanaaaaia az Fai avaafa wraarenfa i Rue 1s 
sadbhirarmibhirayogi yogihrd- — | 
bhavitam na karanairvibhavitam 
_ buddhyavedyam anavadyabhiti yad | 
orahma tativamasi bhavayatmani, 1 
That which is not affected by the six waves, which is 
meditated on in the minds of the yogins, which cannot be 
apprehended by the sense-organs, which is unknowable by 
the intellect, which is flawless excellence, thou art That. 
Meditate on It in thy mind. 
The six waves: hunger, thirst, grief, delusion, old age and death. 
As they arise again and again, one upon the other, they are called 
waves. Brahman is unconnected with these. For, hunger and thirst 
relate to prana, sorrow and delusion to the mind, and old age and 
death to the body. | 
VIVEKACOUDAMANI 7 271 
yogihrdbhavitam: yogins are those who have restrained the 
mind from sense-objects. Meditated on by their hearts, ie., their 
minds, with reverence and concentration. 
na karanairvibhadvitam: not apprehended by the sense-organs. 
Vide the érutis: na caksusd (Mund.);na tatra caksur gacchati; na — 
vag gacchati (Kena): “It is not attained by the eye, not even by 
speech; not by the mind So It be attained.” “There the eye does 
not go; speech does not go.” | 
: - buddhayavedyam: not knowable by the (ordinary) intellect, | 
for it is devoid of sound, touch, form etc.; impossible to be compre- 
hended by an intellect which is not sharp. 
- anovadyabhati: of an excellence which is untainted by ¢ any de- 
fect; vide the Brahmasitra: vaisamyanairghrrye na, sapeksatvat: 
“Inequality (of dispensation) and cruelty (the Lord can) not (be 
reproached with), owing to the consideration of other factors,” and 
the Sruti, niravadyam (Svet.). Thou art that Brahman which is 
of this nature, Meditate on It in thy mind. - # 
258 
aTaneraaTHTAa CATIA Tage | 
fase faetaraqfgna aer acania ataarenia aye ut 
bhrantikalpitajagatkalasrayam | 
svasrayam ca sadasadvilaksanam 
niskalam nirupamadnam rddhimat 
brahma tattvamsi bhavaydtmani || 
That Brahman which is the substratum of the part 
which is the universe superimposed on it, which is esta- 
blished in itself, which is distinct from the sat and asat, 
which has no parts, which is incomparable and magnificent 
—That thou art. Meditate on That in thy mind. 
Brahman is the substratum of that part which is projection of 
delusion and which is of the form of the world; vide the Sruti: pado’- — 
sya sarvabhitani: (Purusa Sukta): “all creatures are a fourth of 
Him”’. | 
svagrayam: established in itself: vide the égruti: “sa bhaga- | 
vah kasmin pratisthita iti; sve mahimni” (Chand.): 
4 To the question if God is tainted with - ‘partiality and cruelty in dispensing - 
the happiness and misery of creatures, it is replied that it is not so as inequality 
among mep arises from their merit and demerit. 
272 VIVEKACODAMANI 
~ “In what, Oh Great One, is that established? In its own ex- 
cellence. ” The truth is That itself, It has no support. ee 
sadasadvilaksanam: which is different from the five elements, 
_ pratyaksa-paroksa-paficabhitavilaksanam [pratyaksa elements 
ea ‘e neue: water, and fire; eee are air (vayu) and eeraee 
_ (aka$a)]. . eke 
niskalam: without parts. a —— 
nirupamadnam: without anything like it; vide the sruti: na tat- 
samascabhyadhikasca arsyate: “nothing is seen equal or superior 
to it”. es | oe 
“rddhimat: magnificient; vide the sruti: esa sarvesvarah (Mand. ) 
: “He is Lord of ail” and satyakémah satyasarnkalpah: “He whose 
aan are achieved i.e., has no purpose to achieve” (Chand. oF 
That Brahman which is of this nature That thou art; meditate on 
It in thy mind. 
259 
waafericrqreaeatiaratagimeaay | 
farvaqerTaAaTSey Wal acaata wraarenfa 1 24e ur 
ja nmavrddhiparinatyapaksayavyadhindsanavihinam 
avyayam | 
visvasrstyavanaghitakéranam brahma tattvamasi. | 
bhdvayaétmani “Aik | 
That Brahman is without birth, growth, change, decay, 
disease and death; indestructible. It is the cause of the 
creation, preservation and dissolution of the universe. That 
thou art. Meditate on It in thy mind. a 
janma: : origination. Includes existence ensuing upon origi- 
nation, | 
vrddhih: growth of the limbs. 
parinatih: change, i.e., formation of another form by sitiaesi 
etc., in fruits like mango etc. : 
apaksayah: decay of limbs. 
' pyadhih: disease. 
nésanam: final change. 
_tair vihinam: devoid of ene i.e. devoid of the six forms of 
tratisformation. | 
- VIVEKACUDAMANI 273 
Therefore avyayam: indestructible, either of its own accord or 
by the action of another, i.e., eternal. | 
visvasrstyavanaghadtakaranam: cause of the creation, preserva- 
tion and dissolution of the universe. Vide the ruti: yato va imini 
bhiiténi jayante, yena jaténi jivanti, yat prayantyabhisamvisanti 
(Taitt.): “That from which all these beings originate; that by 
which all that are born live; that into which at the end they enter”; 
idam sarvamasrjata (Taitt.): “He created all this”; akadsah para- 
yanam (Taitt.); dkdsam pratyastam yanti (Ch.): “akaga i. e., (here) 
the Paramatman is the substratum of the entire universe. The en- 
tire universe attains its dissolution in akaéa, i.e. the Paramatman”. 
That which is the cause of the creation, preservation and dissolution 
of the entire universe. 
Thou art that Brahman. Meditate on It in thy mind. 
260 
AEAATATT CATA T frrae soeiinaraar | 
facaqecaianaraia az aa acanta wetter 1 
astabhedam anapastalaksanam nistarangajalarasiniscalam L 
0 nityamuktamavibhaktamarti yad brahma tattvamasi — 
bhavayatmani u 
_ That Brahman from which all difference has disap- | 
peared, which is inseparably characterised by the features 
_ (of sat, cit and ananda), which is unmoving like a wave- 
less ocean, which is ever free and which is of undifferen- _ 
tiated form—thou art That. Meditate on That in thy | 
mind. 
astabhedam: that from which all differences have iiciasianad 
Vide the Srutis: ekamevddvitiyam (Chand.): “One only without a 
second”; idam sarvam yadayam dtma (Ménd.). “all that is this is 
the 4tman.” _ ae 
anapastalaksanam: having the nature of sat cit aaa ananda as 
its inseparable marks always. 
nistarangajalarasiniscalam:  nistarangajalarasi: . Ocean free 
from waves — like that, nigcalam: unmoving. | - 
nityamuktam: free from bondage always. 
V.C..— 1 9 
140 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
| -avibhaktamirti: Though spoken of as having its three features 
of sat, cit and djnanda, as there is no internal difference in the im- 
plied meaning of that which is expansive, that which has an un- 
differentiated nature, ice., without differentiating parts, or having no 
limbs or parts. 
That Brahman thou art. Meditate on This in thy mind. 
261 | 
UHRA ATABHITA ATLA ATAHITAT | 
START TT cat ae areata wraarenfa 1 Veq Ut 
ekamevo sadanekakéranam karandntaranirasakéranam | 
karyakdranavilaksanam svayam brahma tattvamasi 
bhavaydtmani jy 
That being one only, is the cause of the multiplicity, 
superimposed. Itself it is not caused by anything else. It 
is distinct both from the effect and the cause and exists by 
Itseli. That Brahman thou art. Meditate on This in thy 
mind. 
ekam sad anekakaranam: That which exists as one only is the 
cause as the substratum of the many that are sumperimposed on It. 
kéranantaranirasakaranam: In accordance with the éruti 
pardsya Ssaktirvividhaiva sriyate (Svet.): “its supreme power is 
heard of variously’; not depending on a cause different from It; be- 
ing the witness of the negation of everything that is seen, the cause 
(ground) of the caeeaea of akas sa etc., by the expressions ‘neti 
neti. 
kdryakédranavilaksanam: By the Sruti: tadetad brahmapirvam 
anaparam (Brh.): “This supreme Purusa is another spoken of as 
the Paramatma.” Different from Karyam, the effect and from 
Karanam, the cause. Karyam is the world; Karanam is maya — dis- 
tinct from them. Also vide the Gita: uttamah purusastavanyah para- 
maétmetyudahrtah: But distinct from these is the sere Spirit 
spoken of as the Supreme Self. 
Though it is said in this Sloka that it is the cause of the many 
(anekakaranam), yet, since the effect has been shown to be mithy§, 
the causation too should be considered to be mithya. The attri- 
bution of the qualities of origination, preservation and dissolution | 
are to be understood only as indicative qualities (tatasthalaksanas) 
VIVEKACUDAMANI | 275 
distinct from constituent qualities (svarapalaksanas).*! 
262 
fatawernererrart aercachasatt TT 
faeamaage farsa sar aeaafa sraorenfa 11 262 
nirvikalpakamanalpamaksaram yatksaraksaravilaksanam 
| param | 
nityamavyayasukham niradfijanam brahma tattvamasi 
bhavaydtmani 
Without any internal variety, not small, imperishable, 
distinct from perishable and imperishable, the transcen- 
dent, the eternal, of undiminishing bliss, free from the dark- 
ness (of ajfidna)—-That Brahman thou art. Meditate on 
This in thy mind. | | 
nirvikalpekam: without variety; for, all variety is the result of 
maya. So, devoid of any variety. 
analpam: not small, superlatively big. Vide the Srutis: yo vai 
bhiima jydyan akasat (Chand.); “that which is infinite: vaster than 
the sky”. | 
a aksaram: | undecaying or all~enveloping. | 
yat ksaraksaravilaksanam: Vide the Gita, dvavimau purusau 
loke ksarascadksara eva ca, ksarassarvani bhitani kitastho’ksara 
ucyate |, There are these two beings in the world, the perishable and 
the imperishable; the perishable comprises all creatures; the immu- _ 
table is called the imperishable.” Previously it was said to be 
karyakaranavilaksanam: different from the effects and their cause. 
The same is now differently expressed as distinct from the perish- 
ing world and immutable maya. | | 
Therefore, param: super-excellent, superior to everything. : 
4! That which does not continue as long as its indicated object and is different 
from it, is tatasthalaksana or indicative quality. A lamp-post in front of a house 
or a crow sitting on its roof is the tatasthalaksana of the house. The house will 
continue even though the lamp-post is removed or the crow flies away. The lamp- 
post and the crow are different from it and do not constitute the essential quality 
of the house; they are its tatasthalaksanas or indicative qualities. They are not 
svaripalaksanas of the house, its essential qualities. The colour of man’s skin is 
his svaripalaksana, being inseparable from him. | 
Similarly, creatorship etc. are God’s tatasthalaksanas: Sat, Cit and Ananda are 
His svarupalaksanas, In fact, sat, cit and Ananda are not three; they are one — 
in essence. Sat is cit and ananda. Cit and Ananda are also one with ‘sat. Sat- 
cid-anandasvaripa is an integral whole, a three-in-one. 
276 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
nityam: eternal as it is undecaying. Vide the Sruti: nityo nityad- 
nim (Katha). Or it may be taken to mean the transcendent eternal 
(param nityam). 
avyayasukham: of undiminishing bliss. Vide the éruti: yo vai 
bhima tat sukham; nalpe sukham asti (Chand.): “that which is 
infinite, that is bliss; there is no bliss in the finite’: of the nature 
of unlimited bliss. | 
niranjanam: devoid of darkness (of avigyey That Brahman 
thou art. Meditate on That in thy mind. _ 7o 
263 
agua aetna saramermfaf rarer | 
quacaunfated vat ag aeaafa wraaenft ea 
yad vibhati sadanekadha bhramat némaripagunavikriyatmand l 
hemavat svayamavikriyam sada brahma tattvamasi 
_bhavaydtmani ;; 
That Brahman which due to delusion appears variously | 
in the manner of name, form, quality and action and which 
like gold is itself unchanging, know That to be thyself. | 
Meditate on That in thy mind. | 
Even as the one gold appears differently as a bracelet, earring 
etc., and is in itself of an identical form, but seems different in its 
effectuation, so too Brahman is in itself unchanging. But, due to 
delusion, it appears as various in the form of changes in name, form 
and transformation. That Brahman thou art. Meditate on That in 
thy mind. 
a 264 
USARTRAATT ALAL NAM HCAATA TAT I 
wafaqanranad war acaafa araareafa tt yey it 
yaccakadstyanaparam paratparam pratyag ekarasam 
atmalaksanam | 
satyacitsukham anantam avyayam brahma tattvamasi 
bhavaydtmani 3 
That which shines without any activity Mecund Itself, 
which is beyond even the supreme, the inmost Self, of | 
unitary character, of the nature of the Supreme Atman, of | 
Existence-Knowledge-Biiss absolute, endless (infinite), 
_ undecaying—such Brahman art thou. Meditate on That in 
~ thy mind. 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 277 
yat anaparam: In accordance with the sruti: tadetad brahma- 
piirvam anaparam (Brh.): “This Brahman has nothing before or 
after”, i.e., without cause or effect: that which has nothing to effec- 
tuate beyond Itself, iie., devoid of any activity pertaining to any 
object. Gnaparam: na vidyate param karyam yasya: vastubhia- 
takaryasinyam. 
- pardt param: beyond the supreme i.e, Hiranyagarbha or 
beyond ajiana which is the cause of all effectuation. Vide the sruti: 
aksarat paratah parah (Mund.): “Supreme beyond all maya.” By 
the word ‘para’, Hiranyagarbha too may be understood in accordance 
with the sruti: sa etasmat jivaghanét parat param purisayam PUru- 
samiksate (Prasna): ‘He sees the Supreme Purusa residing in the 
heart, the most Supreme beyond all jivas.” 
pratyak: non-different from jiva, the inmost substance of all. 
ekarasam: of unitary character. 
atmalaksanam: By the Sruti: yaccadpnoti yadddatte yaccatti 
visayin tha; yaccasya santato bhavah tasmadatma prakirtitah HW 
“That which attains, takes, which eats the sense-objects, that of which 
this is constant nature is therefore called the atman”; _ possessed of 
such character of the atman. 
satyacitsukham: which is of the nature of Existence, Know- 
ledge and Bliss. : | 
anantam: unlimited. 
avyayam: undecaying, eternal. 
That Brahman thou art. Meditate on That in thy mind. 
265 
srrrairaaeata cad wTaz srtrergtaertar ter ar 
anattacigd wurqad at areata faeries 11 Eq Ut 
_ uktamartham imamatmani svayam unapaye 
prathitayuktibhir dhiya , 
samsayddirahitam karambuvat tena tattvanigamo bhavisyati i 
Meditate in thy mind with approved reasonings on. this 
teaching which has been conveyed to you, free from doubt 
etc., like water in the palm of the hand. By that thou wilt 
get ascertainment of the established truth. 
uktamartham: This teaching (of identity between the jivatman 
and the Paramatman ). 
278 7 VIVEKACODAMANI 
prathitayuktibhih: by famous reasonings: the famous charac- 
ter of reasoning relates to its being in accord with sruti. 
_ dhiya: in the antahkarana free from blemish. 
| adtmani: in the intellect. 
svayam bhavaya: meditate thyself. By that meditation, like 
water in the palm of the hand, it becomes clear, free from doubt. 
evam tattvanigamah: the ascertainment of the truth arises 
thus. _ Sato on eT _ 
- samSayddirahitam: free from doubt etc.,. re mae eere- 
hension, and sense of improbability. 
The word ‘bhavisyati’ is to be understood as modified by the 
adverb: samsayadirahitam. 7 | 
266 
ea atanta vftygacd | 
faara aed qraea a aa | 
aarertarenfa waar feaat 
famrra weit srasrary 11 2e< I 
svam bodhamdatram parisuddhatattvam 
vijndya sanghe nrpavacca sainye | 
taddtmanaivatmani sarvadé sthito 
vilipaya brahmani drsyajatam }) 
_ Realising thyself in the assemblage (of body, sense 
organs aharhkara, form etc.) as pure intelligence, free from 
all wrong ideas, like the king in the army, being ever estab- 
lished in thy own self, merge everything that is seen (the 
entire universe) in Brahman. 
Like the king who is identified in the army which is made up of 
many soldiers by the emblems of the umbrella etc., realising the 
atman by your understanding in this combination of the body, the 
senses, the breath and the ego-sense, as purified truth, as pure in- 
telligence which illumines everything and as unconnected with 
whatever is seen, be securely established always in that cit which 
is your 4tman. brahmani drsyajatam viladpaya: merge all that is 
seen in Brahman in accord with the declaration: “Merge the earth 
in water, the water in fire, fire in the wind (vayu), the wind in the 
sky, the sky in the unmanifest, that again in pure atman. I am 
that Hari, the Pure”: zs 
VIVEKACUPAMANI 279 
“prthivyapsu payo vahnau vahnir vayau nabhasyasau 
nabho’pyavydkrte, tacca suddhe guddho’smyaham harih” 
Thus making sure that every effect has no reality apart from its cause, 
know that everything has no existence apart from the cause of all, 
namely Brahman. 
tattvam: real nature, yathatmyam. 
bodhamétram: sarvavabhasaka roe as pure. intellig. 
ence that illumines everything. 7 
vijnadya: Vivekena anubhuya: realising by your iacitica tied | 
| 267 
aqat qerat acafgeert 
— wertfes eee oeafgetaa 
AHA Aisa TAT WETAT 
Gat ATATSAMTETTAM: 1 VE Ut 
buddhau guhayam sadasadvilaksanam 
brahmasti satyam paramadvitiyam | 
tadatmana yo’tra vased guhayam 
punarna tasydngaguhadpravesah | 
In the cave of the buddhi, there is the Supreme non-dual - 
Brahman which is the ultimate truth and distinct from the | 
: perceivable and the unperceivable. For one who lives in | 
this cave as that Brahman, there is no more ey. for him a 
in the cave of the body. a ee 
sadasadvilaksanam: distinct from the gross which can be 
perceived and the subtle which cannot be perceived. Such secondless 
Supreme Brahman which is the ultimate truth exists in the cave of 
buddhi. Vide the Srutis: yo’'yam vijianamayah pranesu hrdyantar- 
jyotth purusah; sa va esa dtma hrdi. (Brh). As conveyed in the Srutis: 
pratibodhaviditam and drsyate tvagryaya buddhya -stiksmaya 
(Katha), this Brahman cannot be known without the aid of the 
subtle buddhi. As a face is reflected in a mirror which acts as the 
medium of reflection, though Brahman is everywhere, it is said to 
be in buddhi as the buddhivrtti alone removes the concealment and 
receives Brahman in itself. For, in dreamless sleep, its nature can- 
not be comprehended as buddhi is inoperative in it. The expression 
buddhau guhayaém is metaphorical; and the locative here means 
nearness: samipyasaptami, i.e., in the nearhood of the intellect-cave 
280 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
as in pdsdne- vrksah ‘the tree on the stone’ which means. pital ‘the 
tree near the stone’. | 
_ Even though the word guha secs to all the five uheali. yet, 
as the mental and other sheaths are connected with the atman 
through buddhi and as the sheath of bliss (Anandamayakoéa) - can- 
not be clearly known except by buddhi, therefore, the primacy is — 
given to the buddhi which is predominantly of sattva nature. — 
| tadatmand... ... guhapravesah: For that person who lives as 
Brahman in the guha which is the gross and subtle body there is 
no further entrance into the physical. body, i.e., he will not be born 
again. Or, the word meee in the text may be taken as apostra- 
phising the Sisya. 
pravesah: false identification with the body. Such an identifi- 
cation will not arise again. Vide the éruti: na sa punardvartate 
(Chand). and, étmaénam cet vijainiydét ayamasmiti pirusah kimic- 
chan kasya ka@maiya Sariramanusamjvaret (Mund): “He (the libe- 
rated one) does not come back (to samsara)’. If a person knows 
the 4tman in the manner of ‘I am (Brahman)’, then desiring what 
and for whom Gees he identify himself with me pod a 
268 © 
In the second gloka reference was made to dtmandtmavive- 
canam: discrimination between the atman and the anatman and 
svanubhavah: perfect realisation. Both these have been explained 
thus far. Then reference was made to brahmadtmana samsthitir 
muktih: liberation is of the form of permanent establishment as 
Brahman. The guru proceeds to explain at length what was spoken 
of tersely in that sloka. 
ma aepafe asadt aaarsafecar 
mat ‘Wlamscagfata ZSt AMET AME: | 
sear gezarssenta fraaat aisaatat TATA 
afea “migeafzg Wa AAT AT REC 
jnate vastunyapi balavati vasandnadiresé 
karta bhoktapyahamiti drdha yasya samsarahetuh 
pratyagdrstyatmani nivasaté sipaneyd prayatnat | 
muktim prahustadiha munayo vasanaténavaem yat || 
Even after the atman is known, these impressions 
etc., as, I am the doer, I am the enjoyer, which are the 
cause of samsara are very strong. This has to be removed 
with effort by living in a state of turning the eyes inward. 
VIVEKACUDAMANI | 281 
The sages call this attenuation of impressions mukti, liberation. 
jnate vastunyapi: Even after the 4tman is known from scrip- 
ture and by reasoning as distinct from the five sheaths and as non- 
different from Brahman. 
ya vasana asya samensaneeay ‘That residual impression which 
is the cause of this samsara leading to the statements: I am the doer; 
I am the enjoyer. 
drdha: strong, not easily breakable. _ 
anadih: accompanying since a long time in the past. 
esa vasand balavati: This residual impression is strong. For. 
it is seen that one who has experienced great fear in a | dream does 
not feel composed even after waking from it. | 
_ atah atmani pratyagdrstya: turning the eyes inward toward 
Brahman, i.e., completely abandoning the process of. looking out- 
ward, looking in, by the practice of Hiren Tpasama al: aGtmani: 
‘brahmani: in (towards) Brahman. | 
Sapaneya prayatnat: It should be removed by one who is 
wholly established in the knowledge of ~“non-difference; it should be 
destroyed with effort. 
yatah vdsandtinavam yat, tadiha munayah muktim prahuh: 
Therefore that attenuation of the impressions, ie., their being render- 
ed ineffectual, that itself is said to be liberation by the sages (the 
munis ie., Sastrarthamanana-silah, those who are given to Bo 
tion on the meaning of gastra). : 
atah brahmétmand samsthitih: pei firmly established i in Brah- 
man without negligence. | poe 
This also means that even those Brahmajaanis who have 
attained to that state, not through the firm acquisition of the four- 
fold sadhanas for Brahmajiana, but as a result of good deeds done 
in previous births, they tco should strive in the form of uninter- 
rupted samadhi to attain the attenuation of the impressions and the 
extinction of the mind. 
269 
To show that one cannot remain in the a4tman with an inward 
vision when there are obstructions to it, the guru who is the ocean — 
of mercy explains the means to get over it. 
282 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
wg vata at arat dgrenaraarenta | 
—-Bearetsa farereat fagat carenfacsar ti 2¢9 
aham mameti yo bhavo dehaksddavanatmani | 
adhydso’yam nirastvayo vidusad svatmanisthaya 7 
This false identification with the body and the organs 
leading to a sense of the ‘I’ and the ‘Mine’ should be stop- 
ped by the wise by being firmly established in the atman. 
dehaksddau: in the body, sense organs, etc. Here ‘etc.’ in- 
cludes the breath (prana), the mind (manas) and the intellect 
(buddhi) ete., which are the andtman. 
aham mama iti bhavah: egoism and the sense of possession 
(ahamta and mamata). | | | 
This super-imposition must be completely stopped by the supe- 
rior person given to listening (to the words of the guru) and re- 
flecting on the same and who is ever established in his atman, i.e., 
Brahman. 
nirastavyah: must be destroyed right from the roots. 
270 
The method for this is explained. 
ara ta seamen afgacaterartarcta | 
aisefaa aeararsaeraraaia FE 1 Rvo U1 
jratva svam pratyagatmanam buddhitadurttisaksinam ! 
so’hamityeva sadurttya’na natmanydtmamatim jahi 4) 
Knowing (realising) thy inmost 4tman, the witness of 
the. buddhi and its modifications, get over the idea of the 
atman in the anatman by the proper understanding in the 
form ‘I am He’. 
 sadvurttyd: by the knowledge of non-difference from that which 
cannot be sublated in any of the three periods of time. 
andtmani Gtmamatim jahi: conquer, (get over the sense of the 
atman in the buddhi etc., which are the anatman). 
271 
The guru removes the delusion by the removal of the cause of 
the series of delusion. 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 283 
aH aA CARAT FARA RATT ATTH ! 
MEA AAT CARAT TATEATATTTT FF Uw Voq Ut 
lokanuvartanam tyaktva tyaktva dehinuvartanam | 
Sistrénuvartanam tyaktva svadhyasapanayam kuru iy 
Relinquishing the habit of following the world, of pand- 
ering to the body and of sticking to scripture, accomplish 
the destruction of super-imposition which characterises you. 
lokanuvartanam: following the ways of the world; vide in the 
_ Sddhanapdiicaka: janakrpanaisthuryamutsrjyatam. Be indifferent to 
the sympathies and the antipathies of men. 
dehénuvartanam: Vide in the Sdadhanapancaka: dehe aham- 
matistyajyatém: give up the sense of the ‘T’ in the body. 
Séstrinuvartanam tyaktvaé: giving up the reading etc., of books 
other than those which will be useful to the attainment of libera- 
tion. Or, in accordance with the instruction: drdhataram karma - 
asu samtyajyatam: (Sddhanapaficaka). Let all karmas be firmly and 
completely renounced; Sastra may mean books relating to Karma- 
sastra. 
Giving up these three, destroy the super-imposition on the 
atman. 
272 
The why of it is explained. 
 atwaraarar seat: weaaraaante = 
ACATATAT AMT AATAAT HTAT 11 V2 
lokavasanaya jantoh Sdstravdsanayapi ca | _3 e 
dehavasanaya jninam yathavannaiva jayate | | 
True wisdom never arises to a person who acts in con- 
Sonance with what the people of the world will say or to 
a person who is concerned about his knowledge of the 
_$&stras or who is subject to delusion about his body. 
lokavasané: Being intent on the idea: ‘I shall always act in 
such a way that men do not censure me, but praise me.’ This vasana 
is a great obstruction as no one can abide by it. This has been 
elaborated at length by Sri Vidya4ranyasvamin in the section deal- 
ing with Vdsandksaya in his work entitled ‘Fivanmukti- Viveka’. 
He says: ko lokaméradhayitum samarthah? Who is aR in 
284 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
pleasing the world? vidyate na khalu kascidupdyah sarvalokapari- 
tosakaro yah; sarvathad svahitam dcaraniyam kim karisyati jano 
bahujalpah ,; “Verily, there is no means to please all people of the 
world. One should act by all means to secure one’s own good: what 
can the people do who speak meaninglessly?” Hence it has been 
Said in the Gita that the devotee of the Lord treats censure and 
praise alike: tulyaninddstutih. 
Sdstravasand: This is of three kinds relating to the difficulty 
of learning, the incompetency for $astra and the ‘difficulty of ob- 
servance. These are illustrated respectively by Bharadvaja, Dur- 
vasas and Dastra. This has been well explained in the. ‘Jivan- 
mukti Viveka.’® 
dehavdsana: This is of three kinds, namely mistaking the body 
for the 4tman, the ignoring of its evil qualities, and delusion. 
Due to these tendencies, true wisdom never dawns. 
273 | x aid it 
_. By reference to authoritative statements, it is shown that these 
three alone are obstruction to true knowledge. ie 
AARSTLTA AEST: 
said oefraE TE oH | qatar asa: WearaaTad 
aiseatigaaa: aif afer 1 203 0 
samsarakaragrhamoksamicchoh | 
ayomayam pddanibaddhasrnkhalam ; 
vadanti tajjnah patuvdsandtrayam | 
yo'smad vimuktah samupaiti muktim }) . 
Those who have attained knowledge of Brahman say 
that for those who wish to obtain release from the prison 
of -samsara, these three strong vasanas are iron fetters 
binding their legs. He who is freed from them attains 
liberation. — : 
42 Bharadvaja learnt many Vedas in ‘three lives and finding his study incom- 
. plete, he obtained a further lease of a fourth life. When even then he could not 
complete his study of the Vedas, he was diverted from it to the worship of the 
Saguna Brahman. This illustrates pathavyasana. A muni Durvasas by name went 
to Sri ParameSara’s presence, with a load of books, to make obeisance to Him. 
Narada who was there at the time compared him to an ass Carrying a load signi- 
fying that Aatmavidya does not accrue to one; merely by study if he has not in- 
ward vision and the grace of the guru. This illustrates S4stravyasana. Dasgira was so attached to the rigours of anusthana that, go- where he ies in the world, 
-he could not find a spot pure enough for his austerities. . This’ i anusthanavyasana. 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 285. 
tajjnah: brahmavidah: Those who have known (realised) 
Brahman. | 7 
patuvdsandtrayam: the three vasands, ie., the loka, Sastra and | 
deha-vasanas which have not been attenuated. 
samsarakaragrha: samsara (life in the world . subject to suc- 
cession of birth and death) is itself a karagrha, prison. 
moksamicchoh: for the person who desires release from it. 
ayomayam padanibaddhasrnkhalam: the iron fetters tied round 
the legs. Even as one fettered in his legs will not be able to move, 
so too one who is characterised by these three vasands can never 
reach the state of the Supreme. | 
He who is freed from the sorenaia vasanas, i.e., he wie 
vasanas have got attenuated, attains liberation. 
_yathavat-jnanena, ‘by true mnowiedee’ is to be added at the end 
of the Sloka. 
: 274 7 
_ That in the matter of getting rid of the vasanas which are ob- 
structions to liberation, the culture of atmavasana is the effective 
means is explained with an example. 
worTisars aay eesiasieaeen’ 
dette fania aroe fama afe arena 11 Q0¥ 1 
jalddisamparkavasaét prabhita- — | 
durgandhadhutagarudivyavasana 
‘sangharsanenaiva vibhati samyak 
vidhiyamdane sati bahyagandhe ,; 
The fragrance of agaru which has got hidden by 
(long) contact with water etc..appears well only when that 
external odour is removed by rubbing. 
Intense foul smell arises in the agaru by contact with water 
etc. By that its natural aroma is suppressed. Only when the ex- 
ternal odour is removed by rubbing (against ene else), its 
- own fragrance appears in full measure. 
This is the example (to the foregoing). 
275 
srerfeserrnerrceraremesifaferen TUATHA | 
srarfercieeiorett faqar rete STAT IAT EHST U1 ok tt 
286 | VIVEKACUDAMANI 
 antassritinantadurantavasané- | 
 dhiuliviliptd paramaitmavasana | 
prajndtisangharsanato visuddha 
pratiyate candanagandhavat sphuta T | 
The fragrance of the Paramatman is hidden by the dust 
of vasanas productive of evil. When it is purified by being | 
rubbed against prajia it is clearly perceived like the smell 
of sandalwood. | 
antassrita: imbedded i inside. 
ananta: of various kinds. | 
duranta: productive of evil effects. That is the anatmavasana 
which is the dust on the Paramatmavasana which is smeared over 
and covered by it. : 7 7 
viltpta: abhibhita: covered over. | 
prajnayd: by wisdom. Vide the Sruti: tameva dhiro vijniya 
prajnam kurvita brahmanah (Mund.): “Let the wise man knowing 
it obtain the awareness of Brahman’. Also by the statement (Sloka 
428) brahmatmanoh sodhitayoh ekabhavavagéhini nirvikalpa ca cin- 
matrad vrttih prajieti kathyate “Prajna (wisdom) is that modi- 
- fication (of the mind) which understands the identity of Brahman 
and the atman purified of their respective upadkis (limitations), 
| which is changeless and is of the nature of cit afenieence) all 
over.” 
| Fixing the mind without contamination by the sheaths is 
likened to the process of rubbing of the sandalwood. Then, so puri- 
fied, uncontaminated by the andtmavasanas (the residual impres- 
sions of the anatman), the atman is seen clearly like the fragrance | 
of the sandal. . 
This is the subject of illustration ( darstantika) to ‘the previous 
example. 
276 | 
The meaning conveyed is stated briefly. | 
araTenarararaet: factrarerareat | a 
freareafresat dat ana writ cat FEET 1 OE Y 
andtmavasanéjalaih tirobhitatmavasana | | 
nityatmanisthaya tesdm nase bhati svayam sphuté |) 
The atmavasana which has been obscured by the hordes 
of the an&tmavasanas shines clearly when they are des- 
troyed by steady concentration on the atman. 
WIVEKACUDAMANI | 287 
andtmavasanéh: The vasanas which have reference to the 
objects coming under the anadtman; i.e., the loka, deha, Sastra - vasa- 
nas; the mental vasanas which are exhibited by the demonaical 
nature (asuri sampat) as indicated in the Gita text: dambho darpo’- 
_bhimanasca krodhah paérusyameva ca: “ostentation, arrogance and 
self-conceit, as also insolence and ignorance.” __ | 
tasdm jalaih: by their combination. 
tirobhitatmavasana: the atmavasana which has been obscured. 
tesam: of the crowd of anatmavasanas. 
nitydtmanisthaya: (when destroyed) by the condition of finding © 
anchorage in Brahman. 
svayam sphutaé: shines clearly by itself. 
277 
In accordance with the Srutis: asmdallokdt pretya etam annama- 
yam atmaénam upasamkramati (Taitt.): “Rising above this world 
one gives up the identification of the 4tman with the annamaya” 
koga, and with the Gita: Sanath Sanairuparamed buddhyé dhrtigrhi- 
tayd; atmasamstham manah krtva na kitcidapi cintayet 1 __ 
“One must withdraw gradually with a steadfast mind fixing it on 
the atman and should think of nothing else’, the guru conveys the 
means to bring about the attenuation of the vasanAs. 3 7 
WaT wat ceaTaterd AA: 
Ta TAT Sater ATTA: | 
farediaatel afa area 
ATA: ATTA PT EAT Ut ovo Ut 
yatha yathaé pratyagavasthitam manah 
_ tathaé tathé muiicati bahyavadsanéh | 
nissesamokse sati vdsaninam 
dtmainubhitih pratibandhasinya 1 
To the extent to which the mind is turned and estab- 
lished inward, it gives up the external vasanas. When all 
the vasanas are completely extinguished, the experience of 
_ the 4tman (Brahman) is free from all obstacles. | 
To the extent that the mind is established inside by the aid of 
practice and detachment, to that extent all external vasands like the 
sense of ‘my’ in sons etc., and the sense of ‘IT’ in Sg eHnnmaye:: koSa 
etc. are given up. ea - is : 
vasanainim nissesamokse: whieh the nirvikalphkamsaht siecsus 
by inquiry into the meaning of the Vedanta texts is practised unin- 
288 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
terruptedly, then, in-accordance with the Gita raso’pyasya param 
drstva nivartate: “his desires, too, go (are destroyed) when the 
Supreme has been seen (experienced),” there arises complete ex- 
tinction of vasanas without even a minute particle of them remaining. 
nissesamokse sati: with their extinction along with the miilaj- 
nana (primordial nescience). When that is destroyed, the experi- 
ence of the atman is void of every obstruction. 
278 
By the succeeding nine Slokas it is taught that by the prevention 
_ of the operation of the effect, the cause must be destroyed. Delusion 
is the effect of vasanas. When delusion is rendered nugatory, the 
_vasanas disappear. 
- eaTeareaa eat feueat vat azate- sited 
Seater: SqEM ATTA FE Rive ue 
| svatmanyeva sada sthitya mano nasyati yoginah 
| visanandm ksyayascatah svadhydsdpanayam kuru H 
By unceasing establishment in the atman. there arises 
manondsa (stilling of the mind) for the yogins and the | 
decline of the vasanas. Hence, bring about the removal of 
the super-imposition (of other things) on you. 
yoginah: those who control the rajasic and tamasic propensities 
of the mind, i.e., those who are pre-eminently established in their 
mind by the preponderance of sattva by continuous contemplation. 
mono nasyati: ‘The mind which is transformed by a succession 
cf its operations giving up its current of activities like the con- 
tinuous flame of a lamp controlled. Then, by the strength of proxi- 
mity to Brahman, the pure vasanas in the form of Santi and danti get 
confirmed. When that happens, even in the presence of external pro- 
vocations, anger etc., do not arise, which means that the rajasic and 
tamasic vasanas have been extinguished. For, vasana means the pro- 
pensity of the mind as a result of the transformation in the form of 
anger etc., which arises suddenly without consideration of the before 
and after. 3 7 
Therefore svddhydsdpanayam kuru: destroy all wrong impres- 
sions. After careful and complete inquiry, votally give up the idea 
of the atman in the five koSas. 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 289 
279 
Yoga in the form of control of rajasic and tamasic propensities 
is now explained. | 
_ aat great tH: ATA ACT qga araft 
AAACAAACTET TasUTaTas FEW VOR Ht 
tamo dvabhyaim rajah sattvat sattvam suddhena nadyatt | 7 
tasmat sattvam avastabhya svddhyasdpanayam kuru 4; 
Tamas is destroyed by the two (sattva and rajas); rajas 
by sattva; and sattva is destroyed by the suddha (nirguna) 
Brahman. Therefore keeping hold of the sattva, effect the 
removal of your super-imposition. 
By the two, by rajas and sattva, tamas is eeaces It is ; well 
known that the tamasa qualities like sloth and sleep are destroyed 
by exercise etc., and by engaging the mind in poetic works or study 
of Sastras or in entertainment. | 
Rajas is destroyed by sattva in the form of activities | involving 
| concentration of the mind. 
_ That sattva itself is destroyed by the pure nirguna: fee Sites: the 
nirguna is attained, even jfiana. which is a transformation brought 
about by sattva is destroyed. 
Therefore, taking hold of sattva, get rid of the delusions wrought 
by super-imposition which is of the form of projection of rajas. ering 
_ Simultaneously upon the concealment effected by tamas. i. 
280 
If it is objected that concern for the body is necessary as it is 
the means for the attainment of jiana, it is replied. fe 
sree qoute ayfeter frieaca frrraes: 
eriererrea Ueda TACATATA FE WRCo 
prarabdham pusyati vapuriti nigcitya nigcalah | | 
dhairyamélambya yatnena svaédhydsépanayam kuru i, — 
Be unswerving and brave in the firm conviction that 
prarabdha-karma will sustain the body, and with effort try 
_ to get rid of your super-imposition, _ 
Convinced that the prarabdha karma will protect the body, with 
a mind which is not affected even when there is cause for it, and with 
courage strive to. bring about the removal of your super-imposition. 
V.C.-~20 
499 VIVEKACUDAMANI _ 
| 281 
The manner of it is explained. 
mg Sita: TT Tea gear fergaay 
AAA ANA: HTCACATEATATATT FAL 
niham jivah param brahmetyetadvyavrttipirvakam I 
vasandvegatah praptasvadhydsipanayam kuru | 
Preceded by the elimination (of the jiva) as ‘I am not 
the jiva, but the supreme Brahman,’ get rid of your super- 
imposition wrought by the force of the vasanas. 
 naham jivah: I am not the jiva. 
param brahma: (I am) the Supreme Brahman. 
na tat: atat: what is different from Brahman. Distinguish- 
| shiag: yourself from everything which is not Brahman like the in- 
tellect, the mind, the breath, the body ete. Vide: naham. deho 
nendriydnyantarangam|nahamkarah pranavargo na buddhih \\dara- 
patyaksetravittddidirah , saksi nityah pratyagatma sivo’ham }| 
- (Sri Sarhkara: Advaitastakam). “I am not the body, not the inner 
organs, not the ahamkara, nor the series of breaths; not the intellect. 
Iam far from the wife, the sons and wealth; I am the eternal wit- 
ness, the inner atman, of the nature of Siva, ever auspicious.” _ 
Eliminating all these, get rid of all super-impositions wrought 
earlier by the force of vasanas. 
_ Or, by the word vasand may be understood the anatmavasanas 
( i.e., the wrong identification of the 4tman-with the andtman which 
_ are operating from,'time without beginning). By the elimination of 
what is not the ‘Atman and .by continuous contemplation of ‘I am 
Brahman’, remové your super-imposition which resulted by oe 
power of the andtmavasands. , 
| 282 a 
SCAT FRAT CATTHCAT ATCAT ATALEAATATT: 
FAAATATAT: ATACATEATATTA FS 1 VCR Ut 
Srutya yuktya svinubhityd jratod sirvatmyam dtmanah | 
kvacid abhasatah praptasvadhyasapanayam kuru 
Understanding the universality of the Stman by gruti, 
by reasoning and by your own realisation, effect the removal 
of your super-imposition which SPpeers oe by ne re- 
. flection (of the caitanya). 7 es 
VIVEKACUDAMANI | | 291 
. Srutya: by the sruti which Saye: aétmaivedam sarvam ( Chand.) : 
All this is the atman. 7 : hd 
-yuktya: by reasoning in conformity with Sruti which says: 
That without whose cognition nothing else is cognised like the pot 
(not being cognised) without the clay; like the drum, the conch, the 
_ Vina being cognised as species of the genus sound. | 
— svanubhitya: by one’s own realisation in conformity v with all 
this. A. os | ! 
Or again by the Sruti: tameva bhantamanubhati sarvam, tasya 
bhasé sarvamidam vibhati (Katha.): ‘there is nothing other than 
_ the Atman as everything shines by the light of the atman’; : by reason- 
ing that the super-imposed is not different from the substratum; 
and by self-realization in conformity with these; understanding the 
universality of the a4tman, knowing it as the real nature of every- 
thing that is imagined, get rid of your super-imposition shining in 
some particular koga purely by the reflection of the caltanya in it; 
destroy your ego sense: ahamtam nasaya. Ce 
283 
| sararafaenteay Soatiea feat at: 
adafaqesar fret tareaTaTaaad FE RR 
annadinavisargabhyam isannasti kriya muneh | 
tadekanisthaya nityam svadhyasdpanayam kuru i 
To the sage, there is not the least activity other hai 
taking of food or expulsion. Being solely concentrated in 
the Paramatman, effect the removal of your super-imposition. a 
muneh : to one who is ever habituated to meditate on the Pare- | 
matman, there is not even the slightest activity other than the taking 
of food or ejection. Therefore by being fully established permanent- 
ly in the Paramatman without distraction by anything else (or be- 
ing established in It alone), effect the removal by that means, of your 
super-imposition. , 
284 
ARAMCATTATEANAAATTA CAAT: | 
AeMaNagSUTA TaENTATIAA FEU U | 
tattvamasyadivakyottha-brahmatmaikatva-bodhatah pes 
brahmanyatmatvadardhyaya svadhyasapanayam kuru 1) . 
292 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
Effect the removal of your super-imposition for streng- 
thening the sense of the 4tman in Brahmau through the © 
knowledge of the oneness of Brahman and atman declared 
in the statements like tat tvam asi. > 
ee that has arisen or is produced. | 
dirdhyaya: for strengthening: to attain the knowiedge of the 
atman being Brahman as strongly as an ordinary Peen firmly be- 
lieves that his body is his atman. 
For obtaining this strong conviction that the 4tman is Brahman 
alone, effect the removal of your super-imposition. For, during the 
delusion of the anatman (i.e., mistaking the andtman for the atmam), 
knowledge from the mahavakyas is not ecu 
285 
‘If it is asked how long should one evideavour to get rid of the 
delusion, it is replied: 7 
aeaTaey eestery es 
aaa QEATCAT CATEATATTAT EBT UIVeye i 
ahambdvasya dehe’smin nissesavilayavadhi | 
Savadhanena yuktatma svidhyasdpanayam kuru We * age © 
Endeavour to effect the removal of your super-imposi- 
tion with great care and circumspection of mind till the 
identification of the 4tman with this body completely dis- 
appears without a trace. | 
dehe’smin: in this gross body. nissesavilayavadhi: Until the 
sense of the “I” is destroyed Bone with the vasanas. savadhanena: 
with care or attention. Fee 
— -286 
seatfasttartat: cacragifa aaa | 
— arafacat fara cateareartad FE Vee 
pratitirjivajagatoh svapnavadbhati yavata | 
tavannirantaram vidvan svadhydsdpanayam kuru || 
Learned One! endeavour to effect the removal of your 
super-imposition without a break till the awareness of the 
jiva and the jagat (the self and the world) appears like a 
dream. | 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 293 
Till the time when the awareness of the jiva and the jagat ap- 
pears as a dream to one who has awakened from sleep, i.e., till its 
mithya character appears convincingly, till then, without a break, 
learned One! strive to effect the removal of your super-irnposition. 
| 287 
Having thus by these nine Slokas taught the removal of the 
delusion of the anatman (being mistaken for the Atman), for the 
reason that no quarter should be given for forgetfulness which is 
the cause of the destruction (unawareness) cf the atman, the guru 
instructs about the cause of forgetfulness. | 
fastat atwaratat: weere<ta facqe: | 
aafaataat grat fareaarearranafa ui ace i 
nidraéya lokavartéayassabddderapi vismrteh | 
kvacinnadvasaram datva cintayétmanamatmani || 
Without giving any quarter to foregetfulness (of the 
Atman) arising from sleep, worldly talk and objects of 
(music) sound etc., meditate in your mind on the atman. 
vismrtih Atmavismaranam: forgetting of the 4tman, 
nidrayaéh lokavartayah, sabdaédeh Ablative case: frorn sleep, 
gossip, music, etc. Without giving any room for forgetfulness ever 
arising either from sleep, or worldly talk, or music, etc., meditate 
on the nature of the Supreme in (by) your intellect. For, it has 
been said: dadyannadvasaram kivicit kimaidinaém mandgaji: “Not 
even the slightest room should be given to desire etc.” i: 
Or, it may be understood in the possessive case to mean, do not 
give any quarter to sleep, worldly concerns, sense-objectss and for- 
getfulness. 
It has been said in Moksadharma: aprasanam asamspa'rsam asan- 
darganam eva ca | purusasyaisa niyamo manye nissreyasarn varam || 
“Not eating, not touching, and not seeing attentively ar the rules | 
to be observed by a man. This makes for supreme moksa. “ 
288 
The guru says: Do not consider the gross body which is con-_ 
nected with all the defects of attachment, as your atmen. | 
araifiatiatend wera ay: | 
RAT BTTsACat Hiya Fat Wa WReet uN 
294 | VIVEKACUDAMANI. = 8 ™ 
matapitrormalodbhitam malamémsamayam vapuh | 
tyaktvd candilavaddiram brahmibhiya krti bhava 1) 
Abandoning far away like a candala (outcast) the body 
full of excreta and flesh, and born of impure excreticns of 
_ the mother and the father, become Brahman and. attain your 
 life-purpose. | 
The body is produced by the combination of the igs (semen) 
of the father and the gonita (crimson discharge) of the mother. It 
is also composed of excreta and flesh. Thus, both by its origin and. 
its nature, it is repugnant. | ; 
tyaktvad candalavat: abandoning it far away as you do to a 
candala, i.e., not entertaining any attachment for it. 
brahmibhiya: giving up the sense of not being Brahman which 
is the result of ajnana, understanding that you are Brahman. 
krti bhava: attain your life-purpose (krtakrtyo bhava). Or 
krti bhava may also mean, be wise. 
| 289 - 
Giving up attachment to the gross body, says the guru, by the 
attenuation of its upadhis, attenuate the jiva too which appears sepa- 
rate by the separateness of the body. 
| FaT HTT Rata sara sweater | 
famrararsaTat ail Aa AAT AA 1 Vee 
ghatakésam mahakasa ivatmanam pardtmani | 
vildpyékhandabhivena tisnim bhava sada mune 11 
As the space in a pot dissolved marges in the uni-. 
versal space, dissolve the 4tman in the Paramatman and be 
silent, O sage! 
| The universal space alone, enclosed in a pot, is called ghataékasa. 
So too, enclosed in (limited by) the upadhis like the intellect etc., 
the Paramatman is said to be the jiva. When the walls of the pot 
are ignored by the mind the ghatakasa is only mahaka$a. Thus, by 
the knowledge of all materials not being different from Brahman 
which is the substratum of all imagination and when thus all the upa- 
dhis are eliminated; as there is nothing to delimit what is infinite and 
unlimited, learned one, always be silent as that Infinite as there is 
nothing else for you to do. Fer, it is said in the Gita: etad buddhva 
-buddhiman syat krtakrtyasca bhaérata: “Knowing this (a man) be- 
comes wise, O Bharata! and all his duties are accomplished.” 
VIVEKACUDAMANI | 295 
290 
TAHA MST CATA AAAAT | 
aersnte frosts casaat ASATISAT 1 YRo 
svaprakasam adhisthanam svayambhiya sadétmana l 
brahmdndamapi pindindam tyajyatim malabhéndavat || 
Being yourself the ever-existing Brahman which is the 
_ self-effulgent substratum of everything, give up (the sense 
Cit. 
and of reality of) the universe and your body like a vessel filled 
with filth. 
svaprakisam: What is self-established as it is of the nature of 
adhisthanam: the substraturn of all that is imagined, of maya 
avidya. | 
svayambhiya saddtmand: being yourself as that Sat. 
brahmandam: which is made of fourteen worlds. 
pindindamapi: your own body also. | 
malabhandavat: like a vessel filled with filth. 
- tyajyatém: should be never thought of. 
The rule is that on the destruction of an imagined object, the 
substratum is the sole remnant: adhisthanavaseso hi nasah kalpita- 
vastunah. 
saddtmana tyagah means giving up as non-real; ‘giving up the 
idea that it is real (sat). 
291 
fazenia care egrecrmefaaa | 
fade foaracasa Fal Wa AFA 11 Aq 
. cidétmani sadanande dehadridhim ahamdhiyam ; 
nivesya lingam utsrjya kevalo bhava sarvada | 
Resting the thought of the ‘I’ which is rooted in the 
body on the 4tman which is cit and ever blissful, casting off 
the subtle body, be ever alone. 
deharidham etc.: Resting the sense of the ‘I’ which has rooted 
itself on the body in the Paramatman which is self-luminous and of 
the nature of bliss. 
296 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
lingam utsrjya: not identifying yourself with the subtle 
body. | = 
kevalo bhava: be unattached: or, be devoid of any difference of 
like or unlike or of internal differences. For (the sense of) differ- 
erice arises from ajfana and is destroyed when it is realised that “the _ 
Paramatman is I” and liberation (kaivalya: the sense of being the 
lone Reality) is oe seen as the natural condition. 
292 
TAT ATTA: TAMA: FX AAT 
az wengfata areat waHeal afasafa eeu 
yatraisa jagadabhasah darpanantah puram yatha , 
tad brahméhamiti jratvd krtakrtyo bhavisyasi |) 
Where this reflection of the world is like a city (re- 
flected) in a mirror, realising that you are that. Brahman, 
you will remain in the equipoise of a fulfilled life. 
Even as a city, men, mountain, river, palace etc., are reflected 
in a whole unbroken mirror though they do not exist inside it, so 
too this world which is mithya is reflected in (super-imposed on) 
Brahman. Realise that you are that Brahman and then you will 
' have achieved fulfilment: 
293 
qerayd faweqars fargaraareqataay | 
aera favaraqecaaaa WATATATATATTT: 11 233 0 
yatsatyabhitam nijaripam ddyam 
cid advaydnandam aripam akriyam | 
tadetya mithyavapurutsrjaitat 
Sailisavad vesamupattamatmanah 1, 
Attaining that which is the Real, which is your primor- 
dial nature, which is the non-dual intelligence, the blissful 
and actionless, reject like an actor throwing off his mask this 
_mithya body which has accrued to the atman. 
satyabhiitam nijaripam: Your true nature: vastavikam svari- 
pam. be. 7 
etya: having attained; knowledge (realisation) itself is meant 
VIVE eee 997 
here as attainment. Like the knowledge of ea round one’ s 
| neck. 43 : | 
_ Reject the body which is mithya and realise your LY, ioe real 
atman. Like the actor, giving up the mask which covered his. 
body, so too in the case of the atman. | 
294 | = 
For producing firm conviction, the guru again distinguishes the 
atman which is signified by ‘I’ from the von’ ete. 
wala grated yaa 
TATA: er forercaaerard ) 
wrateag aafata vette: | | 
 aTSeATS: einen Farge ee 
_ sarvatmanad drsyamidam mrsaiva _ | 
naivihamarthah ksanikatvadarsandt | — 
janamyaham. sarvamiti pratitih 3 
kuto’hamadeh ksanikasya siddhyet 4 
In all ways this world of perception is unreal only. The 
sense of the ego too is unreal as it is observed to be momen- 
tary. How can the belief ‘I know everything’ be asserted 
of the ego etc., which are momentary ? 
That which is signified by ‘T’ (ie., the Aatman) is real and eternal, 
This perceived world is only unreal as it is momentary. | 
- kganikatvadarsanat: At one moment, it says ‘T see’; at another, 
‘T hear’. Similarly, it says ‘I smell’, ‘I taste’, ‘I go’ ete. Wherever 
there is a connection with the modification of the ‘T’, in all those 
cases, the expression ‘I’ is frequently used. But the ‘I’. (the atman) 
cannot attach to many things; for the atman is one only. Where 
there is connection with the modification of the Bo { ahamorttisam- - 
bandhah), as the modifications of effulgence are momentary, the con- 
nected objects or activities too are momentary. There is no ‘ground 
for the reality of the reflection. . Hence this perceived world is in 
all ways unreal as it is Jada, non-turminous and 1 BORESNEETY:| Iti ‘is. 
. ing for it ererpahorn: 
outside. On being told by another that it was sound hee neck, she. breathed . a 
sigh‘ of relief and said that she had ‘recovered’ her gold chain. The idea is ‘she 
did. not recover it; for she never ‘lost’ it. It was. all along round her neck, So 
too says the guru to the Sisya, “attain Brahman”, Le, realise that you are the 
Brahmaa which you have always been. | 
298 | VIVEKACUDAMANI 
not at all that ‘I’. This is explained by saying: How can the belief 
1 know everything’ be true of the momentary ego etc. The eye does 
not know taste; the ear does not know form. Thus by the Sruti: 
‘gandhaya ghrénam,’ etc., though they are capable of being modified 
as form etc., they cannot acquire the significance of ‘T (the dtman). 
Nor can the mind know its own modification as it is jada and as the 
same thing cannot be both the agent of activity and the activity 
ee 
295 | 
eres the atma is different. That is made clear. : 
ASTATANACAT SATA 
fact qycarafa waza | 
aa grant fara ofa afaecat 
aoramen aatgaert: 1 VV 
ahampadarthastvahamdadisaksi 
nityam susuptdvapi bhavadarsanat | 
brute hyajo nitya iti srutissvayam 
tatpratyagatma sadasadvilaksanah i 
That which is signified by the ‘T’ (the atman) is s the wit- 
ness of the ego etc. For, it is found to exist for ever even 
-insleep. The Sruti itself says: it is unborn and eternal. That 
| internal atman is different from the. “gross and the subtle. 
~ To the question if the ego etce., which are perceived are not: to 
be understood by the word ‘I’ then what is 3 the T? it is replied: aham 
eee | 
a ahampadarthastu: | what is signified by the word ue p, tu in 
this expression is to distinguish it from all that are seen. os 
ac ahamadisaksi: witness of all that is seen beginning with the 
eee including ajfiana. 
_saksi: the witness of ail; ‘the eternal Being. | 
- susuptavapi bhavadarganat: as it is found to exist even in sleep 
where the modification cf the ego has attained laya, i.e., has disappear- 
ed, as seen in the statement: ‘I slept happily.’ If this is contested as 
a debatable experience, Sruti says so. By the words ajo nityah 
sasvato’yam puranah, na hanyate hanyamdne garire (Katha.):. his 
atman which is unborn, eternal, permanent, efficient, is not killed 
when the body is killed,” the Sruti declares it is eternal. _ ‘ 
VIVEKACUDAMANI | 299 
tat: therefore, tasmat karanat. 
| - pratyagatma: the atma (which lies inside the kogas), which i is 
compacted of existence, intelligence and bliss: -sat-cit-Ananda-riipah. 
_ sadasadvilaksanah: different from what is a (the ares ) 
and from what is latent (the subtle). 7 | 
296° 
faaricat qafaarcaar 
freatsfraret ufae aaete | 
AAU TIAA TT LAT eH | 
GH: OA: eeeMaCAAAAT: 11 ASEM 
vikarinam sarvavikéravetta | 
| nityo’vikaro bhavitum samarhati. | 
manorathasvapnasusuptisu sphutam 
punah punah drstamasattvametayoh. || 
The knower of all changes of things that change should 
himself be eternal and changeless. The unreality of these 
two (the body and the person attached to it—pindatadabhi- 
maninoh) is again and again seen in imaginations, dreams 
and dreamless sleep. 
vikarindm sarvavikaravetta: vikarinam: of the body ‘ete. that 
undergo change always. 
sarvavikdéravetta: one who paws all the ‘changes from origina- 
tion to destruction. | | 
It is but proper that he sould be sterial ‘and mane for, 
_ if he is not eternal, he cannot be the knower of all the changes. If 
he is to be himself subject to change, due to the opposition between 
the agent and the act, the knowledge of the act will not arise. Also 
by reason of his being non-eternal, in the awareness of its own 
change, the 4tman cannot get the Knowledge of change and changing | 
object in respect of other things. Therefore, eternality and change- | 
lessness must be affirmed of the 4tman. By this it is indicated that | 
the predication of eternality to the 4tman as understood by the Tar- 
kika as possessing the qualities of sukha and dubkha is difficult to 
be substantiated.“ | 
manoratha: imagination: It is said that beting dtnseis cannot be 
affirmed of the gross body and the mind in manoratha etc. In 
44 Because what i is liable to the comets of sukha and dubkha cannot be eternal: 
yad vikari tad anityam. 
300. VIVEKACUDAMANI 
imagination (day-dream), in dream and in dreamless sleep, the 
unreality of the gross body and of the mind is seen frequently. One 
_ lost in continuous uninterrupted imagination of the day-dream, is not 
| conscious of the hardships of rain and sun. For, at that time there 
is no consciousness of the body. Even if such body-consciousness 
exists, as there is no attachment io it at that time, it. should be 
understood that in the-absence of attachment the object of attachment 
too does not exist. Thus in dream, another body is created 
in that experience; he who is attached to it is also another. Always 
the witness is one only. Hence it has been said: svapne’rthasinye © 
Srjati svasaktya bhoktrddivisvam mana eva sarvam: “In the dream 
which is devoid of concrete objects,.the mind creates by its power 
all the objects of experience.” In dreamless sleep it is quite clear 
that there is non-existence (non-functioning) of the body and the 
mind. Hence it is said that the witness of whatever is ‘present and 
whatever is absent is eternal and one only. | 
297 
aaishaart cst atafres 
frverfiratireaty afenfert 
HITAATATEAAVSAT ET 
“ater eae miferr 1 2e0 1 
_ato’bhimanam tyaja mamsapinde — 
pindabhimaninyapi buddhikalpite 
kalatrayabadhyam akhandabodham 
jratva svamatmanam upathi Santim 1; 
- Hence, give up your identification with this lump of | _ 
flesh and also with the ego which is attached to it and 
is imagined by the intellect. Attain peace realising your _ 
- &tman which is unlimited cit and which cannot be sublated _ 
. in any of the three periods of time. , 
atah mamsapinde: therefore in the lump of — as it is not 
eternal and is subject to change. , sees 
- pindabhimaninyapi buddhikalpite: the pratibimba or tet 
of the cit in the buddhi. os . 
. tyaja Gtmabuddhim: give up the sense of the atman; Le., do 
not identify it with the atman. | ee 
If you ask: then who am I? You are the atma who cannot 
be sublated in any of the three periods of time, the eternal cit. 
VIVEKACODAMANI- : 301 
Knowing yourself as such, attain peace of liberation which is : charac- 
terised by complete naar of sorrow. 7 Bed | 
| | 298 
coataa Bertlaara- 
VATA TATA AT | 
| feyea sataty aeeret- 
NAKA WATAVSYFSCTST: WU QXc Il 
tyajabhimanam kulagotranama- | 
rupasramesvardrasavasritesu | 
lingasya dharman api kartrtadin | 
tyaktva bhavakhandasukhasvaripah Me oe Geen: 
Give up identification with your family, your clan; y 
_ lame, and station in life which are associated with your 
living body (which is really a corpse through which blood is 
coursing). Similarly, give up the qualities of the subtle 
ped like agency etc., and remain in the form of unlimited 
The guru makes clear the eae of the expression: ‘remove 
your super-imposition. es foe 
ardrasavasritesu: give up the sense of ‘my’ in the family, clan, 
name, form and station associated with the gross body. 
Similarly, give up the sense of agency and other iiuiitbey in 
the suksma - garfra and remain in the form of unlimited bliss. For 
the gross and the subtle bodies are not permanent and are subj ect — 
to change. Remain in the form of unlimited (expansive) } bHsm That 
is the instruction and the benediction. | a 
299 
aaa sian: Fa: daregaat FET: a 
aaa ae srmfaaret WACUARTT: WSSU 
santyanye pratibandhak pumsah samsarahetavo drstih |  tesimesim miilam prathamavikaro bhavatyahaikarah |; 
There are other hindrances to. man which are causes. - of samsara. Of these, ahamkara is | the root and ‘the ‘first 
modification. 
302 a VIVEKACUDAMANI 
(aham-kara: the sense of the aham. or the ’I’, the ego delimited | 
by the upadhis, the intellect, mind, body etc., and producing the 
sense of individuality). _ 
samsarahetavah: the causes of sams&ara, attachment, aversion 
ete. | Be at Se | . 
anye: other than ahamkara. age. ; 
pratibandhah: hindrances; those which hinder the arising of 
atmajhana. oer | 
Of these, the source is aharhkara which is Ree first modification 
of ajfiana. | 
7 300 
| UTaaT eae aaesgateo STITT 
aaa aerararsft aiferanat fase 11 R00 Ww a 
yavat syat svasya sambandho’ hathkérena desig | - 
tavanna legamatrapi muktivirta vilaksané uo 
So long as there is any connection of oneself with the 
wicked ahamkara (ego-sense), there cannot be any talk, even 
in the least, of liberation, which is unique. , 
duratmana: of evil nature: as it is the cause of all the forms 
of bondage. : ss 
vilaksana: bandhaviruddha nitya niratigaya. ‘sukha svaripa: 
which is opposed to bondage 2 and is of the form of exansita. eternal 
| bliss. . | are 
‘So lone’: as: there is connection of é a person with ahathkara, ‘thare 
ne cannot be any talk of mukti which is of the form of exquisite eter- 
nal bliss and which is the opposite of bondage. : 
Such talk does not arise even in the least. | : 
The idea is that one who is affected by egoity which i is: the source 
of all bondage does not ever deserve to speak about liberation. 
301 
That, whieh that deeb: not exist, “mukti arises is stated in this 
Sloka. 
mgRTOMEI ET: eaerqrtasa 
Maa GAS: Ge: Aas: TAUTT: 11309 1 
VIVEKACUDAMANI a 303 
 gahamkéragrahét muktah svaripam upapadyate | 
candravad vimalah pirnah sadanandah svayamprabhah 
- He who is released from the grip of aharnkara attains 
_ his real nature and shines in his native effulgence free from _ 
__ blemish like the moon off the eclipse. 
| ahathkéra itself is the grip, because, it grips | (as sa planet 
Rahu to mcon). 
‘Like the moon scieased from tie concealment of its native 
lustre, one attains one’s real nature. What is one’s real nature? It 
is being free from defect, being pure; full, not limited; ever blissful, _ 
of the nature of eternal joy; self-luminous, being of the nature.of cit. 
These four qualities can also be seen in the moon freed from the 
eclipse by Rahu. In the case of the moon, sadénanda. must be under- 
stood as sada dnandah yena, that. by which ananda is for ever ob- 
tained. As attainment of one’s true nature is itself liberation, it is 
said that liberation ensues when aharhkara disappears. 
| 302 
As it is what is imagined, its destruction is affirmed. 
at at giaisefafa seta: qqeatsfafaarerrenreat 
ada faraeaar fast eenerTara: sfrarraea: a | R08 u 
yo va puraiso’hamiti pratitah 
buddhya aviviktas Canasta ray e 
| eaeanede nissesataya vinise 
| _ brahmatmabhavah partibandhasinyah T 
| Only when that (ahamkara) which before (the Soa | 
_. of jnana) is believed to be the ‘I’ by.the ununderstanding in- _ 
- tellect clouded by the darkness of ajfana is destroyed with- 
out a trace, the sense of the identity between Brahman Sas ae 
the atman is devoid of any hindrance. a ee 
tamasaé: by ajnana. 
atimidhayd: which does not have the Seay to “know the 
nature of the 4tman by discrimination and. analysis. | . 
| buddhya aviviktah: which was not distinguished from puddhi. 
pura esah aham iti pratitah: what was known earlier 2 as s T. 
va: here indicates what is well-known. ps 
pratitah: understood as limited. 
304 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
tasya nissesataya vindsa eva: its complete destruction eas even 
without a trace. 
eva in EYEE snows go with vindsa as vindsa eva, eda acs 
only. 
Then, brahmatmabhavah, the idea that the atman is Brahman, 
is free from hindrance. 
Otherwise, so long as there is wrong understanding the realisa- 
tion of the atman as the unlimited Brahman is not easy. 
is 303 7 . 
| To the aacation: how to bring about the destruction of that 
aren it i is pikes | 
: ARTA AATSE RTCA TTAAAT 
eaecareifs Vad THATS ala: | 
faarare afran fafeoa witead 
fricaigttd fates gant eittisqated am: 11303 T 
brahmanandanidhir mahabalavata’ hamnkaraghorahina 
samvestydtmani raksyate guramayatscandaistribhir | 
_ mastakaih 
se a nidhim sulchakivem 
dhiro’nubhoktum sasnah VW 
The treasure of the-bliss of Brahman is guarded by a 
very powerful terrible serpent called aharmkara coiling 
round it with its three fierce hoods. The brave (wise) one 
should cut asunder the three heads with the great and sharp 
sword of wisdom and, destroying this serpent, enj oy this 
treasure which makes for bliss. | 
For easy understanding, a dramatic illustration is given. Brah- 
- mananda itself is a treasure like a treasure of gold. 
mahdbalavatad: of great strength which has been acquired firm- 
ly by drinking the milk of sense-objects. 
ahainkara itself is the fierce serpent. “ 
gurnamayath candaih tribhih mastakaih: by the three terrible 
heads (hoods) forming the three gunas of sattva, rajas and tamas. 
dtmani: existing in itself. | | 
samvestya: having coiled round. | 
_ VIVEKACUDAMANI 305 
raksyate: is safeguarded se rendering it saint esta of enjoy- 
ment). 
dyutimata: which is shining (being sharp). ‘ches here 
has reference to having for its object the self-luminous atman. 
o 9 a ww 
vijnanadkhyamahasinad: by the great sword of ae eeon born 
of contemplation (nididhydsana). 
Sirsatrayam: the three heads of sattva, rajas and tamas. 
vicchidya: completely destroying the serpent of aharhkara, by 
making it totally non-existent. 
sukhakar am imam nidhim: this treasure of sa bliss of Brah- 
man. 
dhirah: one who has brought his mind under control: vaéyatma. 
anubhoktum ksamah: has the capacity to enjoy. 
_ By this has been declared the destructibility of aharhkara as a 
result of vijfidna born of proper discrimination. 
304 
aaa atenfafanatrenfacier 8251 | 
RATA Tae aaaganta atirat wear 0% It 
—-yavadva yatkificid visadosasphirtirasti ceddehe , 
kathamdrogydya bhavet tadvad ahamtapi yogino muktyai | 
_ How can one be healthy if there is even a trace of 
poison in the body? So also is ahprikara in respect of the 
- liberation of the yogin. 
It was indicated by the previous éloka that chadaere should not 
remain even as a mere tendency. The instruction ‘cutting asunder’ 
in the previous sloka is here expanded. 3 
dehe: in the body. 
yatkincit : even a small particle. 
Even if there is a minute remnant of the poison, how can one 
enjoy health? So too, so long as the ahamkara remains even as a 
natural tendency, it is an obstacle to liberation for the yogin. 
805 
Thus: | 
ACAKAA ALTA ACH AAT AReTAT EAT | 
iad Sis faradt AAT 1 Rok T 
v.c.— 
306 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
. ahamo’tyantanivrttyad tatkrtandnavikalpasamhrtyd | 
pratyaktattvavivekddayam ahamasmiti vindate tattvam 1 
One realises that Supreme Truth ‘I am this (Brah- . 
man),’ by the total negation of aharmnkara, destroying the 
~- various wrong ideas ee by it, and eee oe the 
inner reality. 
ahameah: of aharnkara. 
atyanta-nivrttya: by completely destroying so that it will not 
rise again. | a 
‘tatkrtananavikalpasamhrtya: by the word tatkrta: produced 
by it, it is shown that when the cause is removed, the effect will 
vanish. It is said that this entire delusion wiil be destroyed when 
the first modification namely aharnkara which is the source of 
various kinds of attachment like family, clan, name, form and 
status is destroyed. 
Then, by the discrimination of the reality inside, by the know- 
ledge arising after examining the real character of the atman and 
as there is no admixture of the andtman in jfiana, one has direct 
realisation (aparoksa-jfana) of the truth, ‘I am this (Brahman)’. 
TRUITT AAAS TET 
sditatraadt: ta gaat: aafateaa. NREN 
net ahamkartaryasmin ahamiti matim muiica sahasaé 
| vikdratmanyatmapratiphalajusi svasthitimusi ; 
yadadhyasat prapta janimrtijardduhkhabahulé 
praticascinmirteh tava sukhatanoh samsrtiriyam 11 
Quickly get rid of your identification with the ahath- | 
kara which, being a modification perceives (only) the re- 
flected image of the atman and steals away its (atman’ s) 
real or original state. It is by such identification that you, 
_who are the cit of blissful nature, have come to be involved 
in this samsara full of the miseries of birth, death, old age 
and sorrow. : 
praticah: which is inside. | | re 
cinmiurteh: having jndnasarira: whieh is inside the jaanagarira. 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 
| _ sukhatanoh: compacted of bliss. 
tava: of you, the atman. 
 -yadadhyasat: by the delusion of (wrong identification of) your 
| self with which. | oO _ _ arte 
Gorda jari-dunkhabenila: full of the miseries of birth, 
death, old age and sorrow. | | oe | 
 dyam samsrtih: this samsara which is a . fact of experience. 
 prapté: appears as acquired: prapta iva bhati. ae 
asmin ahamnkartari: in this ahamkara, the “modification of ‘ 
suksma Sarira and which is actually anatman. 
‘atmapratiphalajusi: which captures the reflection of the Stman. 
svasthitimusi: that which diverts (lit: steals) the native con- 
dition of cidananda by making one look outward. _ 7 
aham iti matim sahasa mufica: quickly give up the sense of 
the ‘I’ (in this aharhkara). 
‘This is the supreme instruction. 
307 
For efficiently c conveying the aforesaid meaning to the mind, the 
guru says with great concern: | Se! 
aeqenca faarcaat fant: 
MAPTTATATT HA: | 
qaram aarafaaierdt 
farrgncarrrasa data: 11 3 og T 
‘sadaikaripasya ciddtmano vibhor ser 
dnandamirter anavadyakirteh | 
naivanyathéa kvapyavikdrinaste — 
vinahamadhyasamamusya samsrtih 1 
Without {the operation of) the super-imposition there 
cannot be this (subjection to) samsara. for you who are al- 
ways of the same form, wha are Absolute Knowledge, who 
are infinite, who are all bliss in constitution, of unimpeach- | 
able glory, and absolutely unchanging—never otherwise. 
All the adjuncts given here are very significant and purposive 
effectively suggesting the effects of the superimposition of ahamkar 
308 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
being quite reverse, ie., being of many forms, of non-intelligent 
character, being limited, subjection to sorrow and bad report. | 
sadaikaripasya: of the same form always. In case of different 
reading as ‘sadekaripasya,’ then it means: of the form of Sat or 
Existence Absolute, i.e., of the same form which is not sublated in 
any of the three periods of time. Pe 
cidaétmano vibhoh dnandamirteh unavadyakirteh: being infinite, 
constituted of Intelligence, undelimited, of the form of bliss and of 
untarnished glory, i.e., by being eternally pure, intelligent and free 
and unchanging as Suprenic Brahman in accord with the teaching o of 
the Upanisads. : | 
te: of you. | -_ 
amusya: of the aharnkara which is external ‘é the atman), of 
this externally functioning aharhkara. _ | _ 
ahamadhyasam vind: without the delusion of false identifica 
tion, i.e., without the belief of ‘I’ (the 4tman) in aharmkara. amusya 
may also be taken in the possessive case as referring to samsara of 
this person which is made up of birth, death, old age and grief. Such 
samsara never arises without this adhyasa. | 
308 
aenTagaretad caea 
Magia Heer - sretteray 
fafeoa Ferarerrgrfere TEE | | 
AS eNMAASAGe TSA Roe ve 
tasmidahamkdramimam svasatrum | 
bhokturgale kantakavat pratitam | 
vicchidya vijidnamahasinag sphutam 
- bhuiksvatmasamrajyasukham yathestam 1). 
Therefore, destroying this aharnkara which is your 
enemy and is considered as a thorn in eater’s throat, by the 
great sword of jana, enjoy as much as you oe the — 
city of the empire of the atman. 
imam ahamkaram ete: this ahasnkara which is. directly ex- 
_. perienced, which appears like a thorn in the throat of one who eats 
his food, which is one’s own enemy as it is an i peetene to enjoy- 
ing the bliss of one’s real nature. | | 
ACUDAMANI | 309 
tasmat: as it brings about Samsara even to one who is not a 
samsarin, hence. | . * 
vijnana-mahasina: a the chats word of knowlegde | Bail" of 
analysis of the five sheaths. | 
vicchidya: uprooting so that it does not spring to life again. 
atmasamrajyasukham: unlimited felicity caused of -indepen- | 
dent dtman realisation without break or obstacles. 
yathestam:. to heart’s content. | 
sphutam: like the myrobalan (@malaka ) fruit in the palm. 
‘bhunksva: enjoy. 
309° er 
The guru instructs about what has to be done next. thy a 
ae sgarata tract ata 
AAT: TCATASTATT t 
SOY MATCLATEA TST ACT 
‘garter werfor fafaaer: 11 308 r 
- tato’*hamader vinivartya vrttim 
santyaktaragah ie ari ci 
_ tisnim samassvatmasukhaénubhitya 
pirndtmand brahmani nirvikalpah We | 
Therefore, turning your mind from the ahathkira ete; joe 
giving up attachment, attaining the Supreme, remain quiet 
_ in Brahman in the enjoyment of the bliss of 4tman without 
changes. | 
tatah: after the false identification of the atman with aharhkara _ 
etc., has been destroyed. 
_ ahamadeh: . Ablative case: from aharhkara etc. 
_ ahamadeh vrttim vinivartya: directing the mind away from 
proximity to ahamkara etc. | | 
paramarthalabhat: by. attaining the supreme benefit of the. fori 
of eternal self-luminous bliss. | he ee “Ser 
(bahih) santyaktaradgah: tuming the mind wey front the (ex- 
ternal) sense-objects. : | nha lis 
atmasukhanubhitya piirndtmand nirvikalpak: remaining un- 
changing in the full enjoyment of the bliss of atman. 
brahmani tiisnim samdassva: . remain in brahman silent. 
310 _ -VIVEKACUDAMANI 
310, 
The reason for repeating the same instruction eee and again 
is given: _— | | 
ameeaen wrgft athe aT 1 aG0 1 uW 
samilakrtto’pi mahainaham punah 
, _vyullekhitassyadyadi cetasd keonam 1 
safjivya viksepasatam karoti 
nabhassvata pravrsi varido yatha | 
Like the cloud brought in by the wind in the rainy 
Season, even though completely rooted out, if this ahamkara 
is awakened in the mind even for a moment, coming t to life 
again, it creates hundreds of perplexities. | 
mahan aham: the aharmkira which has ‘grown, grotesque or 
colossal for a long time into numberless branches. 7 
Samilakytto’pi: though cut asunder along with its. root, , ajfina, | 
(by discriminative knowledge). & oesansteett on 
punascetasa yadi ksanam eyullekhitah: if tiie 3 to sprout 
again by the mind even for a moment, it will strike terror like a 
- terrible dream remembered by one just awakened from it. . peunne 
again, it will be cause of hundreds of wrong projections. 
An example for this is given. In the autumn season ‘there is no 
cloud at all. But, gathered by the wind in (at the end of) the rainy 
Season, it pours heavily, again. So, too, here. 
| 311 . 
If it be asked how the aharnkara which has been Gee 
will again come to life, it is replied that, like the dead reviving by the 
sprinkling of amrta, thinking of the sense-objects is the cause there- 
for. | 
| farmer wategaisaare: caer aan a 
ge aetaaggeed settoraratcacifearea 1 PC 
nigrhya satrorahamo’vakasah : 
_kvacinna deyo vigayanucintayad | 
sa eva sanjivanaheturasya ee 
praksinajambiratarorivambu 1): 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 311 
. Vanquishing the enemy namely aharmkara, no quarter _ 
should be given to it by thinking of sense-objects. Like 
water sprinkled on a lime tree, it is the agent of rejuvenation. 
_nigrhya: vanquishing. | 
| -gatrorahamah: of aharnkara- which is the cause of universal 
destruction. | | | 
visayanucintayd avakaégo na deyah: no chance should be given 
to it by thinking of sense-objects to come back to life. Thinking 
of the sense-objects is the cause of reviving it. It will be said in 
loka 323: na pramddadanartho’nyo jnaininah svasvariipatah tato. 
mohstato’hamdhis tato bandhas tato vyathé 1) 
A grammatical point: What is known is called the ihe and — 
what is not known is called vidheya. In a sentence prominence is 
to be given to the vidheya. Though the pronoun here in the second 
line referring to visdyaénucintayad should be in the feminine gender 
sa, as the word safijivanahetuh is the PNA ey a sah in | the masculine 
gender is used. ax 
An example is given of the sprouting out of what has (apparent- 
ly) decayed. To a decayed lemon tree that comes to life again, 
water becomes the cause of: its revival and growth. Thus, though 
aharnkara is destroyed by discriminatory knowledge, it comes back 
to life if one indulges in the thought of sense- objects and that makes 
for samsara. 
But, if it be asked how the ceaeoed ahamkara will come back 
to life by even thinking of sense-objects, it is replied: | 
visayesvavisaccetah samkalpayati tadgunén ,; samyaksarkal- 
panat kamah, kamat pumsah pravartanam }| tatah svaripavibh- 
ramsah vibhrastastu patatyadhah| patitasya vind naésam punar, 
naroha isyate 11 ls. 327, 328. “The mind that has entered into 
sense-objects thinks of them. By firm thought on them, desire for 
them arises. From such desire arises action for a man. From that 
arises delusion about one’s real nature and the man thus deluded 
falls down. One who has fallen down suffers destruction; for him 
there is no rising again.” Thus successively desire for sense-objects 
arises by thought of them. The thought about them meant that 
they are good and can give joy. That joy relates to objects and 
belongs only to the mind (not to the atman). Therefore, when one 
is established in one’s essential nature, where is thinking of sense- 
312 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
objects, where is the Judging thereof as good and where arises aesie 
for them? 
Hence, by thought of sense-objects forgetfulness of one’s true 
nature arises. When the true nature is forgotten, one thinks that 
the ahamkara is the 4tman; for without the sense of the ahamkara, 
desire will not arise in respect of objects appearing merely by reason. 
of bodily connection. Then through the aharnkara, one thinks of 
the mind, the breath and gross body etc., as the. Stman and, as 
before, desiring sense-objects gets one involved in samsara. This 
has been already said in the aphoristic Sloka 268: jfate vastunyapi 
balavatit vasaninaddiresa karta bhoktapyahamiti drdha ya’sya sam- 
séra-hetuh 1 pratygdrstyatmani nivasata sdpaneya prayatnat muk- 
tim prahustadiha munayo vasanatanavam yat 1} | 
_ The-succeeding Sloka is only explanatory of it, aaa Snes the | 
‘purusa being permanently established in Brahman. | : 
| 312 a ee = 
The meaning of ‘ya atra samsarahetuh’: that which is the cause 
of sams§ara is explained. 
gree fea ya wrt Frese raft ot ea 
AASTANMATLART AIT AAT waaay: wae u 
| dehatmana samsthiat eva kami 
 vilaksanah kémayita katham syat | 
ato’rthasandhanaparatvameva 
-- bhedaprasaktyad bhavabandhahetuh i 
_ One who is subject to dehatmabuddhi (identifying the _ 
atman with the body) alone is subjected to desire. How 
_ can one who is different be afflicted by desire? Hence, 
. being concerned with sense-objects is the cause of the. 
_ bondage of samsara caused by a sense of difference. 
One who identifies his Atman with the body, he alone is a kami,» 
one who is subject to desires.. For, how will one who is always firm 
in the condition of uninterrupted bliss have desire for things which 
can produce only a momentary pleasure? By this has been con- 
_ veyed fall from one’s nature. Hence the question: How can one 
who is different (i.e., who does not identify the atman with the body) 
be afflicted by desire? vide the éruti: atmanam ced vijaniyat aya- 
masmiti piirugah | kimicchan kasya kamaya Sartramanusamjva- 
ret. (Mund): “If one knows himself as ‘I am Brahman’, de- 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 313. 
siring for what and for whom will he propitiate the body?” Hence | 
the expressions aptakdmam adtmakémam akamam sokantaram (Brh.): — 
“One who has obtained all his desires, one who desires to realise 
his 4tma only, one who has no desires (for external objects) , one 
who is beyond all grief.” | 
| Hence, being attached to sense-objects, constantly thinking of 
them produces the sense of the ‘I’ in the body etc., through fall from 
one’s true nature and, producing the idea of difference, it is the | 
cause of the bondage of samsara. Otherwise, how will there be the 
difference of what is desired, of what makes one to desire, and of 
desires in one who | is firmly established in (the realisation of) his 
atman? 
313 
To the question how will the aharnkara so destroyed revive 
again, it is replied: 
srioreciereeara afegead | : rearenta fercterag 11393 0 
ee eer bijapravrddhih paridrsyate \ 
kadryandsat bijanisas tasmat karyam nirodhayet | 
It is seen that when the effect is developed, its seed also 
is developed. When the effect is destroyed its source also 
is destroyed. Therefore, one should subdue the effect. 
In the world, by the luxuriant growth of the effect like the 
shoot in the form of the stem, trunk and branches, the growth of 
the seed too is secn. For in the absence of the seed, the growth of 
the shoot will not arise. The shoot will not grow in the seed eaten 
up by worms. Hence, it is seen that when even a single seed is 
well developed by the association of the soil and water and dohada,“ 
ie., the desire of plants at budding time, it grows into luxuriance 
in the form of shoot, leaves, trunk, branches, flowers and fruits and 
creates thousands of seeds. By the destruction of the effect (the 
shoots, leaves etc.,), the seed also is destroyed. If the seed itselt 
which is the cause of the shoot is destroyed, the effect of the seed 
namely the full grown fruit will not arise. When that is destroyed, 
how will the seed arise? (For, the seed is to be obtained from the 
full grown fruit). Hence, if the effect, the thought of the sense- 
__ 43 dohada, means the desire of plants at budding time as for instance the 
Asoka 7 be kicked by young ladies, of the Bakula to be sprinkled with mouth- | 
of ‘liquor. 
314: VIVEKACUDAMANI 
objects arises, it will never -be without aharnkara which is the first 
of the modifications. By the growth of the thought of the sense-~ 
objects, it should-be understood that ahamkara, which is its seed, — 
also grows. Thus, even though destroyed by discriminative know- 
ledge, when sprinkled by vasanads which have arisen from time 
without beginning, ahamkara will grow in the mind and lead to 
samsara in the absence of concentration on the atman by the mind 
turned inwards. So, one will not be affected by vdsands as there 
will be no occasion for thinking ete., on sense-objects if one is con-_ 
tinuously established in Brahman without negligence. Therefore, 
one should subdue the effect, i.e., one should not engage in thinking 
about sense-objects. 
314 
How it brings about involvements in Samsara is further explain- | 
ed. | 
aratafea: ard HTaageIT A ATAAT | 
ada TAM Ta: TART a faa 1 39¥ tt 
vasandvrddhitah karyam kéryavrddhya ca vasana | 
_vardhate sarvathé pumsah samsdaro na nivartate |, 
The effect grows by the growth of vasana and by the 
growth of the effect, the vasana also grows. For such a 
person, Samsara increases; there is no cessation. : 
Even as a spark of fire. however small it may be, growing by 
contact with dry grass becomes a big blaze and burns out a whole | 
forest. Even so ahamkara, though inthe form of vasana, by reason | 
of thinking constantly on objects makes the atman slip down from its 
true state. By the strength of its own reflection, the atman gets — 
modified in many forms, destroys the discrimination that has arisen, 
produces the succession as before the dawn of discrimination, of 
desire and action, grows itself and restarts the course of samsara that — 
has. ceased. Therefore, one is cautioned by this Sloka to exercise | 
great, care. . 
karyam: ‘thought of see Selecta 
By forgetfulness of the native ananda, there is effort for acquir- 
ing the sense-objects. If they are not attained, grief arises. If they 
are secured, there ensues joy. Joy produces pride. When pride 
arises, there is transgression of dharma. By it comes about the 
fouling of the intellect. That produces the inability to realise the . 
VIVEKACUDAMANI | 315 
atman. ‘That results in the identification always of the atman with 
the body. Thence the unbroken continuity of samsara characterised 
by old age, death, and further birth. Thus samsara never ends for 
such a person. 7 | 
| 315 
Therefore: 
darcaufatort aaga vagerta: t 
AAT Aaa EIA: faraat fraat af: 139401 
samsdrabandhavicchittyai tad dvayam pradahed yatih | 
vasand preryate hyantah cintaya kriyayad bahth \1 
The yati should burn these two completely for break- 
ing the bond of samsara. Vasana is ampere by thought 
inside and by action outside. | 
 -yatih: + praYyatnasiiah: a person who is given to effort. 
samsdrabandhavicchittyai: for the complete. destruction of ail 
kinds of shackles like identifying the atman with the oa, which are 
the cause of samsara. 
tad dvayam: both the vasana and i its effect. 
-pradahket: should completely turn to ashes, that is, even as a 
seed burnt to ashes does not sprout, so should he do. — © 
vasanad etc.: with great compassion, the guru explains how it 
arises and the method to destroy it. Vasana is stimulated by inter- 
nal thought and by external action. So it should be burnt away. 
hi: because. What was said by the word ‘effect’ is here made clear 
as by the mental longing and the external (physical) act. Longing 
is inside (the mind); outside is action by the body ete. In the 
absence of the strength of the reflection of cit, the mind which lacks 
luminosity does not have the longing which ensues in action. The 
reflection of cit is through the ahamkara only. Even the capacity _ 
of the insentient body to perform action is only by the pervasion of* 
the cit through the mind etc. Therefore, it must be understood 
that the aharnkara, which is subtle, affects the intellect through 
internal longing and external act. 
316 & 317 
areat TaUaTaT aT qa se ferrer: 7 
aan a eratara: wrafaeary MAST 1 3IG 
316 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
+ Seaeaaenelniees aaa BUTT 1 R90 
- tabhyam pravardhamandé sa site samsrtimadtmanah | 
trayanam ca ksayopdaéydssarvavasthasu sarvadd }| 
- Sarvatra sarvatah sarvam brahmamiatravalokanam | 
sadbhaivavésanddardhyat tattrayam layamasnute 1! 
Growing by these two, the vasana produces one’s trans- 
migration. The means to bring about the destruction of 
these three vasands—tendency, thought and action—is to 
see everything as Brahman under all conditions, always, 
everywhere and in all ways. By the strengthening of the 
vasana of being Brahman, those three are annihilated. 
tabhyam pravardhamana sé vasand: That vasana which grows 
by those two, namely thought and action. 
atmanah samsmrtim site: produces one’s (involvement in) 
_ Samsara. 
As stated earlier, the way to bring about annihilation, namely 
tendency, thought and action is to see everything as Brahman. 
sarvavasthdsu etc. sarvavasthasu: in all the (mental) states. | 
sarvadd: always; sarvatra: everywhere. 
sarvatoh: by all means, in places, in all objects, in waking, 
dream and sleep states there is nothing other than Brahman. | 
According to the Ssruti: idam sarvam yadayamatma (Maénd.); 
brahmaivedam visvam (Mund.): “All this is this atman, all. this 
universe is Brahman only’’, and according to the Siutra: prakrtigca | 
pratijiddystinténuparodhat: “(Brahman is) the material cause also, 
on account of (this view) not being in conflict with the promissory | 
statements and the illustrative instances”, and tadananyatvamdram-_ 
bhanasabdadibhyah: “The non-difference of them (i.e., of cause and 
effect) results from such terms as ‘origin’ and the like”; and by the 
examples of clay, iron and drums, etc., and the cognitions: what 
appeared as thief is a pillar, what appeared as silver is shell, annul- | 
ling (the super-imposition) everywhere and in everything, seeing 
(realising) that there is nothing other than Brahman which is the 
substratum of everything, all this will lead to sarvam brahmamatra- 
valokanam, perception of all as Brahman only. If this jiadna 
46 The former sutra refers to Brahman being the material cause of the uni- 
verse according to the promissory statement of everything being known if one 
is known (ekavijianena sarvavijnanam) and the example cf pots and pans being 
of the same substance as clay. The latter siitra refers to the non-difference be- 
tween the cause and the effect. 
VIVEKACUDAMANI | 317. 
arises: by the gruti: yatra tvasya sarvamatmaivabhit tat kena kam 
pasyet (Brh.): “Where for him everything is &tman which can be 
seen by what?”; and by the Gita text: raso’pyasya param drstvd 
nivartate: “Seeing the Supreme, all his tastes (tendencies) turn 
back’’, where will be the sense-objects? Where more will be thought 
of them and where, most of all, will be external action? When the 
vasana of thinking oneself as Brahman becomes strong, all the three 
made up of tendency, longing and action get annihilated. 
asnute: prapnoti: attains. 
318 
_ For one who is not able to see everything as Brahman, the 
guru gives out a method by saying that the cause should be eceehe 
by the subjugation of the effect. 
feat WatsaeaTATMISeATERTAT: 
TTT Het: aT Steaeafar Tors 1 396 
kriyandse bhaveccinténdso’smadvasanadksayah | 
vasanépraksayo moksassa jivanmuktirisyate 4) 
When the action is destroyed, longing ceases; that will 
lead to annihilation of vasana. The annulment of vasana is 
itself liberation. That is called jivanmukti. . 
Jivanmukti: liberation while alive. 
Each previous factor recalls the suceeding one. There will be no 
_ longing without vasana, and there will be no action without longing; 
the destruction of the cause is to be inferred from the destruction of 
the effect. Thus, effort should be made by a person till the state 
of ‘no action’ arises. Then, there arises complete destruction of 
vasanas; that itself is liberation. Such a state is said to be jivan- 
mukti, liberation even while alive. For it is said: muktim prahuh 
tadiha munayah vésanaténavam yat: ‘The munis say what is called 
mukti is attenuation of vasana.”’ Vasana is the subtle condition of 
athing. Its attenuation means destruction. | 
After isyate: is desired or meant, brahmavibhih, ‘by those who 
know (have realised) Brahman’ is understood, 
319 
That those three get annihilated when the vasana of being 
Brahman (sadbhava vasana) si strengthened is eee with an 
illustration. 
318 | VIVEKACUDAMANI 
aarregtaiaaerct aft gat fait cagaifearet | 
afarereraeraTat facta ary wat aire 1 398 1 
sadvasanasphirtivijrmbhane sati 
hyasau vilinad tvahamdadivasana | 
atiprakrstapyarunaprabhayam 
viliyate sddhu yatha tamisra 1 
Upon the manifestation of the vasana of thinking one- 
self as Brahman, the vasanas of ahamkara etc., all melt 
away, even as the most intense darkness disappears in the 
morning twilight. 
sadvasanasphirtivijrmbhane satt: When the mind cultivated by 
hearing, contemplation and meditation develops into a gleam of the 
perfection that is Brahman by thinking oneself as Brahman always 
- and everywhere. 
asau (viprakrsta) ahamdadivasana: this long-established vasana 
relating to aharnkara ete. Under addi (etc.) in ahamdadi are to be 
included the body, the senses and the Senae ORE: 
hi: surely. _ 
vilina: completely lost. ‘bhavati’ (becomes) is understood. 
Example for this is given. Though the night is very dark as 
on new moon nights etc., that darkness is destroyed in the gleam of 
the dawn: arunaprabhayam. Reference is here is to arunodaya (the 
morning reeht ) before full sunrise. Aruna is the charioteer of the 
- Sun. | 
sadhu viliyate: : nasyati: is destroyed, disappears. 
With yatha, ‘as’, tatha ‘so’ is to be supplied to eee the con- 
struction. 
320 
Then, 
THETA TTT RTT qwaat caf feaat 
AUSTATTATATT Hat daria aeat Ta g an WRQOU 
tamastamahkdryamanarthajalam 
na drsyate satyudite dinese | 
_ . tatha’dvaydnandarasénubhitau 
naivasti bandho na ca dubkhagandhah Hl 
VIVEKACODAMANI 319 
When the sun has arisen, darkness and its baneful con- 
sequences are not seen. So too, when the nectar of .non- 
dual bliss is enjoyed, there is no bondage, nor even a trace _ 
_ of misery. 
As, when the sun has risen in the sky attee dawn, the darkness 
of the night and all the group of evils attending it like affliction of 
eye-sight, the danger from thieves and the straying from the pro- 
per road are not seen (experienced), so too, when the nectar of 
non-dual Brahman is experienced, by the growth of the vasana of 
being Brahman, as a result of the inner realisation of the Brahman 
which is of the nature of sat, cit and ananda, there will be no bond- 
age, i.e., the identification:of the 4tman with the anatman. Nor even 
a trace of grief. The reason is the annihilation of adhya&sa which 
is cause of grief. Vide the gruti: tatra ko mohah kassokah ekatva- 
manupasyatah (iga.): “Where is delusion or sorrow to him who sees 
oneness?” an | Babee 
321 e's 
If the aot appears as a result of prdrabdhakarma ( past actions 
begun to bear fruit), even then— : 
ara cette Miaerray Cat 
waranrraad fraraay | 
aatiget: aT aieTTe aT 
ete waar: aft was 11829 11 
drsyam pratitam pravilapayan svayam 
sanmatram adnandaghanam vibhdvayan | 
saméhitassan bahirantaram. va 
kélam nayethassati karmabandhe 1 
Causing the perceived objects of sense to vanish, tiieslt- 
tating on the Reality which is the embodiment of bliss, you 
spénd your time, if there is a residual prarabdhakarma, in 
external and internal concentration. 
It has been said that so long as wrong understanding has not 
ceased completely, and the gleam of one’s real nature does not arise 
without let or. hindrance, one should spend one’s days in the prac- 
tice, without intermission, of the six disciplines of Sama and ‘the 
rest. By the annulment of the consciousness of name and form, 
annihilating the perceived world, and meditating on Brahman which 
is the residual substratum of the things, perceived, and also oneself 
as that Reality which is compacted of bliss, with due concentration 
320 a VIVEKACUDAMANI 
—both external and internal—, one should spend one’s days. 
External concentration: Concentration by elimination of out- 
side objects as not being the atman. Vide: iyam bhur na sannapi 
toyam no tejo na vayur na kham napi tatkaéryajatam | yedesamadhi- 
sthanabhitam visuddham- sadekam param yattadevahamasmi il 
-“This earth is not the Reality, not even water; not fire, not | wind, 
not the sky, not even their products. I am that Supreme One Rea- 
lity which is pure and the substratum of them all.” 7 
Internal concentration: na deho na caksani na pranavayur mano 
nipt buddhir na cittam hyahamdhih yadesamadhisthinabhitam 
visuddham sadekam param Yyattadevahamasmi 1 “I am not the body, 
“not sense organs; not the breath, not the intellect. not the mind, not 
the ahamkara. I am that Supreme One Reality which is pure and 
the substratum of them all.” ‘Till the bonds of karma due to pra- 
rabdha are destroyed, lead your life with your equanimous mind 
being undisturbed by external as well as internal influences, in the 
experience of the savikalpaka and the nirvikalpaka states of con- 
sciousness. | 
322 eer 
Out of deep concern that the Sisya should not get into misery at any time in any manner, the guru repeats the occasion for the possibility of sorrow even to one in whom discrimination (viveka) has arisen. | | 
carey aeriresrat a wea: HATA 
Tara qegkeary ATA TATMETA: 16.322 
pramado brahmanisthayém ina kartavyah kadacana | Dramado. mrtyurityaha bhagavan brahmanas sutah iH 
In respect of Brahmanistha (being firmly established in 
Brahman), one should not be guilty of negligence. The 
divine son of Brahma spoke of negligence as death. 
kadacana: at any time. 
| brahmanisthayam: in the matter of being absorbed in the con- 
templation of Brahman: | | | 
_ pramadah: neigligence; carelessness; fall. 
_. Ma kartavyah: should not be adopted: one should not be guilty 
of it. ar eRe, | | 
VIVEKACODAMANI 321 
For, divine and Omniscient Sanatsujata, ihe son of Brahma and 
whe was a realised soul from birth told Dhrtarastra: pramadam vai 
mrtyumaham bravimi: “I call neg Hence itself death.” Hence 
negligence is said to be death. Sepa 
| 323 
_ That is further explained: 
aT WATatataiseat afta: cacaeqa: | | 
| MAY Aleta seat: aAagT aeacaat err 11323 1 
na pramadaéd1 anartho’nyo jndninah svasvarapatah ; 
tato mohastato’hamdhih tato bandhastato vyathad |; 
_ There is no greater danger than negligence for a jnanin. 
From it arises delusion; from it, aharhkara anc from it, 
bondage and misery in succession. 
There is no danger to the jhanin other than fall by cetlnee 
For, when there is a fall from one's real nature, then forgetfulness 
arises. Then ensues the sense of the ‘I’ (the A4tman) in the anatman 
(what is not the atman). From it arises super-imposition of the 
atman on the body etc. Thence arises the misery produced by old‘ age, eset - : ee | 
324 
To the question: ‘This may be so for the ajinin: will it be also 
for the jnanin?” it is replied: 
 favafaqe ear fagianfa faeafa: 1 
faduafa mala: wet arehra fraw TEKS ale 
‘visayabhimukham drstva: vidvamsam api vismrtih f 
 viksepayati dhidosaih yosi jaram iva priyam || ° 
Finding him inclined to. sense-objects, fobyetfedness con- 
founds even a Jearned man through defects of the intellect 
like a damsel distracting a paramour... : 3 
yosa priyam jaram iva: may be understood in ae ways. - ‘Bither 
as a damsel dotes on her beloved as she would on a paramour, or, 
as a damsel dotes on a paramour inclined to anton, as she would 
on. her own husband. : 
vismrtih: act of forgetting Brahman. 
vidvamsamapi: even a man with discrimination. | 
visayabhimukham drstva: seeing that he is intent on external _ 
sense-objects. Vide the Sruti: pardfici khani (Katha.) ( the sense 
organs perceiving outward). | z epee ee toe 
V.C.—22 
322 | VIVEKACUDAMANI 
_ dhidosaih: by the evil propensities to be referred to in | loka 
326, 
| " piksepayati: makes him lose the knowledge of his atman: 
makes him fall completely; drags him far away: confounds him. 
325 
For proper understanding, the same idea is ReoEvey en by another 
illustration. | 1 in Beebe. of 
aap vere armel Arete foe oe 
araritfa Tat AAT Stat aTE TeTERTETH A aR 
; yathapalerstam Saivalam ksanamatram na ‘tisthati | 
advrnoti tatha maya prajnam vapi pardéamukham | 
As moss that has been removed (by the hand from 
water) does not stay away even for a moment, but covers 
_. it again, so maya also covers a man however wise he may 
- be, if his senses are outward bent. — 
Previously in Sloka 152, that the five sheaths cover the ‘Simian: 
was taught on the analogy of the moss and that when the moss is 
removed, water appears clear was conveyed. As moss covering 
me removed only for the moment does not remain away from 
water, but covers it again, so too maya covers a man who is out- 
ward-bent even if he has annulled the five koSas. | 
dvrnoti: makes him such that his real nature is hidden. 
326 
The meaning of ‘there is no other calamity areateri than care- 
lessness’ is made clear by another example. — is 
eeuead carafe freditag vigid faa: | 
sieeve afer TAT TAT 1 aRe 1 
laksyacyutam syddyadi cittamisad — 
bahirmukham sannipatet saeasiaal’s 
pramadatah pracyutakelikandukah | 
sopanapanktau patito yatha tatha || es 
If the mind, outward bent, strays away ‘even in the 
least. from its ideal, it will fall continuously down like a ball 
dropped inadvertently at the top falls down the. stairs. 
laksyacyutam: slipped from the ideal, i.e., Brahman. 
bahirmukham: glides into what are not the &tman, i.e., into the 
ahathkara, buddhi, manas, pranas, the body and the sense-objects. 
VIVEKACUDAMANI | e 
 pramddatah: of one who plays even in the absence of his’ in- 
tention, inadvertently. - : 
pr epithe Neaneee the sport ball that has fallen from ‘the . 
hand. | 
sopanapatiktau patitah: which has fallen down a stairs, goes 
susie and down.and cannot be caught. 
- yatha tatha: ‘in the same way’ and ‘so’ ‘to go with nine ieee vanes 
and the illustrated. | a oe 
397 & 328 
“Be the next two and a half Slokas, the fatal character of ¢ care- 
lessness is clearly explained. : 3 
fasgcarfameaa: vacate ezToTT | 
ACUTATETATRTA: BATT: HATA tt RO Ut 
wat: eaenfnsiat fawezeg caer: 1 
| Oferrer fart aret gaaiztg feud | 
Seed ate aahraeT BTTTT BRC 
aris fz avaft sulfaueat aaeaaa mo 
ae vigayesvivigaccetah samnkalpayati tadgundn ee 0, a 
samyak sathkalpanaét kimah kamat pumsah pravartanam | " at 
_ tatah svaripavibhramso vibhrastastu patatyadhah , 
patitasya vind nasam punar naroha iksyate | 
samkalpam varjayet tasmat sarvanarthasya karanam Ho 
7 apathyani hi vastini vyadhigrasto yathotsrjet uw : 
The mind attached to sense-obj ects thinks of’ their 
qualities; by such strong thinking about them,. desire for 
them arises; desire leads to action in regard to them. 
Due to that a man gets deflected from his real nature; thus 
deflected, he falls down. One who has fallen down comes 
‘to ruin and for him there is no going up. Therefore, one 
should give up thinking of sense-objects which is the cause 
of all undoing even as a sick man would avoid-baneful diet. 
 visayesu: in the sense-objects like sound etc. 
cetah: the mind. | 
auisat sat: getting attached. 
tadgunan: qualities of prodeene pleasure etc., as they make — 
for enjoyment. a oe oe 
| samkalpayati:. thinks about. 
samyaksamkalpanat: by deep thinking about’ them. 
 kamah: desire for them (arises)... 
pravartanam: oy to acquire them; a man exerts himself due 
324 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
to. desire. Vide the smrti: yadyaddhi kurute jantuh tattat kamasya 
cestitam (Mahabharata): “Whatever a creature does is the product 
of desire.” . 7 a 2 —_ 
iiteesbirapacelbhrandalt then fall from one’s true nature. 
‘Fall’ here means forgetting one’s true nature. 7 
One who has thus fallen slides into the koSas which are anatman. 
and, through it, goes to the sense-objects which are all far ence 
from his nature. | ] 
patitasya: to one who has been led away to a great distance: 
nigam vind: apart from ruin: nasa (ruin) is not realising one’s 
true nature (svarupa). 
When one’s true nature is not realised, death ensues to such a 
one who always looks on his body etc., as the 4tman. By the delu- 
sion that the body is all, there arises continual involvement in 
samsara. 
punar narohah: there is no rising again: : there is no attainment 
of Brahman. 7 
Therefore, as a man in the grip of disease will avoid unwhole- 
some diet, one should avoid thinking about sense-objects which is 
the cause of all evil. There is great loss ts one sues from one’s 
true nature, and it ends in ruin. | | 
329 
aa: TATETH Tes hea aed: faafarat aertaa: aareit a 
antiga: fafarafa acaa aerigerert AT ATTA: 1 BRS Ut 
-atah pramadanna paro’sti. mrtyuh 
vivekino brahmavidah samadhau 
saméhitah siddhimupaiti samyak 
samahitétma bhava sévadhanah }, 
For the man of discrimination who is a Brahmavit and 
is in deep concentration (on Brahman), there is no other 
death than inadvertence. The one who is in deep concen- _ 
_ tration attains liberation. Therefore, remain WEEY carefully 
in perfect concentration. 7 
samyak saméhitah: firmly established in Brahman (brahma- 
samsthah ). : 
_ Siddhim upaiti: attains mukti or liberation. 
sivadhénah: free from inadvertence. ) 
samahitatmaé bhava: remain with your antabkarana resting ¢ on 
Brahman. tvamapi: you, too — understood. | 
VIVEKACODAMANI | 495 
330 
Stadt ger Gacd fees aa aT: | 
aienfad wast ae wa at aAMTfa: 1 330 1 
 fivato yasya kaivalyam jidehe ca sa kevalah | 
yatkincit pasyato bhedam bhayam brite yajussrutih — 
One who remains alone (unattached) while alive, is. 
also alone after the fall of the body. The Yajussruti speaks. . 
of fear to one who sees even the least difference. be whe 
jivatah: one who breathes, i.e., is alive. 
kaivalyam: being free from connection with every upadhi. 
sah: that brave man. 
- videhe ca: even after the fall of the body. 
kevalah: is free, is released. 
The Yajuséruti (The Taittiriya Upanisad), speaks of fear for him 
who sees even the least difference: ‘yada hyevaisa etasminnudaram 
antaram kurute atha tasya bhayam bhavati': ut: even; aram antaram: 
the smallest difference; kurute: pasyati: sees; atha: then; tasya bha- 
yam bhavati: fear arises in him. To him who causes (sees) any 
(the least) difference in the atman, there is fear. 
The ground of kaivalya (being alone) is being continuously 
established in nirvikalpa-samaédhi, a non-differentiating concentra- 
tion. See infra Sloka 358. Therefore, for the disappearance of upa- 
dhi, the wise man should stand steadfast in nirvikalpa-samadhi. 
331 
The meaning of the Yajussruti ending with tattveva ‘bhayam 
 viduso’manvanasya (Taitt.) is explained in this Sloka. 
wet wat arta farfrage: AVA ATANAATT | 
areas aa aaa aatfara fereartat STATATT 1 389 We 
yadaé kada vapi vipascidesah 
 brahmanyanante’pyanumdatrabhedam | 
- pasyatyathamusya bhayam tadeva 
| yadiksitam bhinnatayé pramadat | 
If at any time, this wise man sees even the minutest | 
difference in the infinite Brahman, that itself seen by in- 
advertence as difference becomes to him the source of fear. _ 
esa vipascit: this man of discrimination who is a Brahmavit. 
anante: in the infinite Brahman which is ee of the three 
_ kinds of delimitations. | 
anumatrabhedamapi: even the least difference. 
yada: used in the sense yadi, i.e. if. 
326 | er VIVEKACODAMANI 
kadé vapi: at any time. yadi pasyati: if he sees. 
yadiksitam bhinnataya pramadat: whatever is seen as differ- 
ence on account of inadvertence. | 
That itself becomes the source of fear for this negligent though 
intelligent person. Vide the sruti: dvitiyad vai bhayam bhavati 
(Brh.): “Verily from a second, there is fear’. Also: sarvam tam 
parddét. yo nyatraétmanah sarvam veda, ye’nyathato viduh anyara- 
janah te ksayyalokaé bhavanti (Brh.): ‘He who sees all this as other 
than the atman is made to fall from the path making for spiritual 
excellence. They who understand differently are subject to other 
matters (who control them) and fall down into the worlds that make 
for decay.” | : 
332 
_afregteareg _ 
grasa a: carerata eth t 
_ safer getafe geo | 
fafeanat a afereet cat Wat Nn 
Srutismrtinyayasatair nigiddhe — 
 adrsye’tra yah svatmamatim karoti t 
-upaiti duhkhopari duhkhajatam 
— nisiddhakarta sa malimluco yatha tH 
He who sees or conceives Self in the perceived objects: i 
_ which are condemned by the Sruti, the smrtis and hundreds 
_ of reasonings experiences misery after misery like one with © 
guilty conscience of having committed a prohibited act. 
The érutis like: neti neti (Brh.); neha nanasti kificana; natra 
kacana bhidasti (Katha): “Not (this), not (this); there is not the 
least multiplicity here; there is not the least difference here’, and 
the smrtis like: anadimat param brahma na_ sattannasaducyate 
(B.G.): “The Supreme Brahman is without beginning; it is not 
said to be sat (gross), nor asat (subtle).” These srutis and smrtis, 
and the hundreds of reasonings expounded in the context of the 
analysis of the five kogas have denied that anything from the body 
to the antahkarana is the 4tman. That being so, whoever identifies 
the 4tman with these prohibited things, viz. the body etc., is one 
who does a forbidden act, i.e., he is a sinner. 
_. malimlucah: (ordinarily, a thief); here malinantabkaranah: one 
whose antahkarana has been fouled, one who is a fool not knowing 
what should be done. Even as one who is ignorant of what is to 
be done goes through a succession of griefs, he also is subject to 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 327 
grief after grief due to thinking that. what. is not real, merely mate- 
rial and source of sorrow is the atman. | . 
333 
This is made clearer: 
aeariwarararat farqaeit RTT ATA freay 
favarttaarreaed Aaa qo RATATAT: RRR U 
satyabhisandhanarato vimukto 
— mahattvamatmiyam upaiti nityam | 
mithyabhisandhanaratastu nasyet — 
drstam tadetad yad acora-corayoh {| 
He who is intensely established in truth is liberated. 
He attains the eternal greatness of the atman. He, how- 
ever, who is addicted to falsehood perishes. This is seen _< 
in the case of a thief and of one who is not a thief. — oo 
| satyabhisandhanaratah: one who is completely constant to 
truth. 
atmiyam mahattvam- the state of mind which is not subject = 
any change and the state of being adored by all. | es 
 upaitt: attains. ; 
mithyabhisandhanaratah: He who is inclined to falsehood. will | 
come to ruin; for his support is falsehood only. How will he be said 
to exist? He will come to ruin only. That is seen in the story nar- 
rated in the sixth chapter of the Chandogyopanisad which employ- : 
ed the illustration of the heated axe. The palm of the man of truth 
- who is accused of theft and who clasps the heated axe in the court 
is not burnt as he is constant to truth. Hence, he is acquitted. ~The | 
real thief says: ‘I am not a thief.’ He does not give up the false- 
hood and he is burnt up by the heated axe which is placed in his 
hand and is convicted. That is the meaning of the reference to the 
thief. Stealing itself is prohibited. To it are added a series of prohi- 7 
bited actions like speaking a lie etc. To one who does like this and 
is given to falsehood, how will there be compliance with truth? 
Hence, it is said that he is subject to a series of sorrows as he suffers 
a downfall in both worlds (in this world while alive and i in the other | 
world after death). 
334 
Therefore: 
afrceaqatie arate fagra 
eqUA AARHUS fees | 
328 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
qaata aq facsr sain carracar 
acta rca faerrnraa: ‘a Teta N3BY U 
yatirasadanusandhim Banananenun vihaya 
) svayamayamahamasmityatmadrstyaiva tisthet 
sukhayati nanu nistha brahmani svanubhitya 
harati paramavidyakaryaduhkham pratitam | 
Giving up all thoughts of asat (what is not real) which 
is the cause of bondage, the samnyasin should take his 
stand on the contemplation of the 4tman in the form ‘I am 
this (Brahman)’. Then surely, steadfast contemplation on 
Brahman gives rise to bliss by self-realisation and removes 
_ the previously experienced intense misery by avidya. 
yatih: the sarnnyasin, to him alone can arise the state of being 
stablished in Brahman. 
asadanusandhim: thinking about what is not Brahman, which is 
bandhahetuh: the cause of bondage. 7 
vihaya: giving up. 
_ The samnyasin should give up thinking of whatever is not Brah- 
man as all that will make for bondage in samsara. Looking into 
himself, he must for ever remain in the contemplation: T am the 
Paramatmi. | | 
- The supreme advantage of such contemplation is stated, 
~ brahmani nistha: remaining steadfast in a aaa of 
Brahman unattached to anything else. 
_ svanubhityd: by the experience of one’s real nature as. self- 
effulgent and ever-blissful. — 7 
_ sukhayati: causes happiness. 
-pratitam: experienced previously. | | 
ie _ avidyakarya-duhkham: avidya and the Brief caused by it, or the 
grief that is the result of avidya. . 
param: intense, extreme. , el 
harati: destroys. Vide éruti: tarati gokam atmavit: “The 
: knower of (one who has realised his) a&tman crosses over all the 
grief.” Also: yatra nanyat pasyatt,............. sa bhima; yo vai 
bhimad tat sukham (Chand.): ‘Where one does not perceive any- 
thing different (from oneself)........ that is the infinite; that which 
is infinite is bliss.” For one who is always established in such 
Brahman, where will avidya arise? How can misery which is caused 
by it ever come to be? 
335 : 
Being an extrovert (sense-organs turned outward) is condemned | 
VIVERALS DEE 329 
in order to uproot all this grief and to be firmly established in 
ss lepcaiia ae 
pihins aerate sferenTy 
caat faas: ofegea are 
 eaeRTaateer facerter oa Tere 
7 bahyabhisandhih parivardhayet phalam 
f durvisanameva tatas tato’dhikam 
 gnatva vivekaih parihrtya bahyam — 
 svatmanusandhim vidadhita nityam 1! ef ae, 
Attachment to external objects will only increase © 
- more and more their fruits in the form of evil tendencies. 
' Therefore, the wise should avoid for the aforesaid reasons _ 
whatever is external and should ever Sheree in the contem- 
 plation of the ee i 
- bhahydbhisandhih etc.: attachment ies ne ects. This | 
attachment to sense-obj ee will only foster more and more the 
evil propensities which will lead to future births. As has been stated 
in gloka 314, action ensues by developed vasanas and vasanas are 
increased by actions: vdsandvrddhitah karyam karyavrddhya ¢ ca 
vasand. Knowing this, the wise should abandon all that is the non- — 
atman for the reasons which intimate the great dangers of attach- 
ment to sens-objects and which have been stated in the context of | 
death (ruin) caused by inadvertence and should constantly engage 
in svdétmanusandhih: continuous uninterrupted contemplation of 
Brahman (which is equated with one’s atman). | 
336 | 
After sisting the binding effects of external attachment, the. 
supreme benefit arising in due order by its restraint is Ronveyens: 
angi fred saa: TATA ATTA TATA | 
afera aes waar: afefactea: qadt faqaa: u 28k u 
bahye niruddhe manasah prasannata 
manahprasade paramatmadarsanam | 
tasmin sudrste bhavabandhandsah 
bahirnirodhah padavi vimukteh _ | 
When the external is controlled, the mind becomes 
peaceful. When the mind is peaceful, there arises the soul- 
sight of the Paramatman. When that is well realised, there 
is annihilation of the.bonds of samsara. So, external control | 
is what nee to secure the state of liberation. 
330 | VIVEKACUDAMANI 
Though involved very much in worldly activity, the mind of 
aman who has got up from sound sleep is very clear. Hence 
susupti (dreamless sleep) is said to be what makes for composure. 
It is called a state of samprasada, serenity; for there are no external 
objects in susupti, the state of deep sleep. When that is so as a 
matter of course, what needs to be said to tranquility produced by 
bliss when external bonds are controlled with effort? When the 
mind is tranquil and clear, in accordance with the Gita text: prasdde 
sarvaduhkhanim hainirasyopajayate ! prasannacetasohyasu buddhih 
paryavatisthate // ‘The destruction of all griefs arises when there 
is tranquillity always. Of the man with a tranquil mind, the intellect 
is firm everywhere”, freed from grief, void of all that is evil, the 
mind becomes subtle and one-pointed and acquires the capacity for 
soul-sight of the Paramatman. Vide the Sruti: manasaivedamapta- 
vyam, manasaivanudrastavyam drsyate tvagryayd buddhyad siks- 
maya (Katha): “This must be attained (realised) only by the 
mind; this must be ‘seen’ (realised) only by the mind; it is ‘seen’ a 
iad sharp subtle intellect”. : 
tasmin sudrste: when it is realised as nevedifterent from. one’ s 
self, without intermission. 
bhavabandhandsah: the complete deteudtion of the beads of ; 
samsara by uprooting of all super-impositions which are their cause. 
bahirnirodhah: the absence of any mental moodifcatfon, ny 
shything external. 
_ Therefore, the absence of connection of the rand with any thin | 
external will help to attain liberation. » ee 
337 
- _ Having thus shown in many ways the evils of thinking about — 
sense-objects, in order to turn one completely from them ou to 
produce revulsion from them, the guru reviles them. oo 
am: Ofesa: aa czafeaat safer: TeaTeeeT 
amfe qatzadtyacted eqaretgat: fray: ut 330 1 uw 
kah panditassan sadasadviveki 3 
Srutipramanah paramaérthadars | 
janan hi kuryadd asato’valambam 
svapatahetoh sisuvanmumuksuh | - 
Being learned, able to discriminate between the real 
and the unreal, believing in the authority of the Vedas, quali- 
fied to realise the Paramatman, who, seeking liberation, will 
knowingly, like a child, go in for the support of the unreal, 
which would bring in his downfall?! | 
VIVEKACODAMANI 331 
paramarthadar&: one who has the qualification to see the Para- 
matman. . 
_ $Srutipramdnah: the one for whom the $ruti alone is the ground 
of knowledge and authority, the same being the only means of know- 
ing what is beyond sense-perception. | 
_ gadasadviveki: one who knows, by the Sruti: yo vai bhiima 
tadamrtam ato’nyadértam (Chand.):. “That which is infinite, that — 
is immortal; what is different is perishable”, that Brahman is the 
reality and that jagat is mithya. _ 
panditah: he for whom panda, jana has arisen; that is, one 
who knows the real nature of a thing. es 
_ mumuksuh: one who desires the cessation of bondage. | 
_ janan hi: knowing surely (that the asat is svapaétahetu cause for 
his downfall). pe es Be 2. 
kah kuryat: who will do. 
avalambam: going in for support. 
asatah: of the unreal, the anatman. 
| svapatahitoh: which is (as aforesaid ) the cause of his down- 
fall. 
An example for it is given by saying sisuvat; for, without 
knowing the consequence, due to ajfiana a child falls down from an 
‘elevated place or clasps a serpent or a flame. But this person is a 
jaanin, a wise man.. Hence, it is said that a man of discrimination 
_ should remain established in Brahman without yielding to inadver- 
tence. 
338 med a 
In the same way as sleep and waking which are characterised < respectively by opposed qualities of unawareness and awareness of 
_ the objects of the world cannot pertain to the same time, so too is 
the case with attachment to the body etc., and Eaperenon: 
delfedafaaraat 4 afin: 
 Aacen agratacaanra: | 
TAT AY ATL TTT: 
CACACAAUAATAAACATT 11 BS Ut 
dehadisamsaktimato na muktih 
muktasya dehadyabhimatyabhavah | 
Suptasya no jagaranam na jagratah mee 
svapnas tayorbhinnagundsrayatvat 1} : 
One who is attached to the body etc., isnot y released 
To one who is released there is no attachment to the body 
etc. One who is asleep cannot be said to be awake. There 
332 | VIVEKACUDAMANI 
is no dream for him who is awake as these two refer to 
“awe different states. | 
By the éruti: na sa punardévartate: (Chand.) “He does not 
return again”, attachment to the body etc., never arises to the libe- 
rated person. If it should arise, he is not liberated. It will be said 
in gloka 440 infra: vijidtabrahmatattvasya yatha pirvam na sam- 
srtihk | asti cenna sa vijnatabrahmabhavo bahirmukhah 11 “To 
one who has ‘known’ (realised) (the truth of) Brahman, there is 
no samsara as before. If it (samsara) is (persists), he is not one 
who has ‘known’ (realised) Brahman. He is one who looks outside.” 
: 339i | 
The nature of one who is liberated is stated. — 
wdiged ferareaa 
AUATTCAATTT LAAT faite 
| eaten eer on ke TELLS 
antarbahissvam sthirajangamesu 
: jrandtmanadharataya vilokya | 
: tyaktakhilopadhirakhandaripah | 
 pirnitmana yassthita esa muktah Ho 
— He is a liberated one who looks on his atman as the — | 
intelligence only (as of the nature of jnana only), as the — 
substratum of all that is unmoving and moving — both in- — 
ternal and external — and who, abandoning all limitations, — 
remains in an unlimited and plenary state. 
_, 8thirajangamesu: im objects which do not move and move. 
antarbahih jnanatmana: ( jfaénamatra-svaripena): inside and 
outside as being of the nature of jnana only. : | 
vilokya: saksatkrtya: realising. _ | | 
upidhayah: limitations which are of the form of ajiiana and its 
effects. tyaktakhila-upadhih: who has renounced o divested of ) 
all limitations. 
Hence akhandaripah: of undivided ( limitless) form; for he: is not 
subject to limitations (upadhis), 1.e., he is devoid of the limitations 
of space, time and objects; he is of the nature of absolute sat, cit 
and ananda. 
pirnatmand: of unlimited nature. 
One who is like this is a liberated person. 
It means that if there is. attachment to the delimiting body etc., 
there cannot be the state of being a parnatma; that is, he is not a 
liberated co 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 333 
340 
The means to liberation and the means to those means are . 
stated. | | 
aafern aafaafaga: aaterarara oisfet aheaq | 
qa AATITAat aaararayea TaTCAHASAT 1 Zo Ut 
sarvatmand bandhavimuktihetuh 
sarvatmabhavanna paro’sti kascit | 
drsyagrahe, satyupapadyate’sau 
sarvatmabhavo’sya sadaétmanisthaya 11 | 
There is no means for complete liberation from bond- 
age other than identifying oneself with the whole universe. 
This identification arises upon the rejection of the percep- 
tible world by continuous practice of meditation on the 
atman. | | 
It has been said: yato yato nivartate tatastat’o vimucyate, 
nivartandt hi sarvato na vetti duhkhamanvapi. To the extent that 
one gets liberated by complete withdrawal from everywhere, one does 
not feel even an iota of grief. Accordingly, the means for the 
complete freedom from bondage is_ identifying oneself with 
everything (cultivation of sarvatmabhava). Than it there are no 
other means. It has been said: aham brahmasmi yo veda sa sar- 
vam bhavati tvidam ; nabhiitya isate devaih tesamatma bhaveddhi 
sah i “He who knows (realises) ‘I am Brahman’, he becomes 
all this; the devas endeavour to thwart the seeker of Brahman; hence, 
he should become themselves.’ | e 
That which is a bond (like a rope) will bind only what is 
other than itself, not itself, on account of the impossibility of the 
same thing being the binder and the bound. For, it has been said 
in the Sitra Bhasya: However well trained, a dancer cannot get 
up on his own shoulders. Fire does not burn itself. Therefore, 
when identification with everything (sarvatmabhava) has been 
attained, what is considered as a source of bondage, becomes insepa- 
rable from one’s self, and then, where is bondage? The Kaivalyo- 
panisad says: sarvabhitesu catmanam sarvabhitani catmani.; sam- 
pasyan brahma paramam yati nainyena hetuna; 11 “One attains 
the supreme- Brahman seeing the atman in all creatures and all 
creatures in the atman; not by any other method.” It means: one 
sees the dtman as the material and the substratum of all creatures 
as the rope is in the rope-snake example, and also sees all creatures 
47 "The ideas is that the devas do not countenance men seeking Brahmajjiana lest 
they should then give up yajfias causing loss of oblation to the devas. To counter- 
act this, the seeker of Brahmajfiana is counselled to get an attitude of looking on 
all this including the devas as himself. | : ee 
334 | VIVEKACOUDAMANI 
in the dtman as imagined in it as the snake Js on the rope. By 
reason of being freed from all limitations (upadhis), being alone 
(Kevalibhava) is itself being all (Sarvatmabhava). For, sarvat- 
matva will not arise in respect of what is limited by association 
with upadhi. Though, by reason of maya enveloping everything, 
it is right to say that it is the substratum of everything qualified by 
it, yet, as maya cannot exist by itself except as an adjunct, its 
substratum is only the pure unlimitéd caitanya or the sole Brahman. 
Such Kaivalya is sarvatmabhava. (The Alone is the All.) _ 
_._ The reason for this is given by Sri Bhagavatpada: asau sarvat- 
mabhavah asya sadétmanisthayd: The sarvatmabhava of this jnanin 
is due to his remaining in continuous contemplation of his atman 
without obstruction.. This arises when the mind does not conceive 
visible objects. 
| 341 
That the non-apprehension of objects of perception will arise 
only upon the contemplation of the atman, not otherwise, is ex-_ 
plained. | | 7 : 
FTATATIEN SA YT Ter Ferra fassat 
gaara: Taesat Kaa: | 
araratan-aq-na-farq: facarafacsraz: 
aa: BTA Faraway: Aeqrg: Waxqg 
drsyasyagrahayam ketham nu ghatate dehdtmand tisthato 
bahyarthanubhavaprasakta-manasah tattatkriyam 
| : kurvatah | 
— samnyastakhila-dharma-karma-visayaih nitydtmanisthd-paraih 
tattvajnaih karaniyam dtmani sadénandecchubhir 
cs. * a | | yatnatah 1) 
How wiil the non-apprehension of the perceptual world 
_ be possible for one who ever identifies his Atman with the 
body, to one whose mind is given to enjoyment of external 
objects and acts accordingly? It can be effected with great 
effort by the seers of truth desiring bliss who have renoun- 
ced all actions relating to sense-obj ects and who are always 
established in their 4tman. ) Pm 
_ dehadtmand tisthatah: One who is in a state of identifying the 
_&tman with the body. Hence, bahyarthanubhavaprasaktamanasah — 
having a mind inclined to enjoyment of external objects. The 
samasa here is sasthibahuvrihi: ...prasaktam manah yasya tasya. 
By this are conveyed thinking of sense-objects, purpose and desire. 
VIVEKACUDAMANI | 335 
tattatkriyam kurvatah: doing the specific actions according to 
the dictates of the mind exercised for the getting etc., of | sense- 
objects. | 
drsyasydgrahanam: non-receiving, that is exclusion of percep- 
tible world. , Se 
katham nu ghatate: how will it be possible? = 
(atah) samnydstakhiladharmakarmavisayath: (therefore) by 
those who have renounced all dharmas, karmas and _sense-objects. 
dharmah: vaidikadharmah: what is prescribed in the sastras; ean: 
laukikakarma worldly activity; visayah: Sabda etc. 
nityatmanisthaparaih: by those whose dtmanistha is nitya; 
who are intensely devoted to permanent contemplation on Brahman 
or for whom such contemplation is pardé or absolute. It may mean 
either nityd ya dtmanistha tasyim parath or sé para pradhinagbhistg | 
yesam taih. 
, So, such exclusion of the perceptible world has to be done by 
great effort by seers of truth longing for bliss. | | 
The order is sadanandecchubhih i ia Yyatnatah drsya- 
grahanam karaniyam. 
342 
The égruti is quoted in support of the statement that permanent 
establishment in the 4tman is the means for effecting universal iden- 
tification (sarvatmya-siddht). | 
erateafaga fret: geerazeTor: | 
aatter facerreatar aieatt ater she erfer: 1h ae 
sirvatmyasiddhaye bhiksoh krtasravanakarmanah | 
samaidhim vidadhatyesa santo dasta iti srutih 11 , 
The gruti beginning with ‘Santo dantah’ prescribes con-— 
centrated contemplation for the sarnnyasin who has perform- 
ed the action of hearing (the Sruti-texts) for the accom- 
plishment of universal .identification. | 
bhiksoh krta-Sravanakarmanch: to the sarnnyasin _— ihe en- — 
gaged himself in listening to the words of the Vedanta-texts and their 
meanings from the lips of a guru who is well-established i in Brahman 
(brahmea-nistha). 
_ sarvatmyasiddhaye: for the perfection of sarvatmabhava of the 
form of kaivalya, which is the mark of emancipation. 
esa: this Sruti beginning with ‘Santo dantah’: tasmadevarnwwit 
Santo danta uparatah titiksuh samahitah Sraddhavitto bhitva dtman- 
yevatmanam pasyet (Brh.): “Therefore, one who knows thus, who 
has controlled his internal and external organs, who has withdrawn 
336 _ VIVEKACUDAMANI 
his mind from objects, who is patient, who has concentra ton and 
faith, let him realise himself in his 4tman.” 
samaddhim vidadhati: It (the gruti) teaches (scenes) samadhi, 
(deep concentration). It is indicated that deep concentration should 
be. practised by shutting off the mind from mus to external 
propensities for the realisation of the a4tman. _ 
vidadhati: kartavyatvena bodhyati: teaches as what should be 
done. ae. 
343 
- That this stands to reason is stated. 
areauatceat fare: 
ad a may: agarsta ofesa: | 
I fafancoremaarfufaeear: 
aA UsTaAAT ( ATAAT: 11 BvR ue 
dridhasakterahamo vinasah | 
kartum na sakyah sahasapi ‘sian 3 
ye nirvikalpakhyasamadhiniscalah | 
tanantara ’nantabhava hi vasanah }) 
The destruction of the ahamkara which has been strong 
cannot be effected quickly even by the. learned except by 
those who are firm and unmoving in nirvikalpa samadhi. 
For, vasanas are long-rooted or variously produced, | 
ye nirvikalpakhya-samddhi-niscalah: Those who are unmoving 
(steadfast) -in nirvikalpa samadhi. Samadhi is of two kinds: savikal- 
paka and nirvikalpa. The resting of mental activity in the pure 
Brahman in that form without the merging of the distinctions of the 
knower, the known and knowledge is called savikalpaka samadhi. 
As the clay elephant is seen though the clay alone is seen, even if 
the sadvastu, the Reality is seen, the triple distinction (of knower, 
known and knowledge) remains. Hence, this kind of samadhi is 
called savikalpaka. Giving up the consciousness of the triple dis- 
tinctions, being firmly established in the known only is the nirvikal- 
paka samadhi of the mind as stated in Yoga Sastra. Salt that is mixed 
with water remains indistinguishable from water; it does not appear 
separately. It appears one with the water. Even so, the state of 
the mind in nirvikalpaka samadhi is that it. remains as the lone 
“Brahman. It does not shine separately; Brahman alone shines with- 
outa second. As there is no thought of the knower etc., this is called 
nirvikalpaka samadhi. The difference between the two, savikalpaka 
and nirvikalpaka is the presence or absence of the mental modifica- 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 337 
tion. Thus it has been declared with respective examples. 
nigcalah: unmoving in it or unmoving on account of it. 
tén antara: except by them. 
dridhasakteh: with the power grown strong, i.e., which is 
capable of producing various kinds of delusions. | 
ahamah vinadsah: the destruction of the aharhkara, 
panditairapi: even by those who have listened to (learnt) the 
Vedantic texts. | 
sahasé kartum na gakyah: impossible to effect quickly. 
hi: yasmat; for. Oo | 
vasanah: andtmasamskarah: tendencies relating to the anatman. 
anantabhavah: those which have numberless births or those 
produced by many objects: anantah asankhyakah bhavéh janman. 
yasam tah or anantaih bahubhih padarthaih bhavah utpannah. 
‘Therefore, for the extinction of all kinds of vasanas, nirvikalpa- 
samadhi alone should be resorted to. 
344 — | 
How the viksepa Sakti (power of projection) which has not been 
completely uprooted makes for bondage is explained. 
meager atigeat atafacenssqaaart i 
faatqafer: ged faaaafa vert: 1 aye it 
ahambuddhyaiva mohinya yojayitudurterbalat i 
viksepasaktih purusam viksepayati tadgunaih 1; ates 
Aided by the concealing power, the projecting power 
_. gonnects a man with the sense of the ahamkara and distracts 
_ him by the qualities of that aharmkara. : 3 
| ‘When one invests the non-Aatman with the idea of the stnién, 
then one’s real nature gets concealed. Vide the previously given 
example of the water covered over by moss. 
mohinya: which brings about fall from one’s real nature. _ 
| ahambuddhyaiva yojayitvg: connecting with the sense of the 
ego, by its concealing power which makes for the real nature of.the 
atman not shining. 
purugsam: panditamapi: even a learned man. 
tadbalat: by samkalpa etc., produced by it. | 
viksepasaktih: projecting power which produces a series of 
delusions and mental modifications of purpose, desire etc. 
_ vikgepayati: leads in many ways far off from the atman. 
V.C,—28 | 
338 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
345 
faetanfenfanat farat facta 
7 fartenrercnatertrararara 
qqraat: eqeratrrateet | 
TAT AATALUATNAT ETAT 
freimia wafa sferarererat 
fratqot afa aa a warqaTa 1 Bwu It 
viksepasaktivijayo visamo vidhatum 
_ nissesamavaranasaktinivrttyabhave | 
_ drgdrsyayoh sphutapayojalavadvibhage — 
nasyet taddvaranamdatmani ca svabhavat || 
nissamsayena bhavati pratibandhasinyo | 
_ niksepanam nahi tadé yadi cen mrsarthe \; 
Without the total removal of the concealing power, . it 
is difficult to get over the projecting power. That conceal- 
ing power will get destroyed naturally only if the seer 
and the seen are distinguished clearly like milk and water. 
_ This conquest over the projecting power will be surely 
effected without any obstacle if there is no resting (of the 
mind) in the false things (of the world). 
Unless the concealing power is completely overcome, ‘conquest 
over the projecting power is difficult to accomplish. _ 
drgdrsyayoh: between the atman which is drk and non-atman 
which is the drsya: drk used in the sense seer. 
sphutam: clearly. 
payojalavat: like milk‘and water; if the distinction between 
them is done by the beak that is the mind of the Paramahamsas, then — 
the concealment will be destroyed of itself in. the 4tman without 
effort. There is nothing more to be done after the destruction of 
concealment ensuing upon discrimination (between the atman and 
non-atman). 
Then, if there is no resting of the mind in the non-dtman which | 
is mithya, the victory over the projecting power will arise without 
doubt, void of any obstruction. | 
346 
That clear understanding is the cause of this kind of diserimina- 
tion is stated. | 
48 Even as the mythical hamsa (swan) separates the milk a the wate in 
the mixture of the two, the Paramahamsas separate the atman from the anadtman. 
VIVEKACODAMANI | 339 
arafiaae: eqeateata: 
farnva PHATATAAEAT 
foater arargaatgare 
 menlzqetea saat aafa: th avg tt 
samyagvivekah sphutabodhajanyah 
vibhajya drgdréya-padartha-tattvam | 
_chinatti mayikrtamohabandham 
yasmad vimuktasya punar no samsrtih | 
Perfect discrimination is the offspring of clear under- 
_ standing separating the nature of the seer and of the seen. 
It then cuts asunder the bond of delusion caused by maya. 
From that arises liberation (vimukti), and there is no 
entanglement in.samsara again. 
sphutabodhah: understanding which is free from doubt and is 
not incorrect. 
janyah: produced by the realisation of the mahavakyas. learnt 
from Sruti and by the grace of the guru; the perfect ee. 
upan that of the form ‘brahma satyam jagan mithyd’. 
_ dygdrsyapadarthatattvam: the real nature of the atman and the 
non-atman. 
oaeib hand: separating like milk and water. | | 
maiyakrtamohabandham: bondage arising from the eonicedl: 
ment of one’s real nature caused by moha or ayay ey i.e., the sense 
of the 4tman in the non-dtman. 
chinatti: completely destroys by the roots. 
The ground for that is stated by saying that for such a one there 
is no samsara again. Vide the éruti: na sa punardvariate (Chand.), 
_ The ghee extracted from milk does not become milk again; even so, 
_ the mind that has attained the state of self-effulgent bliss does not 
get attached again to things that are the non-Atman. 
347 
The meaning of the fourth quarter of the Sloka 346 is explained. 
qeratecafaawate: ageataerigd OTT | 
fw cara Fredacney shay aaa eT Ut ae u 
| eiishacsnhendala ida 
| dahatyavidyigahanam hyasesam | 
kim sydt punah samsaranasya bijam 
| advaitabhavam samupeyuso’sya |; 
340 _-VIVEKACODAMANI 
For, the fire of the knowledge of the oneness of Brah- 
man and the jiva totally destroys the forest of avidya. To 
him who has attained the sense of this oneness, what will 
be there of the seed of samsara? | 
hi: for the reason that. | = 
paravaraikatvavivekavahnih: para-avara-ekatva-vivekavahnih: 
parah is Isvara; avarah is jiva; ekatva viveka: the knowledge that re- 
lates to the oneness of both of them; the knowledge resulting from 
isquiry. That knowledge itself is fire. | 
aSesam: along with all its products. 
avidyagahanam: the forest that is avidya; avidya itself is the 
forest. 
dahati: converts into ash. vide: vibhedajanake’jidne nasamat- 
yantikam gate; atmani brahmano bhedam asantam kah karisyati ); 
“When the ajfidana which is the cause of the sense of difference is 
totally destroyed, who will make the non-existent distinction of 
‘Brahman from the atman?” To this great soul (mahatma) who 
attains the advaitabhava, the sense of the differenceless Brahman, 
who unceasingly realises it, what will remain of the seed of samsara, 
of the delusion of the 4tman in the body etc.? Not in the least, is 
the meaning. 
348 
The manner in which destruction of samsara is brought about 
by perfect knowledge of the real (the atman) is stated. 
 arerorey frafatafa a avandia: [ be 
_ fearafaam: agtedaatraz: afwafa: Wave tl 
Gvaranasya nivrttir 
bhavati ca samyak padarthadarsanatah t 
mithyadjndnavindsah 
tadvadviksepa janita-duhkha-nivrttih 11 
| By proper understanding of an object arises the can- 
cellation of concealment, i.e., of mithyajfiana of the object. 
So too the removal of the grief Broduced: by wrong proj ec- 
tion. 
It has been said in sloka 146, that the bondage of a person arises 
by these two powers. So, when these two, concealment and projec- 
tion (avarana and viksepa) are destroyed, ‘whence will the bondage 
of samsara arise? | 
VIVEKACUDAMANI | 344 
| | : 349 et 
By clear and proper understanding of an object, arise removal 
of concealment and destruction of mithyajiana, false knowledge. | 
Similarly, the removal of the grief produced by the projection which 
takes the form of incorrect understanding also arises. _ This truth is 
| explained with the aid of an illustration. | 
gata ae arausyrreriaATTy | 
TENET TAA arered aera faqer Wa¥e oo at aw 
tnemad vastu satattvam jnatavyam bandhamuktaye vidusd }1 Me 
| ‘These three are seen by the proper knowledge of the 
_ the rope-snake. Therefore, the truth about a thing must be 
known by the wise man for release from bondage. : 
- etat tritayam: these three; removal of the concealment of the 
rope; the destruction of the delusion of the snake, the removal of — 
the grief ensuing on fear and pempnne caused by the = proj jection ue 
the snake on the rope. a ffs 
__ drstam: these three are seen. 
- tasmad vidusé: therefore, by him who knows this. | oe 
. bandhamuktaye: for the destruction of the concealment and 
projection which are the cause of bondage. — 
vastu satattvam: an object in its true nature. 
jnatavyam: should be understood. 
350 
The mithya character of everything other than | the atman is 
stated with supporting reason. 
aaistaraintcs aera Atatfeerey ee at: 
aenranay faad aat qat az WACTATTATTAY ul ayo a 
ayo’gniyogadiva satsamanvayat 
matradiripena vijrmbhate dhih | 
sina eedadebe tritayam yato mrsa 
—drstam bhramasvapnamanorathesu | 
Like the coming together of iron and fire, the intellect | 
manifests itself, by the inherence of Brahman as the knower 
etc. As a result of it, these three are — seen in 
delusion, dream and imagination. - 2s 
- Even as heated iron appears as fire. by the reason of its contact 
with fire, so too by combination with Brahman in the form of a 
342 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
‘reflection, the intellect appears differently i in pene restore gore of 
knower, knowing and known. tae : 
~ dhih: the intellect. 
| matradiripena: in the three-fold form, of ‘mata, mitih and 
meya’, the pramata, pramitih and prameya, the cogniser, the cogni- 
tion and the cognised. . 7 
vijrmbhate: takes various forms. 
The jiva too, who is the cogniser is an imagined’ entity : as it is 
qualified by the intellect. anvestavyatmavijnanadt prak pramatrtva- 
matmanah | anvistassydt pramdtaiva paipmadosadivarjitah 11 
“Before the 4tmajfiana is sought and secured, the atman is-spoken of © 
8s pramata, cogniser, with the distinction of cognising and cognition. 
Upon the atman being known (realised), there is only the cogniser 
(i.e., objectless subject) bereft of sins, defects etc. (arising t irom the 
trinity of knower, known and knowing). 
bhrama-svapna-manorathesu: In delusion, dream and imagine. | 
tion, this trinity (of cogniser, cognising and cognition) is seen. 
tatkaryam: the effect of the intellect associated with the Real 
(satsamanvayayukta-dhikaryam). 
yatah mrsa& drstam: for which reason that vy hich is seen is 
- mithya.® | 
| Uiserarenfar wa ater | 
alate areata wari arearar 1 ak4 u 
tato vikarah prakrter ahammukhah — 
dehavasanaé visayasca sarve | 
kgane’nyathabhavina esa atma 
nodeti napyeti kadapi nanyatha |) 
_ Therefore, all the modifications of Prakrti hon the 7 
aharnkara to the body and all sense-objets are subject to 
change in a moment. But, this atman is never originated 
nor is destroyed, nor becomes different. 
49 In the same way as what is seen in bhrama, svapna and manoratha, delu- 
sion, dream and imagination marked by the trinity (triputi) of seer, seeing and 
seen are mithy&, so too what is experienced in jagrat. which is subject toa like 
trinity, is mithya. 
VIVEKACOPAMANI 343, 
Therefore, as effects of the intellect are unreal, the modifica- 
tions of avidya from the ahamkara to the body, all objects of sense, 
sound etc., and pots etc., change in a moment. Though they appear 
to be real, when carefully examined, they turn out to be non-real. 
As they are of the nature of being seen and getting destroyed, drs- 
tanasta-svaripa, i.e., as all that is seen is liable to destruction, they 
are not real. This Racer: however, is never born; nor does it ever 
die. It is never of a different nature, i.e., it has no modification like 
the intellect. It is always of the same form. It remains as it is 
always. Hence it is real. | : : es 
| 352 . 
frrarguravufaeneqt qecarigarant azaferart: | 
AETIEMATS AAA: NAB AAT TTT: TAT. WRRR u 
nityadvayakhandacidekaripo 
buddhyadisakst SEE PON en ' 
ahampadapratyayalaksitarthah ae 
pratyak sadénandaghanah paratma nN | 
The Paramatman is eternal, non-dual, ‘unlimited con- 
sciousness, ever of the same form, the witness of the intelli- 
gence, etc., different from the gross and the subtle, the 
meaning indicated by the word ‘T’, the inmost self, ever 
compacted. of bliss. 
nitya: without beginning and end. 
advaya: devoid of any object other than itself. 
Hence akhanda: unlimited; without the three limitations (of | 
deta, kala and vastu). 
cit; the pure intelligence. 
nityadvayakhandacidekaripah: whose fora. is the eternal, un- 
limited pure intelligence. : 
The ground for this is stated in the wards: buddhyadi-sakest | 
the witness of the intellect etc.; vide Sloka 296 supra: vikaripam | 
sarvavikaravetta , nityo’vikdro bhavitum samarhati 1, = Hence 
sadasadvilaksanah: ‘pide the Gita text: anddimat param brahma na 
sat tannasad ucyate: i.e., the beginningless supreme Brehmen, diffe- 
rent from avidya and its effects. . 
49a The real is Sat, the ever existent, trikaéla-abadhyam, unsublated in any of 
the three periods of time, The unreal is what is never existent like the son of — 
a barren woman. The non-real is the false that is projected by the concealment 
of the true, It appears, but is not real. : 
344 | : _ VIVEKACUDAMANI 
_ ahampratyayalaksitarthah: By implication, being the subject 
of ned cognition which arises alanis when the word aham ( we 
is heard. | 
~ pratyak: pratilomyena ancati iti pratyak: i.e., when the sight : 
is turned inward. sy 
~ saddénandaghanah: Betaas different from the unreal, the mae: 
tient, grief and aharmkara, shining in the form of sat, cit and Ananda: 
of bliss which cannot be sublated” in any of the three periods of 
time. = 
pardtma: the supreme atman. 
Thus the truth about the 4tman has been declared. 
353 
eed faafrad sient ieen é 
fafraca ata famategseat | to 
WAT CAAA cn ae 
aval fanaa: caaaa meafa T 243 iT) 
ittham vipascit sadusad vibhajya | 
niscitya tattvam nijabodhadrstyi | 
jnatva svamatmainam akhanda-bodham 
- tebhyo vimuktah svayameva simyati 7 
Thus discriminating the real and the unreal, ‘deter- 
mining the truth by the eye of his own experience, know- 
ing his atman to be of the nature of infinite intelligence, 
freed from the things which are the “hon-atman, the wise 
_man attains peace by himself. | 
 ittham: thus: as detailed earlier. 7 ™ 
vipascit: one who goes by Ssruti, who has the. soutien of the 
supreme goal, who is seeker of liberation. - 
‘sadasat: sat is Brahman; asat is avidya and its effects. 
vibhajya: distinguishing as satya and mithya. aay ore 
nijabodhadrstya: by the eye of his ( ee re 
rience born of inquiry. : 
 tattvam viniscitya: knowing for a certainty the exact nature 
of a thing (here the atman). a 
-svamatménam akhandabodham jnatva: knowing (realising) his : 
atman as infinite intelligence. | _ 
tebhyah vimuktah: being completely freed from things from 
avidya to the body, from sense-objects like Sabda etc., to the length 
of the extinction of all vasanas. 
VIVEKACUPAMANI 345 
 -pimuktah: visesena muktah; vdsanayah api abhavah eee: 
The absence of any vasanas is visesa in mukti. 
‘sayameva Se ae remains as unconcealed pure effulgence 
- 354 
“When does one-remain like this? This must be known. So it 
is said: | 
aarecaae: freratasaedat | 
aaTfersaHeTT AATACATMAT 1 BUY UV 
ajnanahrdayagranther nissesavilayastadé | 
pane ee yadddvaitétmadarsanam | 
_When there is experience of the non-dual atman by 
means of nirvikalpa-samadhi, then there is ei des- 
tructicn of the knot of ajnana. 
samdadhina sacle act by pirvikalpe-samadhi as described 
earlier. 
yadddvaitatmadarsanam: when there is direct experience of 
the non-dual Paramatman. 
tada: then there arises. 
ajianahrdayagrantheh: of the knot produced by aja : na which 
makes for the identification of the sentient 4tman with the insen- 
tient non-atman. ee 
nigsesavilayah: destruction along with the vasanis. : 
355 
cana fata wera qqteetary ear 
carafe qeaterraga frfaeie 
stasafa warearaea aat fawer: 
fasaayTTSss TTATATAEAT 1 BY UN 
tvam aham idamitiyam kalpand buddhidosat 
, prabhavati paramatmanyadvaye nirvisese | 
—pravilasati samaidhavasya sarvo vikalpah 
vilayanam upagacchet vastutattvavadhytya | MH 
_ By the flaw of the intellect, the imagination of the dis- 
tinction in the form of ‘you’, ‘I’ and ‘this’ arises in the quali- 
tyless non-dual Paramatman. When this (&tman) shines. 
forth in samadhi, all these wrong understandings will vanish 
by reason of the knowledge of the truth of Brahman. 
346 _-VIVEKACODAMANI 
. buddhidosdt: through the defect of the nature of rajas and 
tamas, there arises wrong imagination as ‘you’, and ‘I’ and ‘this’ in 
the. Paramatman which is non-dual and, therefore, qualityless, — 
When this (atman).shines forth in samadhi, by the clear know- 
ledge of the truth, all imagination will attain complete destruction. 
_vastutattvavadhrtya: by the firm knowledge of the real. nature 
of the atman. a - 
sarvah vikalpah: all doubts, wrong understanding. 
vilayanam: complete destruction. 
upagacchet: will attain. 
356 
In a single Sloka, the guru conveys the nature of samadhi with 
its means and its fruit. - 
“Mal ater: Tere: erferqareTaTtey 
eee woute aft: caer qaerareny | 
| aanfeenfafercarfrary AY TAT fear | | 
| wegen Praafs get friveat fataacs: TEC u 
Sinto dantah paramuparatah ksantiyuktassamadhim . 
kurvan nityam kalayati yatih svasya sarvitmabhavam [ 
ae tenavidyatimirajanitan sidhu dagdhva vikalpan 
brahmakrtya nivasati sukham niskriyo nirvikalpah uw : 
Calm and perfectly controlling the external propensities 7 
of the sense-organs, ceasing from all external activity, 
patiently bearing the dualities, practising samadhi daily, 
the yati experiences his oneness with everything. By that, 
completely burning the wrong ideas caused by the darkness 
of avidya, he remains in the beatific state of: mas 
_ actionless and bereft of doubts and grief... 
\ A _ Santah: nigrhitamanéh: with .his mind held under. check. — 
\., dantah: siruddhabahyendriyab: with his external organs con- 
\ trolled, 
_ param uparatah: aren pletely ceasing from all eerie activity. 
\ heniaelaee: bearing the dualities of heat and cold, Oe and 
pleasure etc.,. with fortitude. 
\ samadhim kurvan nityam:. initia eatabliening his mind 
in the qlialityless Brahman. | 
yatih: the samnyAsin. : 
svasta. sarvatmabhavam: his ichenéés (ind nancies alinees). 
__ VIVEKACUDAMANI 347 
_ kalayati: experiences. o 
tena: by that sithiinaeeuaabd: | Saap EEE 
__ avidyatimirajanitan sidhu.dagdhvaé: avidya itself is the dark- _ 
ness. By completely burning away the WEOHS: ideas een by it, 
totally destroying, turning to ashes. 
| brahmakrtya niskriyah nirvikalpah Aikhom ndansati: actionless | 
and rid of doubts, etc. he lives blissfully in the state of Brahman. . | 
By this it is affirmed that when action is .destroyed, thought i is 
destroyed. From that ensues extinction of vasanas. The extinction 
of vasana is liberation. Such a one is called jivanmukta. kriyadnase 
bhaveccintanaéah, asmad vasaniksayah | “vasanapraksayo moet 
fivanmuktih sa isyate }, (81. 318). | ie 
For it, two qualities, niskriya and nirvikalpa are stated, action- 
less and. having no wrong ideas, etc. — | 
357 
For the effect of samadhi leading to liberation, the meanis is the 
destruction of the awareness of the world inside and outside. Libera- 
tion does not arise merely from external sounds. _ This is declared | 
in the next Sloka. | 
eenfger & afer angi stata aaccang faarafa 1 
TTT ARAN TAIT: 
AVG g arclemaarfaentat: 3419 ) 
samahita ye pravilipya bahyam | 
$rotrédi cetassvamaham cidétmani 
ta eva mukta bhavapasabandhaih 
nainye tu piroksyakathabhidhayinah I 
They alone are freed from the bonds of . samsara who 
merge the external things like the ear etc., their mind and 
their aharnkara in the 4tman which is of the. nature of cit, 
not others who just talk of ‘a thing not experienced by them. 
‘ those pérsons. | 
oe §rotradi: the external things like ear, ete. By. this the 
merging of the. space (akasa) etc. in the cidatman is conveyed. A 
‘man says ‘I hear’ etc., due to super-itnposition of the atman on the 
sense-organ activity. Hence the expression: érotradi. 
cetah: the mind inside. 5 
svam aham: one’s aharnkara. 
348 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
cidéitmani pravilipya: firmly determining that apart from the 
cidatman there is nothing internal or external. 
ye samahitah: those whose minds are firmly set on thie! ' cidat- 
man. . | | ) 
ta eva: te eva: they only. 
bhavapésabandhaih: from the delusion of samsara which are 
like binding ropes. | _ 
‘muktah: are freed. 
| _ anye tu na: not others at all. 
_ paroksyakathabhidhayinah: those who merely indulge in 1 bluff 
of what they have not directly seen (realised). aes ately 
_anye: others, akrtapravilapanah: those who have not made the 
laya or extinction of non-atman. | | 
398 
With the firm conviction that upon the liquidation of the world 
by reason of there remaining nothing else other than Brahman which 
is the substance of everything and the substratum of all that is 
imagined, and that by the extinction of the mind, kaivalya or libera- 
tion ensues without obstruction, nirvikalpa samadhi must be prac- 
tised without intermission. This is stated in the next Sloka. | 
sarfwatna cau fred 
atereatg TATAA BIG: 
aeargarel: fasata fagra 
wat aarsmereraTfahresar WRRE HT 
 upadhiyogat svayameva bhidyate 
| copddhyapohe svayameva kevalah , 
tasmadupadheh vilayaya vidvan 
' vaset sada’kalpasdmadhinisthaya u 
_ By association with upadhi, one is (considers neseil as) 
different. When the upadhi is removed, one remains alone 
(liberated). Therefore, a learned man should ever engage 
himself in nirvikalpaka-samadhi for the liquidation of the 
upadhi. 
The Paramatma which is diversely sung (described) as ekame- 
vadvitiyam (Chand.): “one only without a second”, neha nanasti 
kifcana: “there is no multiplicity here”; natra kacana bhidasti 
(Katha): “there is no difference here”, is ‘differentiated. only by 
aac with upadhi. 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 349 
upadhyapohe: when the upadhi of the form of maya and the five 
sheaths is destroyed. 7 , 
svayameva kevalah: svayam kevala eva: is itself Mone: oe 
tasmat: therefore, for the total liquidation of the ahamkara 
which is the cause of the differentiation—the upadhi. 
sada: without intermission, for ever. | , 
vaset sada’kalpasamadhinisthayéd: one should remain for ever 
in nirvikalpaka-samadhi. 
359 — og 
An example is given foe one who is 5 thus: established in samadhi 
being of the form of Brahman. - } 
afar eat act arf agra giafacsat 1 
MKT WAL SQTa WALATA HET 1134S 
sati sakto naro yati sadbhavam hyekanisthaya | 
iipako bhramaram dhyayan. bhramaratvaya kalpate T 
“ A man intensely concentrating on the Real attains. the | 
. Real. The kitaka, (a worm of a particular kind) thinking 
_ of the particular type of bee becomes that bee itself. | 
| _ ekanigthayd: with undivided concentration. 
- gati: onthe Reality, the Brahman. 
- saktah: with the mind resting on it. 
# ‘sadbhavam yati: becomes Brahman. 
- hi: nigcayah: indicates certainty. 
_ An illustration for this. 
_. kitakah: .a small worm. | 7 SE 
_ ekanisthaya bhramaram dhyayan: thinking of the bee, with 
concentration, | eR 
_ bhratnaratvaya kalpate: becomes able to attain the form of the 
bee, though different from it. | Be 
When a worm which is different from the bee becomes 
the bee, what needs be said of the jiva who is really Brahman itself 
by nature, but imagines himself as different from Brahman due to 
the super-imposition of ajfiana? Thinking of Brahman always, by 
such Brahmadhyana, he ‘becomes’ Brahman itself; ie., he becomes — 
conscious of his ever being Brahman. We oe te 4s 
350 VIVEKACODAMANI 
360 
. Making the idea clear in the limalebeag oy it is connected with 
the object of the illustration. | , 
sareat waratft aeufresat W2EOn 
kriydntarasaktimapasya kitako 
| dhydyan yathdlim hyalibhévamrcchati 
tathaiva yogi paramatmatattvam 
|  dhyadtva samaiyati tadekanisthaya |) 
| As the worm, giving up attachment to any other acti- — 
vity and always thinking of the bee becomes the bee,: so 
the yogi too concentrating on the Truth which is the Para-_ 
matman, attains that Truth. 
Giving up attachment to any “other activity, always. ‘thinking . 
with fear only of the bee that it (the bee) would kill it (the worm), 
the worm itself attains the form of the bee. In the example, there 
is difference from the beginning itself. Later too, this (worm) ‘be- 
comes’ a bee. But it does not become the same bee that it was 
_ thinking about. Here, however, (the sense of) difference (in the 
beginning) is due to ajniana. When the ajiiana disappears by the 
realisation produced by non-differentiated contemplation, there is no 
room for difference. Thinking about the Truth that is the Para- 
matman, like the worm without attachment to anything else, abso- 
lute identity with it ensues. When the difference that arose due to 
ajiana disappears, one becomes established in one’s: real nature. 
That is the idea. Hence the preposition sam to the verb samaydti 
in the éloka. When by thinking of another, the nature of that other 
is attained, what is the obstacle to realise one’ S own real nature 
thinking of one’s self only? So far alone is the limited Spplicetion 
of the bhramarakitakanydaya, the analogy of the bee and the worm. 
361 
waite Qa eater | 
aq eqegecat sfereprefr 
RTT ETSE TTT ETA CTT 
aTrcaara: afayaatata: magn 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 351 
ativa sukgmam paramatmatattvam 
na sthiladrstya pratipattumarhati | 
samadhin@ tyantasusiksmavritya 
jratavyam aryair atisuddhabuddhibhih 11 | 
The Truth that is the Paramatman is very. subtle, It 
cannot be understood by superficial mind. It has to be 
known by great personages of very pure ueert ae samadhi 
through very subtle mentle state. _ | 
ativa siksmam: very subtle as it is nirguna, gus lityisass different 
from the five sheaths. The atmatattva is devoid of the three kinds of 
limitations, The real nature of the 4tman which is self-effulgent and 
ever of the nature of bliss, does not lend itself to be known by the 
superficial sight of the modification of the antabkarana which has for its objects gross things like the body etc.. 
atisuddhabuddhibhih: by people oe very ‘pure: intellect, free 
ksayat papasya karmanah: “Jana arises for ; men by extinction of 
sinful karmas”; kasiye karmabhih. pakve tato jranam pravartate: 
“When karma fructifies into niskima, then jiiana arises”; dysyate 
tvagryaya buddhya siikgsmaya sikgmadarsibhih (Katha): Tt is seen 
by the seers of the subtle by their fine intellect” etc. _ - bet 
_. @ryaih: by those who pursue the paths spoken of in srt and 
Saini and whose antahkarana is void of blemish. — 
-atyantasiiksmavrttya: very subtle as it has not the world for 
its object, by the modification which is of infinite form. 
. Samadhina: by the meditation of the limitless form which 1 is 
extremely subtle and not oriented to the world. ao 
_ - #atavyam: must be made the object of cognition. — 
362 : | 
- That meditation is the cause of purity of mind is stated with an 
erp 
aT gat gear tier 
CARAT AST CATT aasofa | 
TAT Aa: ARACHETA TT 
cutda acusy aala aeay EQ U 
yatha suvarnam putapakagodhitam ‘24 
tyaktvé malam svatmagunam samrechati | 
tatha manas sattvarajastamomalam — 
dhydinena samtyajya sameti tattvam 1! 
352 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
As gold heated in a fire gives up its impurities and 
attains its.own lustrous nature, so too does the mind discard 
its impurity of sattva, rajas and tamas and. attains the Real. 
suvarnam putapikasodhitam: this refers to a process for the 
removal in a crucible of the unpuniesy which conceal the real nature 
of an object. : 
putapaka: connection with fire along with red diay in a crucible. 
(tena) Ssodhitam: its impurities separated (by it). 
tyaktvd malam svaétmagunam samrcchati yethd: as such gold 
giving up impurities, attains its real nature of brightness. 
So too, in respect of the mind, i.e., the antahkarana which is im- 
pure on account of sattva, rajas and taniay: Though in accord with 
the statements: ‘effect the removal of your super-imposition by 
taking hold of native sattva” (see $l]. 279 above), and with the Gita 
text: nirdvandvo nityasattvastho bhava: “be free from’ duality, 
ever established in sattva’”, it is difficult to speak of the impurity 
of the sattvaguna not vitiated by rajas or tamas; yet, by the state- 
ment sattvam Suddhena nasyati: “sattva is destroyed by the cogni- 
tion of the Suddha (Brahman)” and by the Gita text: sa gunin 
samatityaitin brahmabhiyadya kalpate; nistraigunyo bhavarjuna: 
“Transcending these gunas, he qualifies for Brahmanhodod”: “O! 
Arjuna, be devoid of the three gunas’, for the destruction of the 
rajas and tamogunas, the mind discards its affiliation of the sattva- 
guna also, belonging as that does to the realm of mithy4a, the sattva 
also should be considered as impure. This is supported by the follow- 
ing text: mndsvadayet rasam tatra nissangah prajinaya bhavet (Gau- 
dapdda): “One should not taste any essence there, one should re- 
main in one’s consciousness absolutely unattached”, which means 
even the tasting of the (pure) or (sattvic) rasa should be given up. 
As it is said: yena tyajasi tat tyaja (Mahabharata): “That by’ 
which you renounce, renounce that too.” bhiyascdnte visvamayd- 
nivrttih: “At the end there will arise the cessation of the cosmic 
maya”, and as maya which is only of the nature of Suddha sattva is 
‘said to disappear, the suddha sattva too being mithya, must be deem- 
ed to be sullied. 
neha nanasti kificana: “there is no plurality here even in the 
least” which emphasises the non-appropriatenes (in the atman) of 
the realisation of the guna and the gunin, the auanicaten and the 
qualified. 
dhyadnena samtyajya sameti tattvam: “discarding all gunas by 
dhyana on the nirguna Brahman, one attains Brahman”. For, Brah- 
-VIVEKACODAMANI | 353 
man is nirguna. If there is sattvaguna, then. to that extent, there 
will not be nirgunatva, qualitylessness. If there is the remnant of 
sattvaguna, the attainment of truth will not arise. If the akhanda- 
karavrtti (the modification as infinite form) of the antahkarana which 
is sattvic by nature, and which destroys the mulajmana gets extin- 
guished, the adhisthana or substratum (i.e., Brahman) alone remains. 
| | 363 
faverreqreama afzed 
ara at Telfer stat see 
wat ante: a fancqafaa: 
CAAISE ATAATATAT AT: aggu 
| nirantarabhydsavas at tadittham — 
pakvam mano brahmani liyate yada; 
tada samddhih sa vikalpavarjitah 
svato’dvayanandarasanubhavakah ; 
When the mind thus purified by continuous practice _ 
merges in Brahman, then arises the samadhi free from 
vikalpa and in which there is the a of the nectar 
of non-dual bliss. | 
Thus, when by force of continuous practice, the mind free from 
the defects of wrong understanding etc., merges in Brahman, is with- 
out any modification and is purely the residual Brahman, then, 
_ svatah,.even without effort, it becomes the experiencer of the nectar 
_ of non-dual bliss. Being of the form of Brahman is itself the nectar 
or rasa; vide the sruti ‘raso vai sah’ (Taitt.) It is of the nature of 
rasa also as it is the cause of supreme endearment.. Productive of 
that experience, without any blemish, that is the nirvikalpa-samadhi 
which is the cause of the dissolution of all universal vasanas begin- 
ning with ahamkara. 
364 
The fruit of it is explained ‘in full. 
aarlaarea Waeaaraa- 
‘wrdfaaranisfacrntearren: | 
aay: Aaa Tl Aaa. 
caeataqenfacaett: Far RAY u 
samaidhinanena samastavasana- 
granther vindso’khilakarmandsah — 
V.C ~24 
354 _-VIVEKACODAMANI 
antarbahih sarvata eva sarvada 
3 ih cal eae gent ayatnatah syat 4) e 
By this samadhi there arises the destruction of the 
knots of all vasands and of all karmas. There will be the 
manifestation without effort of one’ S nature within and 
without and for ever. 
samadhinanena: by this shsiicdiasleactsiatitihosate 
samastavasanagrantheh: of all the vasanas which are, like a 
knot, not possible to be cut asunder, and wns are the products of 
mithya-jnana. 
vindsah: total destruction. , 
akhilakarmanésah: destruction of all sancita Gaeeesea) kar- 
mas; vide the sruti: bhidyate hrdayagranthih, ksiyante casya _ kar- 
mani (Katha): “the knot of the heart is broken, all his karmas 
wane away”. 7 7 
_antar bahih: inside a outade. | avety where Always the 
manifestation of the real nature arises without effort — ayatnatah. 
| 365 
Therefore, 
at: Ma feast AaraTate 
fafzeara BRT werd fataneraa tt aey t ue 
Sruteh gatagunam vidyan inananam mananédapi r 
 nididhyasam laksagunam anantam nirvikalpakam. 1; 
Reflection is hundred times superior to hearing: medi- — 
tation is hundred thousand times superior to reflection: ee 
nirvikalpaka samadhi is infinitely superior. me 
- $ruteh: Sravanat: than (mere) hearing. 
The meaning is clear. 
366 
ACACAAATEYS TAT V. 
AAI ASIA AAT: 
seaaracfataiard Wad 1 3EE " 
nirvikalpakasamadhina sphutam 
brahmatattvamavagamyate ‘dhruvam |; 
nanyatha calataya manogateh Pelton wg 
pratyaydntaravismiéritom bhavet 11 
oe VIVEKACOPAMANI | (355 
The Truth that is Brahman is surely realised by nir- 
vikalpaka samadhi. Not by any other method. Otherwise, 
due to the inconstancy of mind, it will be mixed up with 
other modifications. 
sphutam: like the myrobalan fruit in the palm of one’s hand 
dhruvam: surely. 
_ némyatha: It-is not understood (realised) by any other method. 
The reason for that is told: pratyayantara-vimisritam bhavet: it 
will get mixed up with other modifications. | 3 
367 
«Ba: aaTeeea aafeza: aa farerat TAA: seta 
favaaa saTearefaerar Fa Mancatartwargy 11 3 E90 tt 
atassamadhatsva yatendriyassan 
nirantaram Santamanah pratici | 
vidhvamsaya dhvaéntamanddyavidyaya 
kytam sadekatvavilokanena 1, | | 
Hence, remain in samadhi with your sense-organs 
under control, with a tranquil mind ever turned inward, 
by realisation of your identity with Brahman, and destroy 
the darkness of beginningless. avidya. 
atah: therefore, i.e., for neo anne ( realising) clearly the 
Brahma-tattva. 
yatendriyah san: having controlled sense organs | like the ear. 
nirantaram: always.. 
Santamanah: - having mental control/tranquil. By pitta 
and saéntamanas, dama and sama<are signified, | 3 
samidhatsva: rest the mind: | | 
- pratici:. in the pratyagatman, the inmost atman. 
By the perception of the oneness generated by the realisation 
of Brahman bereft of all difference, destroy the darknes of begin- — 
ningless avidya which is the source of all samsara. 
dhvantam: which hinders the Se HreeeUieency: 
vidhvamsaya: destroy. | 
368 nee 
The. aids. to nirvikalpaka-samadhi are listed -seriatim, | 
aMeq TAA st Aratarcterisateqg: t ‘: 
fart @ factet a freadaragtoat 3c tt 
356 VIVEKACODAMANI 
yogasya prathamam dvaéram van-nirodho’ adda I 
nirasa ca nirihaé ca nityamekantasilatd || 
The first means to yoga is control of speech, then, not 
acquiring anything more than what is barely necessary, 
- absence of desire; freedom from activity and ever living by 
oneself (in secluded place). 
- The first means to yoga which is restraint of all external modi- 
fications is silence. For, by speech all forms of mental modifica- 
tional activity grow. 
aparigrahah: Not acquiring any object of utility beyond what 
is absolutely necessary for living; for, if more than what is. needed 
is acquired, the mind will be engaged in safe-guarding it etc., and 
restraint of mental modification will not arise. 
niradsa: freedom from desire. If there is desire, the mind is 
subject to agitation. Hence nirasa ie. vairagya. 
- nirtha: niscesta: cessation of all karmas. 
nityam ekantasilata: living in an uninhabited place, 
These are the means to yoga. 
369 
How living in a secluded place helps yoga is explained. 
waradtentatcixatacat gq: TATAAA: 
Ate Bey waa fast AACA 
AarTATTyrTaeT walt aT attra: 
aenfeaaiaeta Ua AAT BA: TaATATA: URES UL 
ekantasthitirindriyoparamane hetur damascetasah 
samrodhe karanam gamena vilayam ydyad ahamvisana | 
tendnandarasanubhitiracala brahmi sada& yoginah 
-tasmaccittanirodha eva satatam karyah prayatnat muneh u 
Living alone (in an uninhabited place) is the means of 
dama, the cessation of sense organ activity. The (dama) 
is the means to Sama, the control of the mind. By such 
Sama the tendency of the ego-sense is attenuated. By it 
accrues to the yogin the unceasing blissful experience of 
Brahman. Therefore, one given to meditation should 
always control the mind with effort. | 
ekantasthitih: living in an uninhabited place. 
indriyoparamane: in the immobilisation of the external organs. 
Dama is cessation of activity of external organs. It is the instru- 
ment to control the cetas, the antahkarana. Vide the Gita: indri- 
Yani pramathini haranti prasabham manah: “The wayward sense- 
organs distract the mind with great force.” As there are no sound | 
(here human speech), etc., and as the ear etc. are not externally 
oriented, the antahkarana gets turned inward towards the atman. 
That is Sama or mind-control. By Sama, the vasana of the ahamkara 
gets stilled. By that, the yogins whose minds are turned from. 
whatever is non-atman are always i ace the nectar of Brah- 
mananda, ~ 
dnandarasanubhitih: the secinning of the bliss ae, Brahman 
unconcealed (by maya). | | | oe 
-acala: not moving, not liable to fall down or decline. 
: ‘Therefore, the muni (mananasila) given to contemplation 
should always engage in controlling the mind. For, when the mind 
is withdrawn from what is external to it, and the vasana of the 
aharnkara wanes, the a of Brahmananda is free from 
| obstruction. 
' It means the nirvikalpake-samsdhi: should bes incessantly 
practised. 
370 
It was said that the first step to yoga is restraint of speech. 
The authority for this is the Kathopanisad which says: yacched van 
manasi prajnah tadyacchet jidna adtmani ; jranamatmani mahati 
niyacchet tadyacchet sdnta dtmani 1; “Let the wise man restrain 
the speech in the mind; let that be restrained in the (vyasti) bud- 
-dhi; let that buddhi be restrained in the mahat (samasti) buddhi; 
let that be restrained in the atman which is of the nature of Santi”. 
That meaning is conveyed in this sloka. | | 
arg frasorata & fae 
azt fad aeo a afzarferfer 1 
a arte orient fafereed 
| faera mien teat aaET IRV N 
vécam. niyacchatmani tam niyaccha © | 
buddhau dhiyam yaccha ca buddhisdksini | 
tam capt pirnatmani nirvikalpe i 
vilipya sintim paramam bhajasva a 
338 VIVEKACODAMANI 
Control the speech in the mind; control that in the 
- {imtellect; control the intellect in the witness of the 
- intellect; merging that again in the infinite Pisa : 
- attain supreme Peace. | 
-- picam: the organ of speech. 
atmani: in the mind. | 
niyaccha: restrain, control. : a 
Give up all speech activity; in the beginning remain purely 
in the region of the mind. When silence becomes as strong as in 
the case of animals, restrain the mind in its twin aspects of deter- 
mination and doubt in the buddhi characterised only by firm con- 
viction. Then the mind will become still and silent, unable to act 
like the carpenter bereft of his tools. That silent intellect should 
be merged in the caitanya limited by buddhi; destroy the upadhi of 
the buddhi and restrain it in the pure cognition which is the wit- 
ness — consciousness, saksi-caitanya, i.e., realise the meaning of 
‘thou’ (tvam) after careful analysis. Merge that again in the plenary 
atman, which is void of the threé kinds of limitations (of space, 
time and object), and which is changeless and qualityless. Unify 
the meaning of Thou and That, and experience peace of the form 
of moksa. 
371 & 372 
That the control of vrttis (modifications of the mind) reveals 
the bliss of (the experience of) one’s real nature is expenedy with 
apprapriste reason. | pee 
“Ganitfranett-qqenfefirentate: | L aween 
waa: TAA: Tagger APTA: 1 394 U1 
afaqrat qa: aeaH aalTTT Tay | 
AAG AATAACTATIT AA ATT: 1 9 Ut 
dehapranendriyamano-buddhyadibhirupadhibhih 1 
yair yair vrtteh samayogah tattadbhavo’sya yoginah | 
tannivritya munessamyak sarvoparamanam sukham 
sandrsyate sadanandarasénubhavaviplavah Me | 
The yogin’s mind is modified according to its identifi- 
cation with the various. upadhis, namely the body, the 
_ prana, the sense-organs, the buddhi etc. | 
‘When the mind is completely withdrawn from these, 
then is seen immersion in the experience of supreme bliss. 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 359 
Though by itself colourless, by juxtaposition with a black cloth | 
etc., a crystal looks black etc., being all the while pure and white; 
so asc is it in the case of this atman in juxtaposition with the 
upadhis namely body, the breath, the sense-organs and the mind etc. 
By ‘etc.’ is included the 4nandamaya-koSa. The atman appears mo- © 
defied into the nature of the vrtti with which it is conjoined, whether 
it is internal or external. The respective affections are of the nature. 
of avidya (persisting in the anandamaya-koga), asmita (echaracte- 
ristic of ahamkara), raga (desire), and dvesa (hatred) (arising by 
contact of the mind with sense-objects), and abhinivega (which is 
fear of death even by the learned: viduso’pi maranad ons and 
consequent clinging to worldly obj ects. " 
samdyogah: connection of form (akaratakhya-sambandhab). 
tattadbhaévah: tattadatmyam: identification with all that. 
tena: . by its qualities. | | | 
asya yoginah: of him who controls the external modes. 
The reason for it is given: muneh: by him who discards them 
as the anatman for the reasons detailed in the context of the des- 
| cription of the five koSas supra. 
To him who does not have the sense of the ‘I’ in ‘respect of 
them, by its disappearance, ie., by the disappearance of the upadhis 
like the body etc., arises the stilling of everything (sarvoparamana), 
ie., the stilling of all the factors of the ana&tman that make for 
sorrow. When thus every upadhi is stilled, there ensues perfect 
bliss. samyak bhavati must be added after the first, line of gloka 371. 
The evidence of that is that there is seen the inundation of the bliss 
of the blissful experience of the Sat. | 
viplavah: being immersed in or being full of. Like the expe- : 
rience of joy within and without by a man who plunges into the 
expanse of the Ganga after being scorched by the excessive heat is 
the experience of unlimited bliss by a man who is kevalda, i.e., freed 
from every kind of upadhi. 
373 & 374 
In the matter of the nirvikalpa-yoga, it was stated’ in the form 
of an aphorism in loka 368, that for the extinction of all upadhis. 
which is the cause of such yoga, vairagya is the first step. This was 
referred to by the word nirasa. This was also stated in Sloka 177 
adding that one should be firm in-the two;'namely viveka and vai- 
ragya. This is now shown as the two very intense internal sédhanas. 
360 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
srareann afgeartt farang art 1 
CAMA ATM CAS LATHE TTAAT Ut 9} ' 
afgeq fawaecn: careregatiata: | 
facet va weitfr eared serfer fatten: TEA 
antastydgo bahistyago viraktasyaiva yujyate 
tyajatyantarbahissangam viraktastu mumuksaya 
bahistu. visayaissangah tathintarahamadibhih | 
virakta eva gaknoti tyaktum brahmani nisthitah |; 
‘To the man of detachment pertain both internal detach-— 
ment and external detachment. For the sake of getting 
_moksa, the detached person gives up both internal and 
external attachments. . 
The detached one alone firmly established i in Srahman 
is able-to give up external attachment to sense-objects and 
likewise internal attachment to ahamkara etc. | 
The renunciation of all that is internal and external which are 
the anatman is possible only for the detached person. The reason 
for it is that he alone, prompted by the desire for moksa, gives up 
everything internal and external. That is, he does not develop the 
sense of the ‘I’ and the ‘mine’. | * 
This attachment is distinguished into internal and external. 
The external is the attachment to the sense-objects, sons etc., sound 
etc. The internal is identification with the ‘T’ etc., ie., including 
the body, the manas and the buddhi. This identification with these 
is unreal. Both these detachments are possible only. for a virakta. : 
for one who has no desires for them. 
viraktastu: virakta eva: only a detached person; one who is 
always dwelling in Brahman without his mind Lataying anywhere 
else, i.e. ‘tw’ is used in. sense of ‘eva’. | 
tyaktum saknoti: is able to abandon. 
The seed (source) of | this giving up is said to be being esta- 
blished in Brahman (brahmani nisthitah), having a mind which. does 
not falter or stray away. 
375 
In the matter of remaining as Brahman, understanding of one'‘s 
true nature is said to be a cause like vairagya. | | 
VIVEKACUDAMANI . 361. 
acre qeaey oar — 
tet faaratty fram a 
_. ferafarattoracerferctgst 3 
‘wveat fart aremeer Fegeafr 11 36% 1 1 
vairagyabodhau purusasya pakgivat 
 paksau, vijanthi vicaksana tvam. | 
vimuktisaudhagrataladhirohanam 7 
nas _ tabhyam vind nanyatarena siddhyatt’ n — 
_ Learned one! know that vairagya’ and bodha- (undies: aoe 
_ standing) are two means like the wings of a bird. The as- 
cent to the upper storeys of the palace of vimukti (libera- 
tion) is not ‘secured by either of them singly. | 
he vicaksana: Oh! learned one, who desires to attain liberation. 
vairagyabodhau: vairagya and bodha: vairagya has been. ex- 
plained already. bodhah: the experience of the true nature of the | 
étman produced by the discrimination of the atman and the: non-. 
atman. | Bole ; ae Teg | 
_paksivat: as of a bird: suffix ‘vat’ meaning simile is. biciaa on 
‘pakegin’ in genitive case — paksinah iva. | 
‘paksau vijanihi: know to be the two wings. 
| The reason for that is given in the third and fourth lines, 
vimuktisaudhagrataladhirohanam: Ascending to the top storey of a 
mansion of the form of vimukti or liberation. : 
‘tabhyam vind: without those two together, i. e., ‘it is ens to be 
attained by one of the two, vairagya or bodha, by itself. For a. bird 
_ cannot soar in the sky with one wing alone; so also here. 
376 
That is further explained. 
MATA: TAT: 
warigaeay gexate: | 
 MYsareaea fe area: 
 RRTERAT Faeagaryt TEST 
; | atyantavairdgyavatassamadhih 
Samihitasyaiva drdhaprabodhah | . 
prabuddhattavasya hi bandhamuktih — | | _muktatmano nityasukhanubhiti, \, 
Only he of intense vairagya can attain samadhi. Only | 
he in samadhi can have unflinching experience of Brahman. 
It is only he who has such. experience of the Truth that 
will be liberated from bondage. Only he who is thus freed 
- can experience eternal bliss. 
| atyantavairagyavatah : He whose mind Anes not get ateacied 
to the things that are non-atman again ie., a tivra-vairdgyavan, a 
man of absolute veneagy et i.e., one who has complete aversion to the 
anatman, | 
(tasya) samadhih (samnbhavati): To him accrues Brahma- 
nistha, the state -of being firmly established in Brahman. 
" samahitasyaiva: to him alone whose mind is ay set on 
Brahman. , 
| -drdhaprabodhab: the firm Knowledge born of realisation. ‘un- 
mixed with any other idea. 
-prabuddhatattvah: he by whom the Truth has been realised. 
bandhamuktih: the non-recurrence of the sense of the atman 
in ee that are not the a4tman, 
 muktatmanah: -the man in whose chilies does not. arise 
_ the false impression of a thing in what is not that thing. 
: oe nityasukhanubhiitih: the experience of a bliss that is eternal; 
the enjoyment of bliss: without any obstruction as it springs from 
jana, devoid of concealment of the true or proj ection of the false. 
377 
na sukham devaradjasya na sukham cakravartinah | 
| yadysam vitaragasya muner ekantasilinah 1) 
yacca kémasukham loke yacca divyam mahat sukham 1 
| -trsnaksayasukhasyaite nérhatah sodasim kalam 12 
3 “Devendra’s happiness or that of an emperor are nothing com- 
pared to that of a muni devoid of. all attachment and living alone. 
The joy of sense-desires or even the high celestial joys cannot ap- 
| proach even the sixteenth part of the joy of a man in whom all de- 
sires have disappeared.” : 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 363 
yaivinartha udapane.sarvatah samplutodake | 
tavan vedesu. sarvesu brahmanasya vijinatah 115° 
‘Whatever use there is in a limited store of water (like a pond, 
well or tank etc.), all that is included in whatever-benefit we get in 
all-pervading expanse of water. So too, whatever use there is in 
all the Vedas is included in the benefit obtained by one who has 
realised Brahman.” (B.G.) That is, all the benefit that accrues in 
practice of the karmakanda a of the Vedas is included in the. 
benefit accruing from Brahmajfan : 
The same meaning is conveyed in these texts and in the Srutis: 
Srotriyasya ca akaémahatasya: “of one learned in the Srutis and who | 
is not the victim of kama”; and so’snute sarvin kéman (Taitt.): “He 
enjoys everything”. The fruit of vairagya and bodha affirmed by 
these texts and verified in personal experience are extolled: : 
— aeNaT Ie TaEA HH Teal ae: | 
aeeeeg auIAa et CANTEAAT ATA 
Gag FTAA ATA: AEATRAAETETE 
aaa TAT Aare AAT Wat GE WAT Ui For tt 
vairdgyanna param sukhasya janakam pasyaimi vasyatmanah — 
taccecchuddhatardétmabodhasahitam svardjya- 
simrajyadhuk | 
etad dvéramajasramuktiyuvateh yasmat tvamasmat param 
 sarvatrasprhaya sadatmani sadé prajfiam kuru sreyase \\_ 
For a person of self-control, I-do not see anything else 
which can generate bliss like vairagya. Given that along _ 
with the realisation of the highly pure atman, it is produc- 
tive of soverignty and overlordship. This is the gateway | 
to the everlasting excellent condition of eternal bliss. 
Therefore, beyond this without desire for everything every- 
where, cultivate nirvikalpa-samadhi in the Real that is 
Brahman for your spiritual benefit. | 
' pasyatmanah: he whose nature is made up of causal and the 
effectuated elements under control. Even if by bodily postures 
(4sana) and breathing exercises (pranayama) etc., the body and its 
organs ‘are controlled, there is no happiness without vairagya, Even 
50 This Sloka_ is to be understood as nen: 
adapine yavan arthah tévan sarvatah samplutodake (yavan tavan eva)—sarvegu 
vedesu yaivan arthah tivan vijdnatah brahmanasya ( yevan tavan eva). 
364 | VIVEKACOUDAMANI 
those who enjoy the excellences like anima‘! etc., do not escape 
from bondage. It is clear from the Puranas etc., that though they 
practised extreme penance, Hiranyakasipu and others became in- 
volved in ‘samsara due to absence of vairagya. Even if their tapas" 
went to the length of worms eating into their bones, it could not pre- | 
vent them from fall for want of self-control. Hence, it is said that 
even for those whose bodies are under control, there will be no. spiri- 
tual happiness without vairigya. For those whose’ body etc., are 
not under control, there can be no vairagya; hence the reference to 
self-control. Similarly, I do not-see any source of spiritual happi- 
ness even for those who control themselves by hathayoga. 
Suddhatarah dtmabodhah: the understanding of the nature of 
the 4tman produced by the analysis of the five kogas. If this vai- 
ragya is combined with such suddhatara-atmabodha, it yields svd- 
raéjya and saémrajya. : 
svdrajya: the state of svarat: lordship ‘over oneself, When 
there is attachment, the mind is conditioned by sense-objects. When — 
there is vairagya, it is not so conditioned by anything external to 
itself. The state of the mind not being dependent on anything else 
is svaérajya or sovereignty or the state of not being ordered by any- 
thing else (itara-aniyamyatvam). Samrajya is the state of ruling 
over everything (sarva-niyamakatvam). For, the Brahmajaanin is 
higher than even God Himself. | 
Such a vairagya of the raan of self-control leads to svarajya and 
samrajya. Hence this vairagya is the door to the excellence that is 
liberation, ie., it leads to the eternal blissful enjoyment of mukti. | 
_ Vide the previous gloka where it has been said: atyantavairdgya- 
vatah samdadhih: “Samadhi accrues to one of extreme vairagya.” 
| Hence, you should cultivate complete noh-attachment to sense- 
objects. | 
sadatmoni: in Brahman which is of the nature of Sat. 
sadéd: always, without intermission. 
Sreyase: for mukti. : | 
prajndm kuru: practise nirvikalpa-samadhi which is the means _ 
for the realisation of the Truth. Jfana is vastutantra i.e., it is ob- 
“SI One of the eight siddhis or supernatural powers. anima: minuteness, mak~- 
_ing the body very light or subtle. anima mahima caiva garima laghima tatha 
préptih prikimyam isitvam vagitvam castabhitayah: Becoming the most rninute, 
the. most mighty, becoming stout, becoming slender, reaching to the 
farthest from where one stands, obtaining whatever is desired, overlordships and 
obtaining contro] are the eight bhiitis or siddhis. | 
32 Ivara is sopa@dhika, bound up by upadhis, He is the aupadhika-edition | 
of the nirguna Brahman while the Brahmavit realises the nirupadhika condition. 
VIVEKACODAMANI 465 
ject-dependent and not karmatantra: action-dependent; so, it is not 
what is to be done or produced. Hence, samadhi born of awareness 
of true nature is its cause. 
CARAT arrest eareg frat: 1 
wai qretseuneitshit fagarewenta aeeqe: 1 Bie It 
asam chindhi vigopamesu visayesvesaiva mrtyossrtih 
—tyaktva jatikulasramesvabhimatim muncatidirat kriyah | 
dehidavasati tyajatmadhisaném prajnam kurusvdtmani 
tvam drastisyamalo’si nirdvayaparabrahmasi yadvastutah |) 
Cut asunder your desire for sense-objects which are 
like poison. . The desire itself-is the gateway to death. 
Abandon from a great distance all actions giving -up the 
attachment to caste, family and aSrama. Give up sense of 
the atman in the body etc., which are unreal (asat). Be 
filled with the awareness of your 4tman; for you are ceo 
the seer, pure, the non-dual Parabrahman. : 
Cut away all desires for sense-objects which are like poison. 
mrtyoh: for this desire is of the nature of mrtyu (death), it 
is the cause of fall from one’s true nature and is of the form of care- 
lessness (praméada). | 
_ Srtih: margah: path leading to. i 3 
_,tyaktvd..... kriyah: Giving up the attachment to ‘waste, 
family and station in life, abandon from a great Saal at’ oon 
prompted by them. ue 
dehadavasati: asati: mithyabhite, on the poey ete. which is of 
the nature of mithya — unreal. 
Gtmadhisanim: the idea of atman. 
tyaja: ma karsth: do not do (do not acquire). 
yat: yasmaét kdranat: for. 
tvam drastési: you are the seer of the body ete., whieh are the — 
seen. 
amalo’si: you are pure in contrast to the body ete., which are 
impure. 
stdoapaparaivanmaal: nirdvayam: that from which duality has 
gone away or advayam. You are that non-dual Brahman. 
366 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
Therefore, acquire the knowledge of Brahman in the atman, in 
the form “I am Brahman”, by means of a eee : 
| 379 
Toe MET ATTA FEAT STATE ey Ateieaa 
cream fatraea frraeaqrtien aefeatery | 
TATA THAATTAT ATSUSTCATSATTT 
menaced frarenft wat aa: FRAT: 11 B08 1 | 
~ laksye brahmani manasam drdhataram samsthapya bahyendriyam 
 svasthaine vinivesya niscalatanuscopeksya dehasthitim | 
brahmaitmaikyamupetya tanmayataydé caékhandavrttyanigsam 
brahmanandarasam pibitmani mudé Sinyaih 
kimanyair bhramaih |, 
Establishing the. mind firmly in the goal that is Brah- 
man, resting the external organs in their respective spheres, 
keeping your body unmoving, unmindful of safeguarding 
_ the body, attaining the identity of Brahman and the atman, 
becoming one with it in the infinite expanse of your mind, 
in the plenitude of your bliss drink within yourself the 
- nectar of Brahmanubhava. What will the ane delusions 
avail you? | | 7 4 
-. Knowing full well that the body is nourished by prarabdha- 
arma: giving up all thought of the state of the body and its nourish- 
ment, with an unmoving body in accord with the Yoga aphorism 
‘sthirasukhamdsanam’, sitting firmly in a comfortable posture, rest- 
ing the sense-organs (jfanendriyas) and the motor organs (karmen- 
driyas) in their aneepective spheres; vide the text of the gelet ke 
panisad: 
viviktadege ca sukhdsanasthah ~ 
. Sucissamagrivasirassarirah | 
atyasramasthah sakalendriyani 
nirudhya bhaktya svagurum pranamya | 
hytpundarikam virajam visuddham 
vicintya madhye visadam visokam | 
- adeintyam avyaktam anantaripam | 
Sivam praséntam amrtam aa ad ll 
tadddimadhydntavihinam ekam 
vibhum cidinandam aripam aibhuian 
 umisahiyam paramesvaram prabhum 
 trilocanam nilakantham pragintam 1) 
VIVEKACODAMANI 367 
dhyatva munir gacchati bhitayonim — 
samastasiksim tamasah parastat 11 
In accordance with the above, resting the mind firmly on the 
goal which is Brahman, realising the oneness of Brahman and the 
atman, by the expansive mode of your consciousness, with the aware- 
_ ness of yourself as Brahman, incessantly drink the nectar of Brah- 
man with great joy. | 
Sinyaih: void of any fruit, and giving rise to great evar 
- anyath: having the non-atman for their objects: 
bhramaih: by untrue ideas. 
kim: of what avail are the other’ fruitless delusions? 
380 | | 
From the abundance of compassion, ‘the SuEU further ie aes 
the state of being centered in the atman: 7 
MATA AT CARAT BAT. AHN | 
 faeaoreraarrsed arafeerntcory IWRoN 
 anaétmacintanam tyaktva kagmalam duhkhakaranam " 
 cintayatmanam adnandaripam yanmuktikaranam 1 
| Giving up all thought of the non-atman which is evil 
and the cause of grief, contemplate on the atman which 18: 
of the nature of bliss and which leads to liberation. 
kaSmalam: impure due to having impure things for its aia 
therefore, duhkhakaéranam: cause of sorrow. 
anditmacintanam 5 aac alae: all aan of what | is not | 
the 4tman. 
muktikdranam: which brings « about complete cessation of all | 
grief. 
dnandaripamdtmanam: the atman which is of the form of. 
ananda or bliss. | 
cintaya: contemplate. 
381 
The method of contemplation is taught. The ‘meaning of eon 
—yaccha ca buddhisaksini is explained. 
ae exdeahfrcairerett Farmerett Frere, 1 7 
wet faery TUE TTATATAATT MAT Waed te 
368 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
esa svayamjyotirasesasdksi vijfianakoge vilasatyajasram | 
 laksyam vidhayainam aca 2 akhandavrttya-_ 
tmatayanubhdvaya y__ 
7 This (&tman) is self-luminous, the witness of every- — 
thing and ever: shines in the vijnanakoSa. Resting your 
mind on it which is different from the unreal, enjoy it with 
your expansive unlimited consciousness, 
esah: this 4tman. 
svayamjyotih: self-luminous; it cannot be pavaaied by other 
things. 
aSesa-saiksi: the witness of everything. 
vijninakoge: in the buddhi. 
vilasati: fully shines. | 
asadvilaksanam: different from the asat or ‘the unreal, for it 
is the sat which accompanies all states (of the mind); it is drk: 
the seer, svayamjyotih: self-effulgent; it is sarvasdksi: witness. to 
everything; it is prakasanam: what illumines.other things. Hence it 
is different from the insentient (jada), the seen: (drSya) and the 
intellect (buddhi which acts only by the reflection of the cit on it). 
 enam laksyam vidhaya: resting your mind on this 4tman, as 
the target of your contémplation. 
akhandavrttya: by being unlimited; cited by other aware- 
ness; dharavahikaya: like continuous downward flow of oil. 
dtmatayé: as your own self (nature), : 
-.. anubhavaya: realise. 
382 
‘The expansiveness of the mental modification ‘(akchandakara- 
vrtti) is explained. | te 4 
geafeswat AAT SHAATATT TAT ' 
BAAIAA fawritare CACASTAAT req TEA 
etamacchinnayd vrttya pratyayantarasinyayd | 
ullekhayan vijdniydt svasvaripatayaé sphutam jt | 
One should realise this as one’s own real nature, con- 
templating on it continuously without any. ne ia 
thought. oy Ha 
pratyayantarasinyaya: eaanig? all contrary ‘ideas. 
acchinnayd: like the flame of a defectless wick and oil; with a 
consciousness flowing uninterruptedly like a stream of oil poured 
downwards. | 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 369 
etam: this Stman. : 
ullekhayan: visayikurvan: dialing it the object of consciousness. 
svasvariupataya viganiyat: one should know (realise) as one’s 
own real nature. _ 
sphutam: Clearly. 
383 
ararersd Geteda agefig aT | 7 
sartraa ag fasse aeqerizag 13cz 
—atratmatvam drdhikurvan ahamddisu santyajan | 
udasinatayd tesu tisthed ghatapatadivat 1 
Confirming the sense of the d4tman here in Brahman, _ 
and abandoning it in the ahamkara etc., one should remain. 
indifferent to them as in the case of pot, cloth, etc. 
atra: in the Paramatman. 
atmatvam: .svasvarupatvam, the sense of one’s own 1 real nature. 
drdhikurvan: confirming; firmly convinced of. _ 
ahamadisu santyajan: rejecting the sa of the : oe in the 
ahathkara etc. | a A | ne 
ghatapatadivat tesu tisthet: Even if the sense of the atman ap- 
| pears in them. at any time, one should. remain indifferent: to them 
as with reference to a pot or a cloth. 
udasinatayé: without the sense of the v in epeet of them. 
(The idea is that we do not associate the sense of the ‘1’ with a pot 
or a cloth). 
384 
It was said earlier: ‘restraining speech in the mind.’ That that 
too (i.e., the mind) should be merged in the pinay atman is clearly 
explainied. 
faqgatact caeq firaza anfarqaatinnra _ 
waenafrracarqaraag TTA ATA AT: Ree 
visuddhamantahkaranam svariipe 
nivesya siksinyavabodhamatre | 
sanath Sanair niscalatimupanayan 
purnatvamevanuvilokayettatah 1) | 
Resting the pure antahkarana in one’s true self which 
is the witnessing conpClouEness; which is of: the nature of 
V.C,—25 
370 a VIVEKACUDAMANI > 
bare understanding, gradually one should attain to a state 
_of being unmoving. After that, one should remain ¢con- 
tinuously in the soul-sight of the fullness (of Brahman). 
visuddham: devoid of.tamas and rajas. 
- avabodhamatre: in the saksin (which is one’s sual natire): un- 
affected by upadhis, i.e., in the cit which is designated as the saksi. 
nivesya: samsthapya: establishing; resting. 
Sanaissanaih niscalatim upanayan: gradually attaining the state 
of unmovingness; endeavouring to be established in it. — 
tatch pirnatvameva anuvilokayet: then one should experience 
the state of being pirna; obtain plenary experience of the atman 
which is kevalajnanasvaripa. When a mirror is removed, the reflec- 
tion lapses into the original; so too, when all the vrttis (modes) are 
eliminated, the reflection of the cit (cidabhasa) too automaticaily be- 
‘comes the original which is Brahman. 
| 385 | 
When the concealment wrought by ajiiana is annulled by the 
expansive consciousness (of akhandakaravrtti), all the projections — 
produced by it are cancelled. This is the idea conveyed in this gloka. 
aafeastnaasgarfafa: cararreracfacterrata: | 
faqraarenararsey Wt agrarafrarantnda WISH I 
- dehendriya-prana-mano’hamadibhih 
| svajnanaklptair akhilair upadhibhih | 
_vimuktam atminam akhandaripam 
purnam mahikdsam ivavalokayet | 
| One should look at the a4tman as full and of unlimited 
nature like the sky, freed from all the upadhis namely the 
body, the sense-organs, thé mind, and the aharhkara imagined _ 
on-account of ajnana. | 
The meaning is clear. 
386 
Explaining the fourth quarter of the previous gloka, the object 
of the illustration is clarified. 
TS -HSM-HIT-Al ATT: array finer farrier 
safe a fafa wrt WE rengafefaqeainta T Ref ne 
VIVEKACUDAMANI , 371 
ghata-kalasa-kusila-sicimukhyaih 
gaganam upadhisatair vimuktam ekam | 
bhavati na vividham tathaiva suddham 
param ahamadivimuktam ekameva \; 
Freed from the thousands of upadhis of a pot, a pitcher, 
a granary, a needle etc., the space is one only and not _ 
diverse. So too, is the Pareindienan one only when divested 
of the upadhis like aharnkara. 
kusilah: a great storehouse of grains, of: great dimension. 
sicih: needle with a very minute hole. - 
by the minute as well as the mighty. 
mukhyath: ‘etc.’ here is intended to include the rope turned 
into a noose, well and other things. 
upddhisataih: by the innumerable upadhis, small and big x re- . 
ferred to differently as the Apacs in a needle-hole (siicyakasa) and 
noose-hole (pasakaéa). 
vimuktam: freed (of the upadhis; the containers). 
ekam bhavati: the space in all these diverse holes and con- 
tainers is said to be mahakasa. It is not really different in each 
case. | 
~ So too the pure supreme Brahman, unlimited by the upadhis 
like the aharnkara, is one only. 3 
| 387 | 
As the upadhis are areal in the object of illustration, the under- standing of oneness becomes easy. That is conveyed here. 
| ETE: CAPATAAT TaTAraT SATA: | 
Aas THY. Sa TRAST ETAT feaaqz 8c 
brahmadyah stambaparyantah mrsimatra upadhayah , 
tatah piirnam svamatmanam pasyed ekatmanéd sthitam 1, 
All the upadhis from Brahma to the minutest worm are 
unreal, Therefore, one should realise one’s nature which 
is infinite as the eternal one and single. 
Brahmadyaéh: Brahma: the presiding deity of the collective 
causal bodies (lingaSariras). The Lord of the fourteen worlds be- 
ginning with Him: the upadhis beginning with Brahma. 
_ stambah: a most minute worm. 
stamba-paryantah: ending with a minute “worm, 
372 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
upidhayah: differentiating bodies: © 
mrsimétrah: merely imagined (super-imposed) on Brahman 
which is the substratum of every super-imposition; not real; liable 
to sublation. 
tatah: virrsSyamane tesiam apratiyamanatvat: as,’ when they are 
examined, they are not cognised. 
ekatmana: as one full like the vast deluge in pralaya. 
 piirnam: devoid of the three kinds of limitations, space, time 
and object: deSa-kala-vastu pariccheda. 
svamadtmanam: one’s essential nature. 
pasyet: one should realise. 
388 
It is now conveyed with reason that there is really nothing other 
than Brahman which is thought of as differentiated. | 
qa wie aferd afzran 
aaa va aenfaheers 
wrdaia wifergeerigeca 
WHAT IANTAETET 1 BCE 
 -yatra bhrantya kalpitam yadviveke | 
tattanmatram naiva tasmad vibhinnam ; — 
bhranter nage bhrantidrstahitattvam 
rajjus tasmad visvam atmasvaripam 
That which is imagined on something due to delusion _ 
is, on discrimination, not different: from that something. _ 
When the delusion vanishes, the serpent seen ‘through the 
delusion vanishes and the rope appears as the truth. Hence, 
the world is truly the atman. | 
yatra: in that substratum (in that adhisth4na). 
bhrantya: _ by erroneous perception. 
kalpitam: imagined — super-imposed. 
When something is super-imposed on a substratum, that in rea- 
lity is the substratum only when it is properly examined. When, 
upon inquiry being made, by the cancellation of the wrong idea by 
the discovery, ‘this is not a serpent’, the idea ‘this is a serpent’ is 
got rid of, the truth of the serpent that it is only rope is discovered. 
So here also. By: the knowledge of the negative texts like athdta 
- Gdego neti neti: ‘By then, therefore, the instruction, as not, as not” 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 373 
and other texts, the entire universe is seen to be of the nature of 
the 4tman which is the substratum ot it all and is not seen as such 
after that like the rope-snake. (The idea is that the sense of the 
serpent will continue only so long as the delusion lasts. When that 
vanishes, the serpent will vanish from view and the Fons alone 
which is the reality will be ceed 7 
389 
tag Tat cag fac: cqufars: cay fara: 1 
caq favafad aq CACHTTTT fra tt 322 1 
svayam brahma svayam visnuh svayamindrah svayam sivah. tH 
svayam visvamidam sarvam svasmidanyanna kivcana }| 
a tom 
The atman itself is Brahma; the -atman itself is Visnu; 
the atman itself is Indra; the Atman itself is Siva. The 
atman itself is this universe. There is nothing else apart 
from the atman. tae 
: By the Srutis: taddhaitad pasyan rsir vimadevah pratipede, 
aham manur abhavam siryasca: (Brh.): “Verily seeing it, rsi-Vama- 
deva said: “I was Manu, and also the Sun”, and, sa yasciyam puruse 
yascisavaditye sa ekah: “He who is this Purusa and He who is this 
Sun; He is one only (in both)”, the caitanya which is one only is 
spoken of, due to difference of upadhis, as Brahma, Visnu, Siva and | 
Indra. As the same rope is imagined to be the serpent, the stick, 
| the waterline, and as the cleft on the ground, so too this entire uni- 
verse is by itself Brahman only; it is nothing other than itself. All 
predicative qualifications are attributed to the noun which are com- — 
mon to them. In the statements: I myself see: you yourself see; 
he himself saw, in ‘myself, ‘yourself’ the self accompanies all these _ predicates; all predicates are imagined in the object designated by 
‘self’; they have no existence apart from it. This is the idea. 
390 & 391 
A Mundakopanisad Sruti says: brahmaivedam amrtam purastat 
brahma pascat brahma daksinatascottarena: “This immortal Brah- 
- man is in front, Brahman is behind, Brahman is in the south and in | 
the north.” A Chandogya Sruti says: ahamevadhastat atmaivdédha- 
stat: “I alone am below; the atman alone is below’. This meaning 
is. taught for the stabilisation of the contemplation and for securing 
the unlimited mode, akhandakaravrtti, of the mind. 
374. | VIVEKACODAMANI 
 aeareeag arg afgeraa a 
cag Ate tqqag Ward | 
tay Warsat camagateat 
malate AMAT 1 RZ NN 
aeMerwRaagae ad TEI TI Tat TAT 
fata dgreqaeaaag aa fadaaed fray 139901 
antassvayam capi bahissvayam ca 
svayam purastat svayameva pascat | 
svayam hyavacyam svayamapyudicyam 
tathoparistat svayampyadhastat || 
| taranga-phena-bhrama-budbudadi sarvam svariipena jalam 
yatha tatha | 
cideva dehddyahamantametat sarvan. cideoatharaatin 
visuddham 
It is itself inside; itself outside; itself in front; itself 
behind; itself in the south; itself in the north; similarly 
itself is above and below. 7 | 
As all things in the form of a wave, a whirlpool and a 
bubble are essentially water only, so, too, the cit itself is 
everything from the body to the antahkarana. All this ?s 
is the unitary and pure cit. eS 
-bhramah: avartah, a whirlpool. 
That which cannot be cognised without the cognition of another 
thing is not different from that thing like the rope-serpent etc., vide 
the égruti:. tameva bhantamanubhati sarvam: “Everything shines 
by virtue of Its (Brahman’s) splendour.” There can be no efful- 
gence apart from the effulgence of the atman; cage everything is 
atman only. 
| | 392 
qeag Ta WIN AeA: 
aaismaraaa calarceatiet feats: 
que fa AAA: HSMTTHraTa aT 
| qeeaNg “aremecerre tata ararafezat i 982 1 T 
 sadevedam sarvam jagadavagatam vanmanasayoh — 
| sato’nyannastyeva prakrtiparasimni sthitavatah 
 prthak kim mrtsnayah kalasaghatakumbhadyavagatam 
vadatyesa bhrantas tvam aham iti mea enaaraye: i 
VIVEKACUDAMANI : 375 
This entire universe apprehended by speech and mind. 
is the Sat (Brahman) only. There is nothing other than 
this Sat for one who stands beyond the boundary of Prakrti. 
Are the pot, the jug, the pitcher, etc., known to be sepa- 
rate from clay? This deluded man inebriated by the wine 
. Of maya speaks in terms of ‘T’ and ‘you’. 
When we say ‘pot exists’, ‘cloth exists’, “well exists’, the words | 
are to be understood in terms of ‘simanadhikaranyam’ which means 
the identical import of words which separately have each a different 
meaning.°? Those who are experts in determining the meaning of. 
words say: “In respect of words which have different references, 
the meaning in the same context is called sémanddhikaranyam.” 
Thus in the Svdtmaniripana it is said:: ekatra vrttirarthe gabdanam 
bhinnavrttihetinam ; ‘sdmanaidhikaranyam bhavatiyevam vadanti 
liksanikah*4 |) _ 
By the mind and by the idea senebated ey different words | 
used in common mode of expression, this entire universe is under- — 
stood as being of the nature of Sat only. 
_ The locative case in vaérmanasayoh is used in iettumental sense 
— vinmanasabhyam. In grammar this usage is called poisicaaas 
| saptami i.e.,locative used in the sense of the instrumental case. 
Or, vaénmanasayoh may be understood in another way also: vak 
refers to the Sruti: attaditmyamidam sarvam; vicdrambhanam 
vikéro némadheyam (Chand.): “All this is (of the nature of) the 
atman; the modifications are only a matter of speech”. manah refers 
to the mental process of discarding the elements of the world re- 
gressively from the gross to the subtle; janiviparitakramato 
buddhya pravilipya patcabhutani | parigigtamatmatattvam pasyan-— 
naiste munissintah ‘| The meaning is, the five primordial elements 
have evolved out in the order of the 4kasa, vayu, agni, ap and prthvi. 
When the order of evolution is reversed by the process of involution, 
then each goes back to the preceding involute. When the mind goes 
through this process of involution to the end, it will be found that 
what remains is the 4tman. The muni at.peace with himself re- 
mains comprehending it with his mind. Then the mind will assume 
the mode of the akhandakaravrtti, co-expansivé with the infinite 
Atman.:.which is the ultimate adhisthana of this entire universe. This 
ultimate substratum will be comprehended when the empirical 
53 The ras reference of all these words. is to Sat, Existence, which i is their 
primary im 
34 See Note on Samanidhikaranyam at the end. 
376 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
things which are super-imposed on it are negated even as when the 
perception of the thief superimposed on the pillar is negated, the 
pillar is seen clearly. So too, when the world is sublated, what was 
apprehended as the world is now apprehended as Brahman in ac- 
cord with the sruti brahmaivedam visvam; aitaditmyam idam — 
sarvam: “This world is Brahman only; all this is this Paramat- 
man.” This has been explained earlier in this work. 
| sato’nyat . seeeeees the meee i in veemeueeyoy is 
explained. | 
| prakrtiparasimni: in fii aiimsts Bound of the prakrtis, i ie., 
the upadanas: the place where all the upadhis lie at rest. The idea 
is that Brahman is the ultimate material origin (sarvopadana) of 
everything. 3 | 
Or, the extreme limit of maya which is the milaprakrti, pri- 
mordial matter. The ground of its imaginative super-imposition is 
the nirguna Brahman. 
tatra sthitavatah: of one who is established there. 
sato’nyanndstyeva: there is nothing else other than the Sat . 
(Brahman). Vide the sruti: yatra sarvamatmaivabhit tat kena kam 
- pagsyet: (Brh.): “When all is Atman only, by what can anything be 
_ seen?” By this is conveyed the sublation of everything. When the | 
-upadana, namely ajfiana, is destroyed, then the destructitn of every-. 
thing wrought by it is also affirmed. 
| prthak kim....This is clarified by an illustration. What was 
earlier apprehended in this distinctness as pot, jug etc., are they not. 
upon examination found to be merely clay only? This is support- 
ed by the vacérambhanasruti quoted earlier. This has been ex- 
plained by Sri Bhagavatpada previously in the monas like mptkarya- 
bhito’pi etc., sl. 230. 
The fool who is deluded mE the wine of maya speaks of the one 
Reality as ‘I’ and ‘ you’. | 
Maya itself is wine as it makes for wrong comprehension. 
393 
That the non-dual substance must be meditated on for the 
destruction of the delusion is conveyed on the strength of sruti. 
fraranfagrtnt wa areafata arf: 
aatfa gered faeaearafrgedt 11353 
kriyasamabhiharena yatra nanyaditi srutih | 
braviti dvaitarahityam mithyadhydsanivrttaye 11 
VIVEKACUDAMANI | 377 
The Sruti beginning with ‘nanyat’ again and again 
speaks of the absence of duality for the removal: of the 
super-imposition of what is mithya. 
_The $ruti: yatra nanyat pasyati, nanyacchrnoti ninyad vijanati 
sa bhiima (Chand.): “Where one does not see another, does not 
hear another, does not know another, that is the eee -asserts 
again and again the non-existence of duality. 
kriyagsamabhiharena: paunahpunyena: again and again. 
dvaitarahityam: dvayorbhivah dvité, saiva dvaitam: being 
two is ‘dvita’; that is ‘dvaitam’ which indicates difference. The ab- 
sence of difference is ‘dvaitarahityam’. : 
For what purpose? For the removal of the mithyadhyasa, of 
the false super-imposition. Or, by the word adhyasa may be under- 
stood the adhyasa having reference to the prapaiica, the visible 
world. 7 
tasya nivrttaye: for its sublation, leaving behind the adhisthana. 
For it has been said: adhisthandvaseso hi nasah kalpitavastunah: 
“Destruction of an imagined (super-imposed) object leaves the | 
adhisthana (substratum) behind”. This is seen in the case of the 
rope-snake. When the superimposed snake is sublated, the rope, 
_ the adhisthana remains. If the world were real, how will it not be 
truly the object of seeing, hearing and comprehension? As the 
world does not appear to the person who rests in Brahman, it is said 
to be mithya. 
394 
For purpose of contemplation, the nature of Brahman is well 
_ conveyed to the mind. : 
ATRTAT AT fasfataqet 
frediafreciantatdaney 
aaa ER OTIS 
tad ot aan fafer atom 1 ray 
akdsavannirmalanirvikalpa- 
nissima-nisspandana-nirvikdram | 
antarbahissinyam ananyam advayam 
_ Svayam param brahma kimasti bodhyam | 
This self-subsistent supreme Brahman is pure like the 
sky, unchanging, infinite, motionless, not subject to modi- 
fication, without inside or outside, always itself non-dual. 
What else is there to know on Knowing Brahman? 
378 | VIVEKACUDAMANI 
In the series of descriptions, there is similarly of nature between 
the sky and Brahman from nirmalam to antarbahissinyam. anan- 
yam and advayam are characterisations of Brahman. 
akéSavat nirmalam: the sky is not affected by the dust thrown 
on it. So too is Brahman really untouched by ajnana etc. 
nirvikalpam: not changing, of the same nature. 
nissimam: endless. 
nisspandanam: actionless. 
nirvikdram: devoid of originations, destruction, growth, dimi- 
nution etc. 
7 Pw 
antarbahissinyam: It is only what is limited in space that can 
have an inner and outer. Being full, it is devoid of the in and 
out, ie. without internal differences (svagatabhedarahitam). 
- ananyat: not different from the pratyagatman. 
advayam: advitiyam; that for which there is no second (na 
vidyate dvayam yasya). Without an object of a different kind 
(vijatiyabhedarahitam). — 
svayam: self-established (svatassiddham). 
When that supreme Brahman is known (realised), what else is 
there to be known? When one is known, everything becomes 
known. 
When the Paramatman which is the all is known, nothing re- 
mains to be known. | 
Or, ananyat, not other, i.e., the all. Therefore advayam, with- 
- out a second apart from. it. That Param Brahman itself is (svayam 
jivah) the atman. Hence what is there anything else that is to be 
known? 
akaSavat: Here the example akasa is inferior to that which is 
exemplified, Brahman. This is like saying that the sun speeds like 
an arrow. The arrow which is the exaniple is inferior to the sun 
which is the exemplified. This is for the sake of facility of under- 
standing by the hearer. For, there is no object which is similar to 
Brahman; vide the égruti: na tatsamah etc. By the Brahma Sitra: 
pratijna’ haniravyatirekacchabdebhyah:” “The (Vedic) assertion 
(that “all things become known if one is known’) can remain un- 
affected only if all the effects are non-different from Brahman; and 
this is confirmed by the Vedic texts” affirms the origination of 
akasa. But it is said of the Brahman: akéSavat sarvagatasea 
nityah: "all-pervading and eternal like akasa”; because in the 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 379 
world the origination etc., of akaSa is not seen. The Brahman is 
compared to akasa and is said to be unchanging like it peceuee its 
origin cannot be seen. 
395 
aaced firxy faertsa ager wea site: ear 
AAATATATTATT He safes wa: 
aararetata sqgnaa: acaatare: aie | 
AANAT safer aaafaaraaretta AAT 1384 
vaktavyam kimu vidyate’tra bahudha brahmaiva jivassvayam 
brahmaitajjagadaparanu sakalam brahmddvitiyam Sruteh | 
brahmaivahamiti prabuddhamatayah samtyaktabahyah sphutam 
brahmibhiya vasanti santatacidénandétmanaiva iahclaianiial 
What is there to expatiate on this? The jiva is itself 
Brahman only. This entire world upto the minutest atom 
is Brahman. The éruti declares Brahman to be without a 
second. Most clearly, those who have awakened to the 
consciousness: ‘I am Brahman’, giving up all external 
attachments, surely live always in unitary experience of . 
. Brahman realising themselves as sat, cit and ananda. 7 
- Is there anything to be said in diverse ways on the subject of 
ang unitary nature of Brahman? For proper and full comprehen- 
sion, the meaning of the Vedanta has been conveyed: with various 
illustrations. That is here given in brief. A meaning conveyed at 
length and in brief is well-comprehended. Vide: slokirdhena pra- 
vaksyami yaduktam granthakotibhih 1 brahma satyam jaganmith- 
Ya jwo brahmaiva naparah ,, “I shall tell you in half a gloka what 
has been taught through crores of books: Brahman is real: the 
world is mithya; the jiva is Brahman only, not any other.” | 
brahmaiva jivassvayam: jivatd, being jiva, is due to association | 
of Brahman with the upadhis. Brahmatva, being Brahman, is the 
real nature of what is understood as jiva, as the rope is the 
real nature of the snake. Hence the jiva is itself Brahman, not 
different from it. | ) 
apardnu: until the minutest aot all this . ‘world from akaSa 
onward is Brahman only. 
tajjatvat, tallatvat, tadanatvat: as it (the world) is originated 
by it (ic Brahman), as it lapses into it, and as it. breathes (is 
sustained) by it; wide the gruti: sarvam khalvidam pranns ii 
laniti Santa updsita (Chand.). | | 
380 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
A point of. grammar is noticed here. It must be tajjalénam. 
The. omission of the final syllable is archaic as in ‘parame staal 
which should really be ‘parame vyomani’. 
_ The beginningless ajfiana etc. too is imagined in it and is not 
apart from it. 
brahma advitiyam: devoid of any object different from it. 
Vide the Srutis: tattvamasi (Chand.); ayamatma brahma (Méand.); 
idam sarvam yadayam atma; dtmaivedam sarvam; brahmaiva sar- 
vam ekam evadvitiyam, etc./ “That Thou art; this 4tman is Brah- 
man; all that is this is 4tman; all this is Atman only; all is Brahman: 
one only without a second” etc. 
brahmaivahamiti ere those whose intellect 
has awakened to the awareness: ‘I am Brahman only.’ 
-prabuddhamatayah: those who have understood what has to be 
understood through Sruti and instruction of the guru. . 
sphutam samtyaktabaéhyah: those who have given up the ex- 
ternals from ahamkara onwards with the accompanying vasanas. 
brahmibhiiya: becoming Brahman. It is not as if they were 
not Brahman previously and that they ‘became’ Brahman now. | 
Their supposed ‘not being’ Brahman is imaginary due to ajfana. By 
virtue of this explanation, i.e. that their abrahmatva (not being 
Brahman earlier) which is implied by the usage of ‘cvi’ *suffix in the 
word ‘brahmibhiya’ is kalpanika due to ajnana, the unwanted gram- 
matical implication is avoided justifiably. 
What is referred to here is the experience of the learned, that 
by continuously dwelling on the 4tman which is sat, cit and ananda 
they delight in the soul-sight (saksatkara) of Brahman. ae 
dhruvam: this is certain. Or, it may be construed that they rest 
in Brahman unmoved. | 
396 
aifg aero tase feratearirarant 
Tanafromet frsegste crag. | 
farnrfacaita faeaataccata 
eaafata ofzata agreat fass 11 8¢¢ 1 
jahi: malamayakose’harndhiyotthapitasam 
prasabhamanilakalpe lingadehe’pi pascat 
nigamagaditakirtim nityamadnandamirtim 
‘svayamiti pariciya. brahmaripena tistha it 
“* Suffix ‘ev?’ is used to show ‘it was not so originally, but later made so’: abhi- 
tatadbhave cvih. 
VIVEKACUDAMANI | 381 - 
Destroy the desire aroused by the sense of the ‘I’ in 
the gross body compacted of filth; then with great peérsis- 
tence do the same later with the subtle body which like 
the air is invisible. Realising yourself as the ever blissful | 
spoken of in the Vedas, remain as Brahman. 
malamayakoge: In accord with the dictum: ‘pracurydrthe 
mayat’, particle ‘mayat’ (maya) is used to indicate abundance 
of filth in the gross body. 
utthdpita: generated. 
asim: the reference is.to the aga (attachment) to the gross 
body and to all things which nourish it. 
prasabham: with great force. 
jahi: destroy. 
malamaya iti hetugarbha-vigesanam: a qualification containing 
the reason for the destruction of the sense of ‘I’ (one will be in- 
clined to destroy it only if one is told that it is malamaya, filthy). 
For it was said earlier: pindindam tyajyatam malabhandavat: “let 
gross body be abandoned like a vessel of filth.” 
paseat: after the destruction of the attachment relating to the 
gross body. 
anilakalpe: which is sess like air. 
lingadehe api: also in the suksma-Sarira (subtle body) made 
up of seventeen limbs (namely, the five jianendriyas, the five kar- 
mendriyas, the paficapranas, manas and buddhi). 
Destroy the desire for objects congenital to the mind and 
aroused by the sense of ‘I’. The advice to destroy the desire for the 
subtle body is stated subsquent. to that relating to the gross body on 
the principle that the abandonment at first of what is subtle is diffi- 
cult and that the abandonment of the subtle which is close is easy 
after the abandonment of the distant gross objects. Hence the 
advice in the beginning to abandon the desire for the objects which 
are gross. The reason for this is given by saying ‘aharndhih’, the 
idea of ‘I’. For, it is indicated that when. the sense of ‘I’ is absent in 
what is seen to be frightening, desire never arises as there is no 
cause for it. The Sruti also speaks to the same effect when it says: 
asmallokét pretya etamannamayam datmanam wupasamkrémati: 
“Going away from (giving up) the external objects, one gets out of 
the annamaya (gross) body of the atman.” 
_ By this it:is meant that one should shed the sense of ‘I’ in.sons 
and friends etc., first who are outside the gross body. One should 
382 VIVEKACODAMANI 
think of the body alone as the atman. Then. giving up the sense 
of ‘I’ in the body, one thinks of the prana as the atman, and so on. 
The identification of the dtman recedes successively and this is 
stated for the easy comprehension of the learners. By the same 
order, is the abandcnment of desire in respect of first the body, 
wealth, sons, sense-objects etc. When it is said that desire itself 
should be abandoned what needs to be said of the abandonment of 
the sense of I’? Then comes the abandonment of the sense. of ‘I’ in 
respect of the gross body and the desires pertaining to it. Then 
the sense of ‘I’ and the desire resulting from it should be abandoned, © 
in accordance with the methods detailed in’ the context of Pafica- 
kosavivarana, in the subtle body compacted of the pranamaya, 
manomaya and vijnanamaya-Sariras.. For every one is intensely 
attached to the ‘Il’. One always says to oneself: ‘May I not not 
be; may I always be’: mé na bhivam hi bhiyasam: This desire is difficilt to destroy as for everybody the sense of the ‘I’ persists in the 
gross body and the desire pertaining to it is difficult to destroy. 
When the sense of ‘I’ is gradually abandoned, as a result of dis- 
crimination born of reasoning in the gross and subtle bodies, the sense of ‘I’ never arises in the 4anandamayakoga with its two-limbs of priya and moda*™? as by reason of its having parts and subject to 
upadhi, it is ascertained to be impermanent. | 
Thus, determining the five sheaths as being the anatman, one 
should remain as Brahman extolled in the Vedas. 
nigamagadita-kirtim: nigamaih: by the Vedas. 
kirtim, The extollation of Brahman in the Vedas relates to 
its sarvajfiatva (omniscience), sarvasaktatva (omnipotence), sarva- 
praniprdnayitrtva (making all creatures breathe), sarvaprasastrtva 
(ruling over everything), visistasagunadhisthanatva (being the sub- 
Stratum of saguna Brahman), saccidanandaghanatva (being com- 
pacted of sat, cit and ananda), vénmanasdgocaratva (being beyond 
the reach of speech and mind), nirddharatva (being without sup- 
port), nirgunatva (being qualityless), niskalatva (being without 
parts) niraiijanatva (being unattached), siksmatamatva (being most _ 
subtle), nitya-suddha-mukta-buddha-satyananda-svabhavatva (being 
eternally pure and free, and of the nature of pure intelligence, the 
true and blissful). _ — 
_nityam dnandamirtim: that which is eternal and blissful. By 
this the 4nandamayakoga too is negated as it is not eternal. 
_34a-The reference to any object priya arises when it is simply seen, moda arises 
when it is got and pramoda when it is enjoyed. The two. parts of anandamaya- 
koSa sre priya and moda. Whatever has parts is not finally true. 
VIVEKACUDAMANI ~ 383 
 paratminam: the Paramatman. | 
Svayamiti: svasvaripam iti: as being one’s own real nature. 
| pariciya: nisgcitya, anubhiya: determining, realising. 
brahmaripena tistha: remain as such Brahman. | 
If the person is not counselled thus to ‘remain’ as such Brah- 
man, when all the five sheaths have been negated, and as a man is 
said to be made of these five sheaths only, one may be led to con- 
clude that there is nothing else substantial thereafter. This might 
lead to anatmavada if it is not accepted that the Brahman poe! is 
atman. | 
Hence the admonition brahmaripena tistha: remain as Brahman. 
Hence the gruti says: asanneva sa bhavati asad brahmeti veda cet. 
397 
Wart aagata aaedie , 
Qeq: FATT FATT SANTA TAT: 
Waa We soate frareroradt 
aat deat wait wafa fe care afaeft nage u 
Savikaram yavad bhajati manujastavadasucih 
- parebhyah syat klego janana-marana-vyddhi-nirayah | 
yadaitmanam suddham kalayati sivikaéramacalam 
tadaé tebhyo mukto bhavati hi tadaha Srutirapi 1) 
As long as a man thinks of the atman as of the form 
of a corpse (i.e., physical body), he becomes impure and 
there will ensue grief from enemies.in the form of birth, 
death, disease and hell. When he realises the &tman as 
- pure, of auspicious form and as unmoving, then, for certain, 
he becomes free from those griefs. This is also mere: out 
by éruti. | 
yavat: yavatkalam: as long (as man identifies the atman with | 
the gross body). 
 Savikaéram bhajati: since it is declared to be a corpse as it is 
devoid of caitanya (as long as) man regards the body from the feet 
to the head as his self saying ‘I am it only’, 
For the reason that it is filthy and hence impure, he himself, 
though pure being the atman, becomes impure by wrong identi- 
fication. | | 
384 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
parebhyah syét klesah: then there will be grief from enemies, 
tigers, etc., outside him. 
| janana-marana-vyddhi-niraydh: In this world the griefs relate 
to birth, death and disease. As sin attaches to him who thinks of 
the body as the 4tman, and by the smrti ‘yo’nyatha santam atmanam’, 
hell ensues on the fall of the body. Hence such a one is for ever 
consigned to grief. This is also borne out by the éruti: na ha vai 
sasarirasya satah priydpriyayor apahatirasti: ‘““There is no annul- 
ment of priya and apriya (pleasant and painful) for. one who is with 
the body (consciousness)”, and also by Yama’s words in the Katho- 
panisad: 
“na simparayah pratibhati balam pramaddyantam 
vittamohena miidham | 
“ayam loko nasti para iti mani punah punarvasamadpadyate me || 
“For the childish one deluded by attachment to wealth, a hereafter 
(paraloka) does ndt appear as a reality. He thinks: ‘This is the 
only world; there is ho world beyond’. Such a one gets into my 
grasp again and again.” When a person endowed with the fourfold 
qualificational means (sadhanacatustaya), humbly approaches the 
_ guru in the prescribed manner, and by virtue of the declarations of 
' Vedanta-texts flowing from the lotus of his mouth supperted by 
accordant reasons understands the atman as pure, beyond the three 
(gross, subtle and causal) bodies, of auspicious form, of the nature 
of bliss, unmoving and free from troubles caused by others, then he 
becomes free from the aforesaid griefs and from birth, death, dis- 
ease and hell. 
kalayati: janati: knows, realises. 
tebhyah: from these griefs. _ 
hi: signifies niscaya: certainty. 
tat Srutirapyadha: it may mean either tat érutirapyaha or tadapi 
$rutiraha: Either that is declared by Sruti also, or that also is de- 
‘elared by Sruti. In the latter meaning by the word ‘api’ are in- 
cluded along with Sruti, anubhava and the words of the guru. 
The gruti says: aSariram viva santam na priyapriye sprsatah: 
“The pleasant and the unpleasant do not affect one who is unattach- 
ed to the body”; dnandam brahmano vidvan na bibheti kutascana: 
“The wise one who knows (who has realised) the ananda of ‘Brah- 
man does not fear with reference to anything anywhere”; tarati 
Sokam atmavit: “The knower of—one who has realised—the atman 
crosses all sorrow”; jnatva devam mucyate sarvapasaih: “Knowing 
—realising the resplendant One, one is freed from all bonds”; tame- 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 385 
vam vidvan amrta iha bkavati: “Knowing Him—Brahman—thus,. 
one becomes immortal here”; kstnah klesaih janmamrtyuprahdanih: 
“On the cessation of all griefs there is destruction of birth and 
death”; jfatva sivam santim atyantameti (Chand.): “Knowing— 
realising —the auspicious, one attains infinite peace” etc. Also:. 
Samane vurkse puruso nimagno’nisaya Socati muhyamanah ; justam © 
yadé pasyatyanyamigsam asya mahimanamiti vitasokah 11 (Mvnd.): 
“Immersed in the bedy and deluded by it, one grieves helplessly. 
When one sees the lord—the atman—-other than the anatman—ex- 
tolled by the great, one attains eminence getting rid of all grief.” 
By this gloka the meaning conveyed in the previous Sloka is 
proved by the reference to the fruit, namely, that the knowledge of 
the true nature of the atman results in absolute and complete re- 
- moval of sorrow while knowledge of the andtman is bad fruit. 
398 
To the question how the form of pure auspiciousness accriles to 
the atman, it is replied: . 
_ career fteratararearerea area: 
TaTaAT TX HAT WMATA 1 BRC 1 
svatmanyaropitasesébhasavastunirasa tah } 
_ svayameva param brahma pirnam advayam akriyam \; 
By the removal of all impure features super-imposed 
on the atman, one remains as the supreme Brahman, the 
infinite, non-dual and non-acting. 
_ svitmani Gropitdni: imagined, super-imposed by mere ajfidna. 
asesibhaisavastiini: * all the things of the nature of the anatman = 
and with impure qualities. | 
nirasatah: by being destroyed by éruti, yukti aa nididhylsana, 
Scripture, reasoning and contemplation. 
svayameva param brahma piirnam advayam akriyam: one is 
oneself the supreme Brahman, the plenal, secondless and actionless. 
This is supported by a statement of the wise: anvestavyatmavijnanat 
prak pramatrtvamatmanah , anvistassyat pramataiva papmadosa- 
divarjitah 1| gaunamithyadtmano’sattve putradehadibaddhandt , sad- 
brahmatmahamityevam bodhe karyam katham bhavet ,; : “The 
&tman is known as a pramata, knower, before the knowledge of the. 
atman which has to be sought arises. When it has been sought and 
attained, it is free from the taint of knowership etc. When this is 
cancelled by the realisation T am the Reality which is Brahman’, a 
V.C,--26 . 
486 | VIVEKACUPAMANI | 
the identification of the 4tman with sons etc., and the body etc., be- 
ing annulled, where will there be any occasion for aetion?55 The 
‘Sruti also says, ‘athdyamaseriro *mrtah préno brahmaiva teja iva: 
“Then this A4tman, unembodied, is immortal, the giver of life-breath 
for all, Brahman only, effulgent”’. 
| 399 , « & 
It is said in this gloka that if samadhi is practised. with effort 
annihilating the seen world in the beginning, for him so established 
in samadhi, the perceived world, though cae earlier, becomes 
like the horns of a hare. 
cee fi Regt ec ae eee 1 | 
a quad seaaa fener: wHeTATA: afetarsact Aa: uWReSz 
samahitayam sati cittavrttau 
paratmani brahmani nirvikalpe | 
na drsyate kascidayam vikaipah 
prajalpamatrah parisisyate tatah 1) 
If the mental functions are established in the true, 
unchanging, Higher Self, Brahman, this awareness of the 
phenomenal world is not experienced. What remains there- 
after is merely a matter of meaningless word. : 
If the mental functions are established unwaveringly in the 
true and real non-sublatable Paramatman which is unchanging, this 
phenomenal world is not seen in the least. Then it remains a matter 
of words. Sabdajfandnupaéti vastusinyo vikalpah (Yogasitira): 
“Vikalpa means indicating by a sound without a corresponding 
object”. As the ajnana has been completely uprooted, the imagined 
wrong identification of the Aatman with the anatman does not sur- 
-vive; for such wrong identification is the result of ajfiana. What 
remains is only the infinite saccidananda Brahman. As what is asat 
(non-existent) like a sky-flower cannot lead to activity, the world 
that previously aroused joy, sorrow, desire, fear, anger, etc., does 
not—like a serpent whose fangs have been removed—induce ‘the 
Brabmanistha to action. ; | 
400 os | 
By the preceding, the andtmavasanas in the mind of the gisya | have been annulled and it is now inclined to the perception of the 
55 The atman identified with.sons etc., is called ‘gaunatma’: that identified with - 
the body is called ‘mithyatma’; that which is the inmost core of one’s being is 
called ‘mukhyatma’. It is also known as .‘pratyagatma’. 7 
VIVERACODAMANI 387 
advaita truth. The guru then instructs him in ‘the purport of all 
Vedanta, namely absolute unreality of duality (dvaita}, and he does 
this by recourse to experience, reasoning, example and éruti-texts. 
aaenent fanciisa farafeeanacatc 1 
faferete fare fafaata frat Ba: i voo tt 
asatkalpo vikalpo’yam visvamityekavastuni | 
nirvikadre nirakére nirvisese bhida kutah 1 
This variegated world imagined in the one Entity 
(namely Brahman) is asatkalpa.* Where can be any differ- 
ence in that unitary Reality which i is unchanging, unembodied 
and qualitiless? 
A point of grammar is noticed here: visvam is noun in the 
neuter gender. It must be referred to as ‘idam visvam’. But the 
expression ‘ayam visvam’ is used. This is due to the rule of the. 
primacy of vidheyam over uddesyam. (apurvarthabodhanam 
vidheyam, avagatérthinuvadah uddesyam. That which intimates 
what is not known previously is vidheya; that which signifies what 
is known is uddegya). vikalpah is vidheyam, what is not known sO 
far. It being masculine, it has primacy over vigsvam which is known 
already which is neuter. Hence the use of the masculine ayam. 
-vikalpak: what is variously imagined: vividham kalpyate. It 
means it is imagined by ajfana; there is no real object coreporane 
to it. 
asatkalpa: isadasamaptau kalap-pratyeyak: the particle ‘kal- 
pap’ (kalpa) is attached to show that it is a little less than the com- . 
plete (ie., the world is not absolutely non-existent [atyantasat] like 
a sky-flower, but it appears, but is not real). So it is asatkalpa::-all 
but unreal. Yet, to those who are ever concentrating on Brahman 
in the seventh storey of spiritual heights the world does not even 
appear and so it is only like the horns of a hare, absolutely unreal. 
But for others, it is of the nature of drstanasta, i.e., it is seen in the 
state of ajnana and sublated on the dawn of jfiana, and like silver 
imagined in a shell, it is only pratibhasika (reflectional). So it is 
not declared to be ‘asat’, absolutely unreal, but it is said to be 
‘asatkalpa’. Therefore, as duality is of the nature of mithya, as 
there is really no second to Brahman, in that single Reality which 
is devoid of change, form and quality, of the distinctions of quali- 
fication and the qualified, part and whole, of class and individual — 
sd "Fo be explained in the commentary. 
ae is called turyaga. See the account of the saptabhiimileis in peer: ho 
388° VIVEKACUDAMANI 
and as they are not related even in the tadatmya Tetanon. of in- 
herence, how can there be difference? | uate 
401 
RUST HAGA ea AT ATT bo 
fataer? Grovert falaad fret aa: Nod tt 
drasty-daréana-dréyadibhavasinyaikavastuni 
nirvikdre nirakare nirvisese bhida kutah 1) 
How can there be difference in the unitary Reality 
which is devoid of the distinctions of seer, seeing and seen, 
which is unchanging, unembodied and qualityless? — 
drasté: pramété: knower; darsanam: pramitih; knowledge; 
drsyam: prameyam: object known. The word 4adi: ‘etc’. is to include 
_ the pramanas, the grounds of knowledge. ee 
Or drastr-darsana-drsya may mean karerearana-karyanss doer, 2 
instruments and action. oe 
All these pertain to the state of avidy. As a matter of fact, 
by the gruti: yatra tvasya sarvamatmaivabhit tat kena karn pasyet 
(Brh.): “Where of this everything was the atman, then by whom 
can anything be perceived?”, in the unchanging, pure, infinite cai- 
tanya, in the state of jana, ajfidana is destroyed. Hence, the dis- 
tinctions of a seer, seeing and seen traced to it simply do not exist.. 
These distinctions being absent in that supreme single entity, where 
can difference subsist? It means it does not exist. It.is also indi- 
cated that there is no occasion for difference as there is no distinc-. 
tion of means (karana) and action (karya). There is no poneibiltty 
of difference as there is no change of nature. _ 
> nirvikdre: in what is devoid of change. oes 
_ nirakare: in ‘what has no limbs or parts or no form. 
402 
ETT rarcararafequnaegit i 
| fafeent Preven? fafa’ t frat Ha: i voV 
kalparnava ivatyantaparipirnaikavastuni | 
nirvikare nirakare nirvisese bhida kutah 1 
_ How can there be any difference in the one Reality 
which is of superlative plenitude like the ucean at the time 
of cosmic deluge, and which is unchanging, unembodied 
and qualityless? | | 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 389 
The Puranas say that at the time of the general deluge, the four 
oceans combine. All land will be submerged. The world becomes 
a vast sheet of water. Then everywhere there is water only; no 
speck of land is seen as there are no demarcations. A point of 
grammar: arnava must be in the plural. But, as the oceans divid- 
_ ed by land into four now become one, the singular is used. Even 
in this deluge, there is still the sky different from the ocean, which | 
means then the ocean is not all. However, for conveying the in- 
finite fullness to the hearer, the oneness of the.ocean is given as | 
in the example. It is like saying: ‘The sun speeds forth like an 
arrow”. Obviously the speed of the sun is infinitely greater than 
that of an arrow. But the arrow is the speediest which the mind 
of man can ordinarily comprehend. Hence the comparison of the 
sun with it. So too here, notwithstanding the existence of the sky, 
the union of the four oceans into one is mentioned as an example. 
of the paripirrya-eka-vastu, plenary single object to enable com- 
prehension by the sisya. It is to bring out the significance of 
atyantapirna, of what is superlative full. By the Srutis jyayana- 
kaSat jyaydnantariksat jyayinebhyo lokebhyah: “Greater than the 
_ sky, greater than the middle region, greater than these worlds”; and 
pado’sya sarva bhiitani tripidasyamrtam divi (Purusa Siikta): “All 
the creatures are one quarter of Him, three quarters of Him are im- 
mortal in the sky”, where can be any difference in the incomparably 
excellent Paramatman which is a unitary substance, unchanging, un- 
embodied and. dualitylese? 
403 
'- Earlier too, though there was no difference, there was ajiiana 
which was the cause of the delusion of difference. As that has been 
‘completely uprooted, there is not even the delusion of difference. 
That is conveyed in this Sloka. 
data ant aa faci onferarcorg t 
alga oe area fafa frat Ga: 1 v03 U1 
tejasiva tamo yatra vilinam bhrantikéranam | 
advitiye pare tattve nirvigese bhida kutah \) _ 
How can there be difference when the ajfiana which is 
the cause of delusion is dissolved, like darkness in light, in 
_ the eee Truth which is without a second and quaity- 
less? 
tamah:. means both ajiana and darkness. Where in the Para- 
matman, the darkness of ajfiana which is the cause of delusion is’ 
390 | VIVEKACUDAMANI 
dissolved like darkness in the light of the sun ete., in that non-dual 
supreme Truth, how can any difference arise? As has been said: 
vibhedajanake 'jnane nasamatyantikam gate ; datmano brahmano 
_ bhedam asantam kah karisyati |; “When the ajfiana which produces 
sense of difference has been completely destroyed, who will make 
the non-existent difference between the 4tman and Brahman?” 
404 
gered gt aed azarae wae 7 
qa qanratat Fe: daracitiea: Wow i 
How can there arise any talk of difference in the Sup- 
reme Reality which is unitary? Who has experienced dif- 
ference in the state of Shenae sleep characterised by 
pure bliss? 
The éruti says: yadvai tanna pasyati, pasyan vai tanna pasyati, 
natu taddvitiyamasti tato’nyad vibhaktam yat pasyet (Brh.): “He 
who says that (in dreamless sleep) he does not see anything, says 
so even while seeing. There is none other than and distinct from 
him which he could see”. | 
_ The fact that one does not see the world in dreamless sleep is 
not to be understood in terms of the Tarkika theory that the 4tman 
does not see anything then as it is non-sentient (jada). For in 
dreamless sleep there is the self-effulgence of the atman which is 
ever of the nature of jfiana. But the truth is that the 4tman will 
see something only if there is an other to it; but a second does not 
exist in that condition. -Even if ajnana exists in dreamless sleep, 
yet, it does not exist as an entity distinct from the atman as there 
is identity between the gakti and the Saktimat, the power and its 
possessor. Hence the two words as ‘anyat’: other, and ‘vibhak- 
tam’: separate, in the sruti. It is only the caitanya which is affec- 
ted by the upadhi or ajfidna that can be the witness (saksi) in 
dreamless sleep. Ajfiana is imagined on its ‘substratum itself and 
there is no difference between the imagined super-imposition and 
the substratum of that super-imposition. 
Though this feature of the negation of the world (nispra- 
pancatva) is common to the states of waking and dreamless sleep, 
yet, in the latter, all the factors making for effectuation get merged. 
Therefore, the negation can be better understood in it and it is 
taught in relation to .dreamless sleep to convey it better to the 
hearers. | 5 | 
VIVEKACUDAMANRI 391 
If, while in the waking state, a person examines the. nature of 
the caitanya in dreamless sleep and separates the ajnana from the 
atman, then his antahkarana-vrtti characterised by jndna is des- 
tructive of ajfiana. His mind becomes void of prapafica (nispra- 
pafica) and of the form of Brahman (Brahmakara). That condition 
is the state of jfidma; then the pure state of infinite Brahman is 
attained by the mind. That this is the con¢lusion is the purport of 
Sruti. 
Between the dreamless sleep and samadhi states there is simi- 
larity in that the viksepa Sakti, the power of projecting the pheno- 
menal world is absent in both. They differ in the point that there 
is Avarana or concealment of Reality in dreamless sleep while it is 
absent in samadhi. Hence it is said by Sri Appayya Diksita (in his 
Atmarpana Stotra), ‘nidra samadhisthitih’: “My sleep is the state | 
of samadhi (as I am then unconscious of the world).” This is in- 
tended to show that if a waking person thinks long about the bliss- 
ful mental condition in the state of dreamless sleep, that itself leads 
him to a state of samadhi. . 
So, when it is said in the Sloka: ekatmake pare tattve bheda- 
vartéa katham dbhavet: “When the supreme Truth is one only, how 
ean there be any talk of difference?”, it means there is no differ- 
ence at all; how then can one speak of difference? For there is no 
form of change to justify difference. The Sruti says: “yadahye- 
vaisa etasminnadréye anatmye’nirukte’ nilayane’bhayam pratistham 
vindate  atha so’bhayam gato bhavati (Taitt.). “When one 
attains the state of samadhi making for fearlessness in this (Brah- 
man) which is imperceivable, unembodied, unqualified and unsup- 
ported (by ‘anything else), then he attains fearlessness: “yatra 
_ manyat pasyati nanyat Srnoti nanyat vijdnati sa bhima (Chand.): 
_ “Where one does not see another, does not hear another, does not 
know another, that is the. infinite. ” 
_ If difference is real it must-be seen in dreamless sleep. If it 
is argued that the affirmation in respect to dreamless ‘sleep: ‘I did _ 
not know anything’ indicates the reality of ajfiana in that condi- — 
tion, we reply that it is completély burnt, away in the state of 
samadhi. Therefore there is no reality to ajnana or its products 
as they are totally destroyed. Also by the reasoning: . ddavante’pi 
-yannasti vartamaéne’pi tattatha: “That which is hot in’ the hbegin- 
ning and at the end, is also so in the intervening present,” the 
phenomenal world of difference is not, was not and will not ever 
be; ie, it is of the nature of mithya. Thus being mithya, which 
is the ‘counter-part of negation in all the three periods of time ° 
(traikalikanisedha-pratiyogitvam) is established. 
392 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
| 405 
That is explained further. 
wafer fara rraeaatara 
ararentat aetin fatereet | 
aieaa araietftat qe 
Aeratare: ana iorsrary wok 1 
nahyasti visvam paratattvabodhat 
sadatmani brahmani -nirvikalpe | 
kélatraye nipyahiriksito gune 
nahyambubindur mrgatrsnikayaim 1 
By the realisation of the Truth about Reality, the _ 
‘world does not exist in the unchanging Brahman which is | 
of the nature of Real. In any of the three periods of time 
the (wrongly) seen serpent does not exist in. the Tope, nor 
do water particles exist in the mirage. : | 
It is perfect and correct knowledge that is the cause of realisa- 
tion of an object. Earlier, the mind was afflicted by delusion. Up- 
on proper inquiry, the true atman shines like a lamp, ajfidna dis- 
appears like darkness, and the world is found not. to exist at all in 
Brahman. 
nahyasti: naiva asti: never exists. . 
The ground for it is stated: saratatvenbodhat: by: the realisation 
of the truth about the Supreme Brahman, i.e., its nisprapancatva: 
its being devoid of any connection with the world which is taught 
by sruti. For, there can be no doubt or wrong idea about a thing 
understood by the canons of knowledge. Therefore (as a matter 
of fact), the world does not at atl exist. | 
Example for it: For, the serpent is not seen in the rope in 
‘all the three periods of time. Likewise the drops of water are never 
Seen in the mirage. So too, the object appearing previously due to 
ajfiana is not real. This is supported by the Git& text: nabhavo 
vidyate satah: ‘Negation cannot pertain to what is real”. That is — 
also the experience of the wise. It is the shell that appears like 
silver; the single moon appears like two. These are matters .of 
ordinary experience in the world. So there can be no difference 
' of opinion about the mithy4-character of what is super-imposed. 
Hence the’ Sruti also: yatra hi dvaitamiva bhavati taditara itaram 
pasyati (Brh.); mrtyossa mrtyum adpnoti ya iha naneva pasyati 
_ (Katha):. “Where one sees duality as it were, then one sees an- 
_ other; he who sees here as if many, he goes from death to death.” 
VIVEKACUDAMANI | 393 
In the sruti, ‘by the addition of the word ‘iva’ (as it were, or as if) 
the a aa of dvaita is indicated. 
| 406 
_ To clarify the same, the éruti is quoted. 
wTararatad FAA BEe TATA: | 
ata act eft: arent qaaraTTaa isos Ul 
miyaématram idam dvaitam advaitam paramarthatah | 
itt brite Srutissiksat sede dance sis Wo 
The Sruti itself says: this duality is only an appearance 
wrought by maya; the ultimate truth is non-duality (ad-— 
vaitam). This is realised in dreamless sleep. _ 
mayamatram: mayaya miyate pratiyate, anubhiyate: it appear 
by maya and is experienced on account of it. 
idam (drSyam): i.e., whatever is perceived by the senses, 
dvaitam: ‘difference, duality. 
paramarthatah: in reality—i.e. the truth. 
advaitam: differenceless Brahman. 
This is said in so many words by Sruti. 
It is experienced by everybody in dreamless. jie ‘haneiore, 
there is no scope for discussion here; for experience is in accord 
with gruti which is free from any blemish; for it is not man-made; 
it is apauruseya. 9 
407 a 
— aerearaqntasrararctaed facifarara | 
afesa ceHeriat fasedt wrfasitat: vow ut 
ananyatvam adhisthandd adropyasya niriksitam | 
panditai rajjusarpddau vikalpo bhrantijivanah j1 
The non-otherness of the super-imposed from the sub- 
stratum is seen by the learned. The sense of difference 
between the rope and the serpent etc. is on account of 
delusion. 
It may be argued on the Basie of the Reloalrenaneed susuptt- — 
kale sakale viline tamo’bhibhitah sukharipameti: “When every- 
thing has merged in the state of dreamless sleep, enveloped by 
tamas, one attains bliss; the expression tamo’bhibhiitah speaks of 
factual existence of tamas (darkness). It is replied ‘that it does 
not actually exist there; it is imagined. Further, it is absent in 
394 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
samadhi; hence it is said to be not real. Of what is super-imposed, 
_ its non-existence as a separate entity apart from the substratum as 
in the case of the rope-serpent, is clearly seen by the learned. | 
vikalpah: the sense of difference. _ 
bhrantijivanah: It subsists by delusion; i.e., it is to be traced 
to bhranti: When there is no delusion, no difference is seen due to 
the absence of any apprehension making for difference. “ 
408 
The method of getting over the delusion is next explained, 
fareyet fascist framed a wert 
safrerdt wera seat TATA vod U 
cittamilo vikalpo’yam cittébhave na kascana | 
atas cittam samddhehi prutyagriipe pardtmani |) | 
The mind is the source of this sense of difference; 
when the mind does not exist (function), there is none. 
Therefore concentrate the mind on aad innermost supreme © 
atman. 7 
cittam: the extrovert mind, the mind going outward. 
_cittamilam: has the extrovert mind as its source. 
cittabhave: when there is no (functioning of the) mind as in 
_dreamless sleep, even the nominal avidya is not capable of 7 
lating itself to action. That avidya transforms itself in the form of 
the mind in the waking and dream states and originates the world. 
Therefore, firmly establish your mind in the Paramatman which 
is your rea] nature. By that, all differences vanish along with the 
avidya also. 7 
409, 410 & 411 
7 To establish the mind firmly in the nese atman the follow- 
ing are affirmed with emphasis. 
| afc wrerafas fray mer Tot aaTUt vos tl 
reterfergterayed ATA ATS 
AALAAAAT ATAAA TL | 
frnrmeafig fraexniag : 
gfe woafe fagrr wet Tt AAT UN ¥qo Ut 
VIVEKACUDAMANI : 398 
| MACACA ATT ATES 
fear forefront ) 
wfrareare Meat MATA 
ef woafa faara wer ot aatat i xag 
kimapi satatabodham kevalanandaripam 
nirupamam ativelam nityamuktam nirtham L 
niravadhi gaganabham niskalam nirvikalpam 
hrdi kalayati vidvan brahma pirnam samédhau |) 
prakrti-vikrtiginyam bhavanatitabhavam 
| samarasam asamanam siina-cambaniheaiean: 
nigamavacanasiddham nityam asmatprasiddham 
hrdi kalayati vidvaén brahma pirnam samadhau We 
ajaram amaram astabhasavastusvariipam - | 
stimitasalilarisiprakhyam akhydvihinam | 
samitagunavikdram sasvatam Santamekam 
hrdi kalayatt vidvian brahma pirnam samédhaw {)- 
The vidvan realises in his heart during samadhi an in- 
definable plenary Brahman of the nature of eternal know- 
- ledge and of pure bliss, incomparable, beyond all bounds, 
~ ever free without desire, like the sky, without parts and : in- 
divisible. 
The vidvan realises in his heart during. samadhi anin- 
’ divisible, plenary Brahman bereft of cause and. effect rela- — 
tion, of unvarying nature, incomparable and incomprehen- | 
sible, beyond all canons of knowledge, established by the _ 
words of sruti, eternal and perceived in the realisation of | 
the wise. 7 , 7 
| The vidvan realises in his heart during samadhi ‘an in- _ 
‘divisible, plenary Brahman which never decays, which is 
immortal, free from the taint of ajfiana and its effects, like 
an unmoving vast expanse of water, that has no name, 
which is nirguna, eternal, ever identical (not changing) 
and unitary. . - 
409 
kimapi: .a certain; indescribable—beyond words, ae 
satata-bodham: who is verily the eternal = aici know- 
ledge. 
' kevalanandariipam: of the nature of bliss unconitacted® ey 
sorrow and free from all upadhis. By virtue of its being self-efful-_ 
3906 VIVEKACUPAMANI 
gent and of the nature of eternal bliss, it is indicated that it is the 
ultimate object of human aspiration and endeavour, paramapuru- 
sartha. 
nirupamam: incomparable; vide the $ruti: na tasya pratimasti 
_ (Brh.): there is no other like it. 
| ativelam: transcending bounds, i.e., beyond the universe. 
nityamuktam: ever free: free from bondage at any time. 
nirtham: without desire or without activity. 
niravadhi: without end in respect of time, space or object. 
gagandbham: (unattached and free from impurities) like the 
Sky. 
niskalam: without parts. 
nirvikalpam: bereft of any kind. of wrong idea. 
| purnam brahma vidvén samadhau kalayati: the ivan rea-_ 
lises such a plenary Brahman in samadhi. The idea is to convey 
the instruction: ‘you too realise, thus.’ | 
prakrtivikrtisinyam: by reason of its being eternal and with- 
out parts, and by virtue of the sruti: tadetad brahma apiirvam dna- 
param (Brh.): “This that Brahman (is) without a before and an 
after,” devoid of any cause and effect relation. 
bhadvandtitabhavam: whose nature is beyond the imanination 
or comprehension without the aid of the Upanisadic texts. 
samarasam: ekarapam, of an identical nature. | 
asamainam: beyond compare. | 
manasambandhadiiram: beyond connection with any means of 
knowledge, beyond all pramanas. For, even sruti can only speak 
of it by implication (laksanaya). As Sri Sureévaracarya observed: 
pramata ca praminam ca prameyam pramitistathad |  yasya prasa- 
dat siddhyanti tatsiddhau kim apeksyate \ “What else can be re- 
quired when That is realised by whose grace are established the 
knower, the ground, what is to be known and the knowledge it- 
self?” When the pratyagatman (the inner atman) becomes self- 
realised, even the érutis which convey the annulment. of the dis- 
tinctions of knowing, knower and knowledge are indifferent. Or, it. 
may mean: manam: i.e. the canons of knowledge like pratyaksa, 
‘direct sense-perception; ‘tatsambandhadiram: devoid of any con- 
nection with it, i.e., incomprehensible by any of the canons of BROW 
ledge. = 7 
VIVEKACUDAMANI © | 307° 
nigamavacanasiddham: established on the basis of the words 
of the Vedas. | 7 
- nityam asmatprasiddham: sada (brahmaham asmiti) vidvada- 
nubhavagocaram: always the object of realisation (as ‘I am Brah- 
man’) by the learned. : 
| 411 
ajaram: devoid of decay. 
amaram: devoid of destruction. 
astabhasavastusvaripam: that from which all differences 
(wrought by ajnana) have been extinguished. | 
stimita-salilardsiprakhyam: amoving like an expanse of water 
without waves. | | 
akhydadvihinam: namarahitam: without name, because it cannot 
be classified as belonging to any class or group, as indicated by a 
name, or quality or an action and as casual relations cannot be asso- 
ciated with it. Vide the Sruti: akdse ha vai nima nimaeripayor 
‘nirvahité te yadantara tat Brahma (Chaénd.): Akaéa is the container 
of everything. That which includes the container and the contained 
is Brahman.” . 7 | : - 
éatiitaqunavikerom: qualityless and ahangclses 
- ahigdenli anddisiddham: existing without any beginning. 
' Sintam: undisturbed by anything. 
_ekam: without a second. 
hrdi kalayati vidvan: as before. 
— 412 
UAT TA AGA BWET 11 ¥VR Ul 
_samahitintahkaranah svariipe | 
_ vilokayatmaénam akhandavaibhavam | 
vicchindhi bandham bhavagandhagandhilam 
yatnena pumstvam saphalikurusva | 
Clearly see the atman of infinite glory in the Para- 
matman with the mind steadied in concentration: cut off 
the bonds fashioned by the vasanas of samsdra. and make 
your birth as a man fruitful. 7 | ‘a 
398 a _ VIVEKACUDAMANI 
svaripe: paramatmani: in the Paramatman which is your real 
nature. 
| samahitantabkaranah: with your mind firmly and unmovingly 
made. to rest. | 
akhandavaibhavam: of limitless glory; being the sibeetenn 
even of the expansive akasa. 
_vilokaya: realise. | - 
bhavagandhagandhilam: contaminated by the vasanas of sam- 
sara, ; 
bandham: ajhanam. | 
vicchindhi: destroy; vide: avidydstamayo moksas sa ca Saadha 
udaéhrtah: ‘Moksa is the extinction of avidya and that vayidya) is 
spoken of as bondage. o 
yatnena: with effort: vide the érutis: palisbhinieare labho 
yotsukhainna param sukham | yadbodhannaparo bodhas tad brah- 
metyavadharaya ;, “That than gaining which there is no higher 
gain; that than the bliss of which there is no higher bliss; that than 
by knowing which there is no higher knowledge, understand that to 
be Brahman.” dtmalabhanne param kifcidasti: “There is not any- 
thing beyond the getting (realisation) of the atman’: dtmanaman- 
viccha guham pravistam: “Inquire about the 4tman embedded in 
the inmost cave of your being”. Vide the Gita text: etad buddhva 
buddhiman syat krtakrtyasca bhérata: “Knowing this, one becomes 
wise and of fulfilled purpose, Oh Arjuna!”; vide aiso the éruti: atma 
va are drastavyah etavadare khalvamrtatvam (Brh): ‘The atman 
must be ‘seen’; that verily is immortality”. All these show that 
the realisation of the 4tman (atmasiksatkara) alone is fruitful. By 
effort towards it make your birth as man secured by the many 
merits of previous births purposeful. Do not get into samsara ee 
: 413 
waintafatryadt afeaarrangay 
ATATAUTA ACT T WT: HETASETT 11693 th 
sarvopadhivinirmuktam saccidinandam advayam | 
bhavayatmanam atmastham na bhiyah kalpase’dhvane tN 
Meditate on the atman which is in you, free of all upa- 
dhis, of the nature of Pure Existence, Knowledge, and Bliss 
and non-dual, and you will not be entangled in samsara 
again. | 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 399 
adtmanam bhavaya: meditate on the atman. How? 
Vinirmuktam: completely freed of all os aorosge freed of the 
forms of the gross, subtle and causal bodies; freed even of the 
vasanas. | ; 
saccidanandam advayam: of the nature of sat, cit and ananda 
and non-dual. | | 
 @tmastham: existing in you; by this it is _ shown that the 
atman is not far away. vide the Sruti: atravava kila’ sat saumya na 
nibhdlayase: ‘Verily the Atman is here, dear one; do you not see?” 
The meaning is that it reveals itself to “the subtle intellect. 
na kalpase’dhvane: being established in your own excellence, 
you do not get again into the path of samsara; vide the Sruti: na sa 
punar avartate ( Chand.): “He does not come back again”, and the | 
Gita text: mam upetya tu kaunteya punarjanma na vidyate: “There 
is no rebirth after attaining Me”. 
| 414 | 
The negation of rebirth is explained. 
BTAS FA: TLERAATATATATAT ST GSTTACAT 
erectearerg werafnced qa dere g¢ RETET Teara 
chéyeva pumsah paridrgsyamanam 
abhdsaripena phalanubhitya | 
Sariramarat savavannir astam © | 
punar na sandhatta idam mahatma it 
The great one (who has had Brahman-experience), by 
reason of his realisation of the expansive consciousness, 
does not attach himself again to the body which is visible 
as a shadow when once it has been cast off like a corpse. _ 
— mahatma: brahmabhavam praptah purusah: one who has 
attained Brahmanhood. | | 
 phalanubhityd: by reason "of experiencing the attainment of 
expansive consciousness: akhandakara-vrtti: the natural. caitanya 
not being concealed by ajiana and hence revealed in: its epuigence 
as svarupa-caitanya. 
abhasaripena: by reason of its being only an appearance like 
a slough cast off by a serpent appearing to others’ eyes as a real 
serpent, or like the shadow of a person, this body which is seen 
till the moment of death, does not induce the ‘sense of ‘Tl’ as’ ‘before, 
being (mentally) cast away to a far distance, like:a corpse. 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 
tdam sariram punarna sandhatte: does not attach the atman- 
hood etc. (ahamtadikam) to this body. Even if it appears, he is in- 
different to it (as something external to him) as he would be to a 
pot ete. 
415 
aaalanoaarTrsced cay 
cat HeAwSriaAd Tez | 
ae gay aa eget aaa 
| ercufaraad sera STA egy UE 
‘satatavimalabodhénandaripam svametya 
tyaja jadamalaripopadhimetam sudire | 
atha punarapi naiva smaryatém vantavastu 
smaranavisayabhitam kalpate kutsanaya | NW 
Realising your true nature which is eternal, pure, in- 
telligent and blissful, throw this sentiment, impure upadhi — 
that is the body, far away: Let it not be thought of again; 
for the vomit only brings disgust when it is remembered. 
. satatavimalabodhéinandaripam svam: the ee ca meh is 
eternal, free ffom impurity, effulgent and blissful. 
etya: ( pratyaktay4) prapya: attaining it (as the inmost self). 
jada-malaripam upaédhim etam: This body which is | irisentient, 
impure and of the nature of an upadhi. 
sudiré tyaja: fling far off. 
— smaranavisayabhitam: smrtam: remembered. | 
: kutsandiya: causing. disgust. to oneself or censure by others. 
_ After realising that one is the pure intelligence and. bliss that 
is Brahman, after this jfana, the body should not be thought of 
_ again. It must be cast away from he mind. like an impure object. 
An example is provided for it. The vomit is a matter for disgust 
and revulsion. An impure object should not be thought of again 
as it will foul the mind. People also censure one who thinks of an 
evil object, which has been abandoned. 
416 
ayond after agit 
sree salty fataned | 
: eam freafeaaten- pgp oa fesofa fagfzes: 11 ¥9¢ 11 
-VIVEKACODAMANI | 401 
samilametam paridahya vahnau 
, sadaitmani brahmani nirvikalpe 
tatas svayam nityavisuddhabodha-— 
nandétmand tisthati vidvaristhah |) 7 | 
The highest of knowers remains firmly established 
as the eternal, pure, intelligent and. blissful Atman after 
burning this body outright in the fire of apg S Brah- 
man which is the ever existent Stman. — ot 
 Sadéitmani: in one’s real nature which is unsublatable in any 
of the three periods of time. | 
paridahya samiilam vahnau sadaétmani Branca nirvikalpe: 
_ Burning this body from its roots along with aypene in the fire of 
the unchanging Brahman. 
vidvaristhah: those who know are vidah; tesiam oe the 
Superior among vidvans is vidvaristhah. For one who remains as 
eternal, pure, intelligent and blissful, never will there be reflection 
of the anadtman in him. 
a TAT aT fasoa Tia AR ' q TA: ayata ae i a aT 
| 
prérabdha-sitra-grathitam Sartram — 
prayatu va tisthatu goriva srak ; 
na tat punah pasyati tattvavetta-. 
 *nandatmana brahmani linavrttih || 
Let this body. fashioned by prarabdha-karmas go away 
_ or remain like the garland round the neck of a cow. The 
_knower of Truth does not care for it again, his mental fun¢- 
_ tions being merged in Brahman which is compacted of bliss. 
prayatu tisthatu va: let it go or remain, the cow is unconcerned 
about it. | ; | 
prarebdha-sitra-grithitam sariram: the prarabdha itself is 
the string; the physical body made with it. A simile is given to this: 
sitragrathita srakiva: like a garland tied in a rope ( round the 
neck of a cow as an adornment). | 
_° The cow -has no attachment to it; but others consider it an 
adornment to it. Before Brahmasaksatkara arises, the body is made 
V.Com27 | 
‘402 _--VIVEKACODAMANI © 
for the experience of joy and sorrow. After Brahmasaksatkara, let 
this body go or stay; let it be dead or remain alive. The knower 
of Truth does not see it after realising that he is Brahman. 
tattvavetté: Atmayadthatmyadarsi: who realises the true nature 
of the a4tman. 
linavrttih: The reason for it is given. All his mental modes 
are merged in Brahman in a blissful state. The vrttis.do not pro- 
ject outward because they are blissful internally and are not out- 
ward-oriented. When the mind is immersed in the bliss of Brah- 
manubhava from which it does not turn, how or why would it be 
directed outward? It has attained that state where it sought. un- 
ending bliss. Then having attained the eternal and surpassing state 
of bliss and become immersed in it, it does not rise (project itself) 
outward. As it will be said hereafter in the work (sl. 523): “Who 
that is a learned one, will delight in the void giving up the enjoy- 
ment of supreme bliss? Who will wish to see the painted moon 
when there is the real moon giving intense delight?” 
418 
The second half of the previous gloka which says the knower of . 
the truth does not perceive it’ is explained further. 
seusaraarca fara FATS: | 
fafaeoq wea at gat: ae Toft acafaa uve ti 
akhandinandam atmanam vijiaya svasvariipatah | — 
kimicchan kasya va hetor deham pusnati tattvavit || 
After realising the blissful infinite Atman as his real 
nature, desiring which and for whose sake will the knower 
of Truth nourish the body? 
kimicchan: desiring which, i.e. for attaining what that has not 
been attained, will he make effort; and as effort cannot be made 
without the body, will he nourish the body, he. being knower of. the 
truth and having understood the blissful 4tman? The Sruii too 
says: atmanam ced vijdniyad ayamasmiti pirusah,. kimicchan kasya 
kamaya Sariram anusanjvaret (Mund.). 
419 
The mark of Truth properly known is spoken ebcue 
afagea Ga asetaaaer Ath: | 
alert: Marerrawarearerareary WYqs 
samsiddhasya phalam tvetat jivanmuktasya yoginah | 
bahirantas sadinandarasisvadanam atmani | 
VIVEKACUDAMANI | : 403 
| This is the result that accrues to the yogin who has 
attained perfection and is a jivanmukta. It is the perma- 
nent enjoyment of bliss in his mind both internally and 
externally. 
This is the fruit that accrues to that yogin who adopting the 
preliminary means of sAédhanacatustaya, approaches a guru, listens 
to the Vedanta-texts from his lips, reflects and meditates on them 
- with concentration and translates them into facts of his own expe- 
rience, and, who by reason of his mind being anchored in the 
-Paramatman is a jivanmukta, that is, one who is free of connection 
with every upadhi. The fruit is the enjoyment of bliss both outside 
and inside in the atman, i.e., the antahkarana. Even when the yogin 
comes to the vyutthana dasa, i.e., when he relapses into world-con- 
sciousness from his samadhic state, there is no eclipse of his joy; for 
the akhandakara-vrtti of his mind has destroyed the concealment of 
the atman. Hence, he experiences joy externally also. Others — 
‘too, when they see him are able to infer from his smiling and plea- 
sant countenance etc., that he experiences plenary bliss. The 
uninterrupted joy of moksa which is a state of the destruction of 
avidya becomes possible of perception by others due tc these marks 
of a aiveneaue s countenance. : 
420 | 
In this matter, if the especial effect of the several means are. 
known either directly or in succession, the seeker of liberation 
- (mumuksu) will be able to attain perfection in a full measure. For 
that purpose, the fruits of vairagya (detachment), bodha (know- 
ledge) and uparati (abstinence) are given in that order. - 
aUNIEA Gt Tra: Trerearacha: GIT | 
TATA PAAATA WheaCTAATa: BST Uo ti 
‘vairigyasya phalam bodhah bodhasyoparatih phalam , 
svaénandainubhavat santir esaivoparateh phalam , 
_ The fruit of detachment is knowledge; of knowledge 
abstinence (from sense-pleasure) is the fruit. That leads 
to the experience of the bliss of the true self which, in turn, 
leads to peace. : 
Sri Bhagavatpada said earlier: vairdgyanna param sukhasya 
janakam pasyami vasyatmanah, taccecchuddhataratmabodhasahitam 
 svdraéjyasamrayadhuk (gl. 377), that ascending the topmost floor of 
-mukti does not accrue by any other means than vairadgya and bodha, 
404 | VIVEKACUDAMANI 
non-attachment and knowledge. By that is to be understood that 
they are both ‘equally means to moksa. | 
Earlier, in respect of vairagya, it was said: etad dvdramajas- 
ramuktiyuvateh: (s1. 377). “This is the entrance for the perpetual 
state of mukti”’. Yet, it was also said in the latter half of the Sloka: 
sarvatrasprhaya sadétmani kuru prajnam nijasreyase: “Turn. your 
mind .to the Real that is the 4tman by non-desire everywhere for 
your spiritual benefit”. This does not show clearly the cause and 
effect relation between vairdagya and knowledge. Therefore, it is 
made clear that though, amidst the means for liberation, namely, 
viveka (discrimination), vairagya (non-attachment), sSamadisatka 
(the six disciplines beginning with sama) and mumuksutva (the 
desire for liberation), vairagya and uparati (withdrawal from 
senses) are included, yet, as those means are internal in nature it 
may be that they are not strongly marked at the time of inquiry 
(into Brahman).. They would acquire excellence by the adoption 
of the means to jfana like Sravana and manana (hearing the words 
of the guru and thinking about them). Hence it has been said: 
bahyaénalambanam vrtteh eso’poratiruttamad: ‘“Non-attachment to — 
externals is the pre-eminent condition of uparati.” In the stage of 
inquiry, without nididhydsana it will not be possible to get over 
wrong ideas (viparitabhavana). Hence, it will be impossible to 
secure bahyandlambanatva, the state of non-attachment to external 
objects. Yet, it must be said that the mental state secures the capa- 
city to inquire by non-attachment to sense-objects like sound etc. 
Now, however, preceded by the elimination of the five sheaths, 
when one’s own direct experience has been secured by nididhyasana, 
the non-liability to be attracted by things which are-the andtman 
can be effectively declared. That,is why it is said that uparati 
(abstinence) is the fruit of bodha (knowledge). Previously in the 
midst of the six disciplines beginning with gama, uparati was said 
to be the effect of Sama and-dama. This is a preliminary state of 
uparati. It is only after the superior type of uparati as aforesaid 
has been attained that the gama defined as ‘svalaksye niyatavastha. 
manasassama ucyate: “The state of mind, not sliding from its goal 
is called Sama” that is described as Santi in the expression: svdnanda- 
nubhavacchéntiresaivoparatel phalam: “This Santi alone that arises 
from one’s own experience of bliss is the fruit of uparati.” This means 
the sadhanas that had been acquired previously: by one’s effort 
and by listening to the words of good persons who are concerned in 
one’s welfare, attain excellence by inquiry and they: become broad- 
ened and deepened. So too, the truth: ‘Brahman is the. Real, the _ 
VIVEKACUPAMANI 405 
world mithyd,’ is said to be of the form of discrimination between | 
the eternal and the transient (brahma satyam jaganmithyetyevam- 
ripo viniscayah, so’yam nityanityavastuvivekah samudaéhrtah). This 
which was a matter of indirect knowledge previously (paroksajfiana) 
acquires directness after inquiry. Similarly, by the Gita text: 
rasO’pyasya param drstvd nivartate: “On seeing the Supreme, his 
taste too ceases”, desire for sense-objects does not remain even as a 
tendency. Hence, vairagya of the form of absolute absence of desire 
for objects is established in its fullness. Therefore, if, when inquiry 
is made by steadying the mind in practice of vairagya, bodha which 
must necessarily arise does not:arise, then it must be concluded that 
the means, namely vairagya, is not complete. Hence, for its stabi-. 
‘lisation, endeavour must be made. Thus, upon the direct realisation 
of the atman arising from the knowledge of the Upanisadic texts, 
or when the direct knowledge free from doubt or wrong ideas arises, 
uparati becomes the fruit of that bodha. Even after this knowledge 
has been acquired, if the withdrawal of the mind from the external 
objects is absent, it must be understood that the mind has not acquir- 
ed firm knowledge. The reason for this is the incompleteness of 
vairagya. If vairagya is not complete, and if the conviction about 
the truth of the atman is not firm, what then is the distinctive feature | 
of those who have acquired vidya? How will there be abstinence 
from sense-pleasure for those who have knowledge? Of an abstinent 
mind, peace from experience of the bliss of the atman and remain- 
ing inactive—these alone are the fruits. For, it has been said: 
jranamrtena trptasya krtakrtyasya yoginah 1|- naivasti kincit 
kartavyam asti cenna sa tattvavit }} : “For the yogin who is satis- 
fied (who has deeply drunk) the nectar of jnana and who has 
achieved his purpose, there is nothing to be done; if there is, then 
he is not a knower of the Truth.” If the succeeding things do not . 
_ arise, it means that the preceding things have been infructuous 
( yadyuttarottarabhavah pirvapirvam tu nisphalam). So until the 
determined effect of each is attained, it means that the practice of 
the respective preceding means is not complete. That knowing this, 
the aspirant should endeavour properly is conveyed for the per- 
fection of the means. 
421 
The fruit of Brahmavidya is conveyed. 
faata: aca afta: araratsqqa: tact: | 
qeeqrasqaan: fragt: Kea THT UYRT 
406 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
nivrttih parama trptih dnando’nupamah svatah | 
drstaduhkhesavanudvegah vidydyah prastutam phalam }; 
Withdrawal (from all activity),. absolute satisfaction, 
_ incomparable natural bliss and absence of regret. over the 
perceived miseries—these constitute the pre-eminent fruit 
of knowledge. 3 
nivrttth: withdrawal from all actions; ‘non-activity, the state 
of nothing remaining to be done. 
paramaé trptth: absolute satisfaction of the form, ‘what has to 
be done has been done; what has to be attained has been attained; 
hereafter there is nothing to do or to attain’. cs peculiar. self- 
satisfaction in this manner. | | , 
dnando’nupamah: anupamah: incomparable. anandah: per- 
manent superlative bliss that is not dependent on sense-objects. 
drstaduhkhesvanudvevgah: absence of regret over sorrows — 
_ suffered asa result of prarabdha-karmas. When sorrows arise, the 
ajnanin wails in regret: ‘I am a sinner; fie on me, the evil one’ 
etc. Though these appear to be words of wisdom, yet, if this man 
had acted in his previous life as a deterrent against sinful action, 
it would have been purposeful. Now it avails little. Such delu- 
_ sion regarding what might have been is a modification of tamas. 
This is udvega or regret. Grief is a mental mode of anguish 
brought about by rajoguna due to attachment etc., at present. That 
is the difference between grief and regret. There is no occasion for 
such regret in the case of a jnanin on account of the four features 
of cessation from activity, absolute satisfaction, incomparable bliss, 
non-dependence on sénse-objects and absence of regret. for suffer-_ 
_ings experienced. This is the perceived pre-eminent fruit of the 
knowledge which is synonymous with realisation of the truth about 
the atman. | 
422 & 423 
Among these, the nature of withdrawal (from activity) is ex- 
plained. When this is the difference between. the unwise and the 
_ wise person, what needs be said in respect of vidya relating to the 
Paramatman which is the result of viveka? These glokas expand 
this idea. Oo | 
ted orfiadorat arared aafcrary | 
Graal faaaay qe wangfa IRit aL 
frarnet earcaat trata: 
} t aattarers | 
| aaa aera feorerat 
arag faat acne fare 1 ¥33 
yatkrtam bhrantivelayam nanikarma jugupsitam | 
pascénnaro vivekena tat katham kartum arhati M 
vidyaphalam syaddasato nivrttih | 
pravritirajndnaphalam yadiksitem | 
tajjnajrayor yanmrgatrsnikadau 
noced vido drstaphalam kimasmat || 
- How can a man who did various loathsome deeds dur- 
ing a state of delusion do them later after the dawn of 
viveka? 
The result of caawiedae will be withdrawal from | 
what is unreal. Action is the result of ajaina. This dis- 
tinction between jfianin and ajfianin is seen in the case of 
the mirage etc. Else, how will the direct fruit of one who 
knows be withdrawal from this? i 
. Even as a man of discrimination will withdraw later fais the. 
loathsome actions which he did earlier due to delusion before the 
dawn of viveka, so too arises the state of complete cessation from — 
all actions on the part of the man of knowledge as there is nothing for him to obtain and as he is ever established in Brahman. That 
this is a matter of general experience is conveyed in the next Sloka. 
“mygatrgnikadau: in the mirage etc. Etc. is intended to in- 
clude the case of the shell-silver. The wise man does not go in | 
quest of water- knowing it to be a mirage. The ignorant man who 
does not know that a hot place appears with water due to the rays 
of - the sun, goés there for water, but does not get it; his effort be- _ 
comes fruitless. | 
It is shown that the fruit of knowledge is uvniag back from the 
unreal and the fruit of ajfiana is going towards it. This is clear. 
Otherwise, what is the fruit of a jianin who knows it thus? What 
else is the perceived effect of withdrawal from the unreal? wes 
asmét:. asannivrttiripat: from the withdrawal from the un- 
real. | | | :. _ 
In this context, in the matter of Brahmavidya, by the word 
asat, the anatman is. understood, i.e., everything that is not Brah- 
-man. Previously in the state of ajfiana there was action towards 
VIVEKACODAMANI 
it (the unreal), as then the svaripananda, the bliss of self realisa- 
tion had not been attained. Now, however, to one who has known 
(realised) his Atman, as everything else is understood to be mithya, 
there is no occasion for any action at all. Thus the fruit of know- 
ledge is withdrawal from the asat, from what is not real. 
424. 
That withdrawal arises also because there is no impulse to 
action. By the word anicchoh in the Sloka Supreme satisfaction is 
conveyed. : 
aatTeeaaen: fraret wersiad: | 
atireotiage: Taq sec: BLT CAT: We vIy Ul 
ajnanahrdayagranther viandso yadyasesatah | 
anicchor vidusah kinnu pravrtteh kdranam svatah }} 
When the knot of ajfana in the heart has Been com-_ 
pletely cut off, what can induce the wise man to act who 
has no desire of his own to satisfy? 
The knot of the heart is wrought by ajfana. It is the result 
of the super-imposition leading to (wrong) identification of the 
saksi-caitanya in the buddhi. When, by the akhandakara-vrtti of 
the mind, the ajfiana which is the cause of that knot is destroyed 
from its roots including the vasands, then what can be the impulsi _ 
to action to a wise man who has no desires? For, everywhere, de- 
sire is the cause of action. When that does not exist, there can 
be no action. For, it is said: without thought of a benefit even a 
fool ‘does not embark on an action. Hence is the desire for moksa 
included among the sadhanacatustaya (the fourfold means to libe- 
ration). Desire is a quality of the antahkarana; vide the Sruti: 
kamas sankalpo vicikitsé sraddha asraddha dhetir adhrtir hrir dhir 
-bhir ityetat sarvam mana eva (Brh.). “Desire, purpose, doubt, 
faith, lack of faith, courage, absence of courage, bashfulness, in- 
telligence and fear are all only qualities of the mind.” 
The desire of the mind for external objects is due to noh-rea- 
lisation of the blissful 4tman. Due to perception of defects in the 
external objects and his desire for mukti, the wise man is drawn to 
gastraic pursuits through gravana, manana and nididhydsana in res- 
pect of the 4tman which is of the nature of supreme bliss. There is 
no more any desire when the d4tman has been realised; for the ob- 
jective has been achieved. Even during inquiry, external desires 
do not at all exist as the supreme means of vairagya has been prac- 
VIVEKACODAMANI 409 
tised. As no desire exists for such a one, it must be said that the 
-witness-consciousness too (saiksi) has no desire arising from the 
super-imposition of a (false) identity. Even the desire for (know- 
ledge of) the 4tman is there only so long as there is ajfidina of the — 
_ &tman. When the ajfidna is destroyed, the super-imposition caused 
by the identification of the sentient with the insentient produced 
by itis also destroyed and there is complete withdrawal (from 
action). So, in all ways, there is nothing to induce activity exter- 
nally or internally. Thus, the meaning of withdrawal from action 
is remaining in a state of ecuonieetes. This is the direct fruit of 
ee 7 | | 
425 
| ‘When are vairagya, bodha and uparati (detachment, awaken- 
ing and abstinence) to be known as having arisen in full? The — 
question is answered by the guru for the benefit of the pupil. 
AAAS AV STAT TAHT: 
ACAAMNAATATAT ATCA TATA: | 
ataqacacata: aatetaeaeq ATU SRy 
 vasaninudayo bhogye vairdgyasya paraivadhih | 
ahambhavodaydbhavo bodhasya paramavadhih \, 
tinavriter anutpattir maryddoparatestu sé | 
The supreme limit of detachment is the non-springing 
of vasanas in respect of enjoyable objects: The non-spring- 
ing of the sense of the ‘I’ (in the things which are the 
anitman) is the extreme limit of bod: . The non-spring- 
ing again of the modifications whieh hav. ceased is the ex- 
treme limit of uparati. — 
bhogye sane amudagale When there is absence of excitement 
even in their presence by sense-objects once experienced, that is 
the limit of detachment. Such a mind is dead to sense-objects, 
How will there be any attachment to them? Thus has been shown 
the ultimate in detachment. 
ahambhavasya udaya-abhivah: This may be explained in two. 
ways. It may mean the cancellation of the sense of ‘I’ (aham) in 
the cognition ‘I am Brahman’: aham brahmasmi, after the manner 
‘4lo _ VIVEKACUDAMANI 
of ‘baddhayam simanadhikaranyam’ : 36 
So too here when it is said: ‘aham brahma asmi’, ‘T am Brah- 
man,’ the sense of ‘I’ (aham) is cancelled like the idea of the thief, 
and Brahman remains like the idea of the pillar in the other. case. 
Thus the non-springing of the sense of the ‘I’ in the plenary ex- 
perience of Brahman is the ultimate limit of bodha. For, in Brah- 
man which is the all, there is no place for the delimiting sense of 
the ‘I’. ‘Hence it was said earlier in gloka: vadatyesa bhrantastve- 
mahamiti maiyémadirayd: One deluded by the wine of maya speaks 
in the language of ‘you’ and ‘I’. The meaning is that which was 
cognised as ‘I’ in the assertion ‘aham brahmaésmi’: “I am Brah- 
man”, is Brahman only, like ‘yah corah sa sthanuh’: “He who was 
(appeared as) a thief, is a pillar”. 
Or, ahambhavodayabhivah may be taken to mean the non- 
arising of the sense of the ‘T’ in the (five) sheaths covering the 
-atman. 
navrtteh anutpattih uparateh marydda:. the limit of uparati 
(abstinence) is the non-springing again of the mental modifications 
-which have been extinguished... It is the non-revival of the mental 
modification which has merged in the bliss of Atman-realisation. 
Even as ghee which has come from milk will not lapse back into 
the state of milk, so too, is. the case with incomparable bliss. From 
it arises supreme sense of fulfilment. Hence there will be with- 
drawal from everything. Thus is shown the cause-and-effect rela- 
tion between these. 
426 | 
‘Now the guru explains the incomparable bliss of the jfAnin. 
agirereaar aar feaaaar faacarercelt: 
rutrum faTraz asag | 
eaters IIT Tafa: 
aed Sfrarragoaneay aa: a arat yfa eee i 
36 ‘Samanadhikaranyam’ means two different words having reference to the 
same object. In the case of ‘badhayam samanadhikaranyam’, the same object is 
referred to by two words as when an object which is really a Pillar is spoken of 
in ignorance caused by darkness, as a thief. ‘This is a pillar’ is the truth, ‘This 
is a thief,’ is the opposite of it. Both words cannot apply to the same object. One 
of them should be cancelled. Here the knowledge about the object will take the 
form: ‘This which appeared as a thief is really a pillar.’ What was cognised as 
a thief is a pillar. By virtue of ‘badhayam samanadhikaranyam,’ in the cognition 
‘aham Brahmasmi’, the sense | Of ‘aham’ becomes badhita and the consciousness of 
Brahman alone remains. — 
VIVEKACUDAMANI : : 411 
brahmakdratayé sada sthitatayé nirmuktabaéhyarthadhih 
anydvedita-bhogya-bhogakalano nidraluvad bdlavat | 
- svapnaélokitalokavat jagadidam pasyan kvacillabdhadhih 
dste kagcid anantapunyaphalabhug dhanyah sa 
manyo dbhuvi j| 
Freed from awareness of any external object by reason 
of his ever being Brahman, consuming only what is needed 
for bodily sustenance proferred to him by others like one in 
sleep or like a child, looking at this world when he comes 
to external sight like one seen in a dream, remains the bless- 
ed one enjoying infinite merit. He is to be honoured on 
earth. 
The reason why the mind of the blessed one is freed from all . 
awareness of external objects is his being always anchored: in 
Brahman. There is not any other kind of awareness. He remains © 
for ever in the realisation of the Paramatman which is of the nature 
of the infinite sat, cit and adnanda which is the ultimate objective 
of all human effort. 
nirmukta...: completely freed (from all worldly sttachinenta) 
along with.the vasands. The word is to be understood as nastah 
bahyarthah yasyam’: not ‘yaya’, ‘by which’. Mind in which all sense | 
of external objects has been destroyed. For, tendencies get nullified 
of their own accord without needing any effort for their removal. As 
the Gita says, raso’pyasya param drstva nivartate: “Even the men- 
tal tendencies of such a person withdraw when the Supreme is rea- 
lised.” . Thus, when Brahman is realised, the absence of necessity for 
effort to withdraw from sense-objects is clearly seen. So nimukta- 
bayarthadhih means he whose awareness of the external objects has 
been destroyed. 7 | . | 
kascit: a rare person: adjective to. this is anydvedita-bhogya- 
bhoga-kalanah: “He whose means of subsistence—food and: drink-—_ 
are provided by others.” That is, swallowing the food and drink 
put into his mouth. As one asleep automatically swallows what is 
put into his mouth by another, or as a child is fed by its mother 
(with no effort by the person or the child), so too, in the absence 
of the condition of being extrovert, there is no mental affiliation. 
with anything external and there is an automatic swallowing (like 
a reflex action) of the objects making for physical sustenance. The 
idea is that even the inevitable experience of the effect of the pra- 
rabdhakarmas for the sustenance of the body accrues only through | 
others. : 
412 — VIVEKACUDAMANI 
kvacit: paramaitmani, labdhadhih: that some one whose mind 
is established in the Paramatman. Or, kvacit: kadacit, labdhadhih: 
when at any time he lapses back to the world-awareness, he looks 
as one seen in a dream, as mere mithya. 
kascit: brahmavidvarah: that superior brahmavit, the knower 
of Brahman. | 
idam jagat eepiapiuatiaon (mithyatvena) pasyan: seeing 
this world as mithya as seen in a dream. 
anantapunyaphalabhuk: the experiencer of the bliss of libera-_ 
tion which is the fruit of the good deeds done in hundreds of crores 
of previous lives. 
dste sa dhanyah bhuvi manyah: such a blessed one exists on 
earth esteemed by all. 
By this has been declared that the fruit of A4tmajfiina is incom- 
parable bliss without dependence on sense-objects. Vide the sruti: 
so’snute sarvan kaman saha (Taitt.); the Gita text: yavdnartha uda- 
pine sarvatas samplutodake ; tavan sarvesu vedesu brahmanasya 
pijanatah 1 and also the Sruti: etdsyaivanandasya anyani bhitdni 
matramupajivanti (Brh): ‘He enjoys all his. desires together; even 
as the benefits of limited reservoirs of water are fulfilled in an in- 
- finite expanse of water, all purposes of prescribed duties are achiev- 
- ed by one who has acquired knowledge (realisation) of Brahman” 
and, “of this bliss itself other joys are an infinitesimal fraction”. 
Or, it may mean that he who knows the infinitely great and the in- 
finitely small; i.e., the Brahmajfianin by virtue of his Brahmabhava 
which is like the ocean, experiences together at the same time all 
the joys which accrue to men of the world by the extent of their 
meritorious deeds and the pleasures ensuing upon them. 
anantapunyaphalabhuk: The Brahma Gita explaining the — 
Taittiriya idea says: so’snute sakalin. kiémaén akramena surarsabhah | 
widitabrahmaripena jivanmukto na samsayah i} : “Oh ye best of 
gods! by reason of his knowledge of the nature of Brahman, the | 
-jivanmukta enjoys all pleasures at the same time (not in succes- 
sion). All the pleasures arising from sense-objects are but a drop 
in the vast ocean of Brahmananda. When it is said: ‘He whose 
mind is given to Brahmavicara even for a moment, has bathed in all 
the holy waters; the whole earth has been gifted away by him; a 
thousand sacrifices have been performed by him; all his gods have 
-. been propitiated; his ancestors have been rescued from samsara; he 
is deserving of adoration even in the three worlds,’ what needs to 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 413. 
be affirmed of him who is always established in Brahman? For, it 
is said: Of him whose mind is ever immersed in the ocean of know- 
ledge of the supreme Brahman, his lineage has got purified, his 
mother has realised her purpose and the earth has been sanctified 
by him. The Sruti also says: tasmdddtmajfiam hyarcayet bhiiti- 
kaémah (Brh.): “Therefore let him who desires prosperity voreP 
him who has known (realised) his self (the atmajia).” 
427 
With the idea that if the qualities of a ileal: are known, > 
the aspirants will be able to endeavour to attain that state, for the 
benefit of those who desire liberation, the guru begins to detail those 
qualities. 7 
fenersait afced a: AAT TAT | | 
aenda faciteren fafaaret fafafesa: eRe r 
’ sthitaprajiio yatirayam yassadanandam asnute | 
_brahmanyeva vilindtma nirvikdro viniskriyah |) 
| This yati who enjoys bliss for ever with his mind rest- . 
ing in Brahman only, unchanging and inactive is a sthita- 
_prajna (man of steadfast wisdom), whose mind is firmly | 
_ anchored in Brahman. 
--brahmanyeva vilinitma: he whose antahkarana has merged i in 2 
Brahman. 
Hence, nirvikdrah: devoid of the changes of the mind due to 
joy, sorrow, etc. | 
viniskriyah: ‘devoid of all external activities of the body ete. 
Or, changelessness may be said to be due to actionlessness as 
stated in Sri Bhagavatpada’s commentary on Brahmasitra (Saman- 
vayadhikarana): kriyé svasrayamavikurvati naivétmainam labhate: — 
“An action subsists only by the nen which affects its locus; it 
never attains the 4tman.” 
This yati who enjoys this bliss always is a sthitaprajia, 1 man of 
steadfast wisdom. 
This loka is in the form of an aphorism. 
428 | 
In that context, the quality of being a sthitaprajia is explained. 
RANATAT: atifereretrearerrearereeriett 
fataweat a fararat afer: Safa wea | 
ae renee eae oe TREC 
414. VIVEKACUDAMANI 
brahmatmanoh Sodhitayor ekabhavavagahini | 
nirvikalpa ca.cinmatra vrttih prajneti kathyate |) 
sé sarvadad bhaved yasya sa jivanmukta isyate 1, 
| The mental modification which comprehends the iden- © 
tity of Brahman and the atman after analysing them is call- 
ed prajfid. He who possesses this type of prajiia always is 
said to be a jivanmukta. | 
Sthitaprajfia means, sthita satatam vartamana prajiia yasya sah: 
he whose prajna is rooted (in Brahman) always. 
The meaning of prajfiad is given. brahmatmanoh Sodhitayoh 
ekabhavavagahini: vrttih prajneti kathyate: By the method shown 
in the context of the explanation of the mahavakya, Brahman is the > 
Paramatman; the a4tman is the inner (pratyak) atman. Brahman is 
indicated by the word ‘Tat’; the 4tman by the word ‘tvam’. When 
they are shorn of their upadhis, they have an identical reference. 
The modification of the mind as such infinite cit, unchanging. and 
not related to the mithy4-objects and brought about by hearing (the 
words of the guru), thinking and firm reflection en them, éravana, 
manana and nididhyasana, is said to be prajiia 
sd sarvadé bhaved yasya: if it subsists always. Such a one is 
called a jivanmukta. For, it is the idea of a thing in what is not 
that thing (atasmin tadbuddhih) which is the cause of bondage. 
When one is for ever in the experience of such infinite conscious- 
ness, there is not any trace of bondage at all. | | 
429 
wea feqar wag TAT mearaeat ree: 
gape faeqaora: a sitaqer ead ere i 
yasya sthitd .bhavet prajia yasyanando nirantarah | 
‘prapanco vismrtaprayah sa jivanmukta. isyate |) 
‘He ig said to be a jivanmukta whose prajaa is firmly 
established, whose bliss is continuous, and to whom the — 
world is as a thing forgotten. 
This is the explanation of: the two expressions in the sloka 427 
which is in the form of a siitra, namely, -yassaddnandamasnute .and 
brahmanyeva vilindtma. Here everything is his form. or svaripa. 
Therefore, there is no question of exclusion by qualifications, Or, it 
may be uriderstood to mean: he whose prajna (consciousness) is 
firmly established (in Brahman) is a jivanmukta. Similarly, he 
VIVEKACODAMANI as 
whose bliss is uninterrupted is a jivanmukta; he for whom the 
world is as if forgotten is a jivanmukta. The suffx ‘prayaht 
in ‘vismrtaprayah’ is used to indicate that, according to the Gita: 
utterance: upadeksyanti te jranam jraninas tattvadarsinah: “The 
men of wisdom who are seers of the truth will instruct you in that 
wisdom”, the world is remembered as it were by the guru’ when he © 
comes out of his samadhi for the instruction of the Sisya, we the good 
fortune of the Sisya. pee * , 
| 
430 7 
The difference from the state of dreamless Sleep is conveyed. 
staeitefe stir at srvadatar: | 
atet frataat aea a sitaaqaat goat ego Ut 
linadhirapi jagarti yo jagraddharmavarjitah | 
bodho nirvasano yasya sa jivanmukta isyate || 
He is said to be a jivanmukta who is awake though his 
mind has merged in Brahman, but without the features of 
the waking state and whose awareness is free from desire. 
In dreamless sleep the mind is merged in ajfiana. Now in the 
case of a jivanmukta it has got merged in Brahman which is pure 
cit. As there is no occasion for tamas (darkness) there, though 
his mind is merged, he is awake. It means that he is free from the 
sleep of avidya. Or, as all objects are connected with the atman 
uncovered by avigye everything is apprenenced: as not. distinct from 
oneself, 
The eharkoter of the waking state is the association of sense- 
organs with objects: indriyairarthopalabdhih jagaritamiti; jagrad-— 
dharmovarjitah: Even in such waking state, there is no attachment 
as before, to the gross body; hence, the jivanmukta is said to be de-_ 
void of the qualities of the waking state, jagraddharmavarjitah. In 
accordance with the Gita text: ragadvesaviyuktaistu visayin indriy- 
atscaran | dtmavasyair vidheyatma prasadamadhigacchati \, “He 
attains peace, who, self-controlled, approaches objects with the 
senses devoid of love and hate and brought under his control’, Effort 
is made for such peace even during the pendancy of adhyasa_ (i.e, 
before the dawn of enlightenment). | 
bodho nirvasano yasya: he whose bodha (mind) though it 
pertains to objects is free from vasana (residual tendencies) , i.e., is _ 
devoid of the power to induce action. In accordance with the 
Vasistha text yadrcchopanatesvaksi-digdravyesu yatha punah ; niré- 
416 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
gameva patati tadvad bhogyesu dhriradhth }, “The man of 
courageous (steadfast) mind is unattached to objects of enjoyment 
even as he is indifferent again to objects of vision, hearing etc., 
_ which merely occur before him”, is devoid of the sense to discard 
or to take up. Or, linadhirapi jagarti may mean that the man whose 
mind has merged in Brahman is yet awake because the eye and the 
sense-organs do not still cease to function. Though the sense- 
organs are awake, he does not experience their objects; so he 
is free from the qualities and activities of the waking state; he is 
jagraddharmavarjitah. Though they are experienced occasionally, 
_ due to steadfastness of his viveka, he is devoid of love and hate and 
his mind is free from vasanas. 
| By this, nirvikaratva mentioned in the aforesaid aphoristic 
§loka is explained. 
431 | | : 
By the following twelve Slokas, the unchanging character of the 
mind of the jivanmukta is primarily explained. For, when the 
prajia is thus firmly established in Brahman, bliss is always secured 
without effort. 
MAMA: maui Genie uN | 
a: afadists fafraa: a sitaager gerd ve7 
$anta-samsara-kalanah kalavanapi niskalah | 
_ yassacitto’pi niscittah sa jivanmukta isyate |, 
He is called a jivanmukta, whose afflictions of samsara 
are appeased, who, though learned, yet, is without learning 
(as it were) and who, though possessed of a mind, is yet 
free from the mind. 
isyate means is (desired to be) dectared: he is called or sia to 
be Santa-samsara-kalanah: he whose cares and anxieties relating to 
samsaéra have been stilled. This a ective is the reason for calling 
him niécittah. : 
_ kalévanapi: though adept in all vidyas. 
niskalah: as'he is devoid of all mental modifications other 
than that as Brahman. Or, though possessing the sixteen kalas 
enumerated in the Mundaka Upanisad, till the time of liberation 
without attachment to them as they are looked on as elements 
foreign to oneself. od | 
57 These kalas are enumerated in Pragnopanisad (6th prasna) as explanatory 
of the Mundaka-text. They are said to refer to: prajiia, graddha, akarsa, vayu, 
gar apah, prthvi, indriyam, manah, annam, viryam, tapas, mantrab, karma, loka 
VIVEKACUDAMANI | 417 
sacitto’pi niscittah: though possessed of a mind, enveloped by 
his 4tman, is without a mind; i.e., by reason of absence of external 
actions, he is as one stupefied. - Or, he may be said to be a-niscittah 
as he has no attachment etc. 
432, 
adervis Zasfereoraraaqatate t | 
HEAT AT SAAT AAET SAT WSR 
vartamane’pi dehe’sminns chayavadanuvartini 1 
ahamta-mamata-abhavo jivanmuktasya laksanam T 
The mark of a jivanmukta is the absence of the sense 
‘of the ‘I’ or ‘my’ in this body though it is a him like’ a 
' shadow. 4, 
chaiyadvad pupae: Though they exist in this ‘gross a 7 
the senses of ‘I’ and ‘my’ are as if they relate to another body. The 
character of a jivanmukta is being without the sense of the ‘I’ or 
‘my’ in his body as all modifications, love, hate etc., old age, death — 
etc., are to be traced to the gross body. When the source is non- | 
existent, changelessness becomes a matter of course, — 7 
oe 
—ataaerar afeonaferarena — 
Maratea ore sitaeqaaea Serer 1133 
atitananusandhdnam bhavisyadavicdranam l 
audasinyamapi prapte jivanmuktasya laksanam rT 
7 The. mark of. a.jivanmukta is not pondering over what _ 
has been, not worrying about what is.to be and indifference | 
about the present. | | 
_ananusandhaénam: ..not remembering. © 
bhavisyadavicaranam: not thinking about the future. 
prépte: about the present. 
alae ll indifference; being without attachment. 
434 - 
aerateferfredsferg eanraa facet 1 
waa arated: sitanqaarer Tey TRekal 
‘gunadogavisiste’smin svabhavena vilakgane | 
sarvatra samadarsitvam jivanmuktasya lakganam 11 
V.C.—28 
a ss VIVEKACOPAMANI 
The mark of a jivanmukta is seeing with an equal eye 
‘all this of the world which by nature is very acral | 
being endowed with good and evil qualities. | — 
Because they are endowed with good and evil qualities, they 
are, by nature, peculiar. In the Atma Vidya Vilaisa, Sri Sada- 
Sivendra says: na nisedhati dosadhiyé gunabuddhya va na kincida- 
datte ; dvidyakam ahilam iti jnatva- -udaste: yatih ko’pi 1) “A 
yati does not reject anything in the belief that it is evil, nor does 
he accept anything in the belief that it is good, knowing, as he does, 
that everything is the product of avidya”’. Accordingly, samadar- 
Sitva is, being without rej jection or acceptance. | 
Qr,. samadarsitva may mean seeing Brahman everywhere 
according to the smrti: nirdosam hi samam brahma (B. G. ): “The 
Brahman is without blemish, the same everywhere”. | 
, Ses anes gees * 
STfeaTaAAT AAA MATATSSAAT. | : 
saaattaarteed slaeqaae. Sa Ry 
istanistarthasampraptau samadarsitaya”’tmani ., ~ 
ubhayatravikdritvam jivanmuktasya laksanam it 
The mark of Jivanmukta is being without change in 
oneself by reason of seeing with an equal eye both the 
cases of the accrual of what is favourable or unfavourable. 
For, the jivanmukta has no sense of distinction ‘between the 
favourable and the unfavourable. 
—ubhayatra avikéritvam: being changeless in respect of both; 
being without joy or sorrow for either. | 
istanista: favourable and unfavourable from the point of view 
of worldly persons; to the jivanmukta, nothing is ista or anista. 
436 
—_———w Ud: | 
wate igciannt sitaaqarer weMRT RE 
brahmananda-rasasvadasaktacittataya yateh | . 
antarbahir-avijnanam jivanmuktasya laksanam a 
The mark of a jivanmukta is unawareness: of the inte- 
rior or the exterior as his mind is wholly a in the 
experience of the bliss that i is Brahman. 
VIVEKACUPAMANI 419 
This is clear. 
437 
agfiraret way aangaraata: 
‘Stareteaa aferag a sitarqar gerT Ngo UI 
dehendriyadau kartavye mamihambhavavarjitah | 
auddsinyena yastisthet sa jivanmukta isyate 1) a 
He is said to be a jivanmukta who is free from the 
sense of the ‘my’ or ‘I’ in the actions of the none. and its 
organs and remains indifferent to them. 
_ dehendriyddau: the Gdi, ‘etc’, is used to include the breath, 
= mind, intellect and the ego-sense. : 
kartavye: in the\discharge of ‘duties’. : ane 
- maméhambhavavarjitah: being free from the sense of ‘ my’ as 
‘this has to be done by me’ or ‘this is done by me’ and of super- | 
imposition (adhyasa) in body and sense organs which expresses 
itself as aham manusyah: Iam aman; aham pasyams:. I see; ; mame | 
caksuh: my eye, etc. | 
audasinyena. yah tisthet: he who remains indifferent or un- 
attached due to absence of false identification to be traced to adhyasa. 
438 
fama arent aea ANAT: MATH 
waaataiadan: a sitaera OAT URS I 
vijnata atmano yasya brahmabhavah Sruterbalat , 
| bhavabandhavinirmuktah sa jivanmukta isyate 11 
_ He is said to be a jivanmukta who has realised the 
Brahmanhood of his atman on the authority of sruti and 
is (thereby) liberated from the bonds of samsira. 
Sruter balat: by the force of the Vedanta-texts like tattvamasi. 
- (svasya) brahmabhavah: his Brahmatva; being — | 
Brahman. | 
 vifmitah: has — realised by the destruction of the primor- 
dial ajhana aulajaene) and hence: devoid of all kinds of delusion. 
439 
Being liberated from the bond of samsara is further explained 
clearly. 
420 | ‘VIVEKACOPAMANT 
23tadvagera: STMTACATAS | 
Ueq Al Wad: Tals a SlaeRT TAT eet Ww 
dehendriyesvahambhavah idambhavastadanyake 7 
-yasya no bhavatah kvapi sa jivanmukta igyate 1) _ 
He is said to be a jivanmukta to whom there does not 
ever arise the sense of the ‘I’ in the body and its ; organs 
and the sense of ‘this’ in other things. a | 
anyake: in other things like pot. ete. 
kvapi: at any time. 7 | 
: The body and its organs, and the pot etc., agree in their charac- 
ter being non-dtman and are therefore viewed in. equal “measure. 
The sense of the ‘I’ and ‘this’ in them is to: be traced ‘merely to 
previous vasanas. - Therefore, it -will not ever arise to a tala ccniie 
| whose understanding is free of all vasanas. : iat. pees 
440 
7 —, am ienai Lo 
saat ot faorania a sitaaqat gat Ui ¥vo Mt | 
na pratyagbrahmanor bhedam kadapi brahmasargayoh a 
prajnayd yo vijanati sa jivanmukta isyate 11 | 
He is said to be a jivanmukta who. is not ever aware 
of (who does not make) ‘any difference between the inner 
 (pratyak) &tman and Brahman, and between Brahman and : 
~ the world. | 
By virtue of the following text, awareness S of ‘iterates fioks 
not pertain to one who ever abides in Brahman that. makes for 
fearlessness. : 
7 vibhedajanake’ jane: nasamatyantikam gate oe 
_atmano brahmano bhedam asantam kah karigyati § (Manu) 
- “When the ajfidna which produces the sense of difference has 
got completely destroyed, who will make the non-existent: edge 
tion of Brahman and the atman?”’ 
pratyagbrahmanoh: between the jiva and Brahman. 
 brahmasargayoh: srjyate iti: sargah: world is called ares as 3 it is 
created; between Brahman and the world. , 
os ‘VIVEKACODAMANI dat 
brahma-sargayoh na bhedam: vide the Sruti: brahmaivedam 
- sarvam (Mund.). The world is imagined by super-imposition on 
‘Brahman like the rope-snake. So, there is no difference between 
the superimposed and the substratum. 
Also by the érutis: yatra tvasya sarvamatmaivabhit tat kena 
kam pasyet (Brh.): “Where everything for him was the atmia, 
then by what can one perceive and whom?;” naényat pasyati (Brh.) _ 
etc: “He does not see another” etc. And by the éruti: yada hye- | 
vaisa etasminnudaram antaram kurute, atha tasya bhayam bhavati— 
(Taitt.): “When he makes a difference in it, then there arises fear 
for him”, for the jivanmukta established in Brahman: which makes 
for fearlessness there is no awareness of difference. So, by the 
absence of difference only, there is no awareness of such difference. 
For like the horn of a hare, it is subject to sublation in all the three 
periods of time. One is said to be of little knowledge only in res- 
pect of what exists, not in respect of what does not exist at all. 
For, to the yogins who are all-knowing, their character as all-know- 
ing will not be affected by their not rales rn one like 
- the horns of a hare. 
- Therefore, the jivanmukta is not aware of difference by his un- _ 
changing consciousness which has been disciplined by a mind | 
fashioned by the study of the several Saéstras. The only criterion of 
a S4stra‘is that it intimates what is purposeful, not known previously 
~ and what cannot be sublated (at any point of time): “Sastrasya 
prayojanavadanadhigata-abadhitartha-bodhakatvenaiva praméanyat.” 
How can difference which pertains to the ajnana of men, which is | 
purposeless, and which is cancelled along with its material become | 
the object of cognition, in the infinite mode of Brahman-conscious- 
ness? As said earlier in the Sloka 286: pratitir jivajagatoh svapna- | 
vad bhati yaivata | tavannirantaram vidvan svadhyisdpanayam 
kuru: 4; When all delusion has been removed, there will be no 
awareness of difference. One: of such quality is sa d to be.a jivan- 
-mukta. | | 
441 
rater qaararastenrt ateaarashs sar: | 
qererat weer a eRTER Sear ved tt 
sddhubhih pijyamane’smin pidyamane’pi durjanaih 7 
samabhavo bhaved yasya.sa jivanmukta igyate ;) 
422 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
- He is said to be a jivanmukta who is equanimous 
whether adored by the good or affiicted by evil Parone.) | 
samabhavah: being free from joy, anger etc. 
7 442 | 
Why expatiate at length? To put it briefly: 
wa sfacar fawar: oefeat: © 
 wetsraret ga arteersit 
forte aearacat a fafat 
— Seared afataaar: ue yeR ui 
yatra pravista vigayah pareritah — 
| nadipravaha iva varirasau | 
linanti sanmatratayaé na vikriyam 
utpidayantyesa yatir vimuktah 11 
Such a yati is said to be a jivanmukta in when the : 
sense-objects directed by others are merged by reason 
of his being pure Brahman, like the rivers flowing into the 
sea (and getting merged in it) and do not cause any change. 
pareritah:. paraih: anyaih: by others; iritah: induced: by this 
it is said that there is no orientation to sense objects on the part of 
the jivanmukta who has ‘seen’ Brahman; praise, censure, etc., made 
by others are good or bad from their point of view. (The jivan- 
mukta does not distinguish them so). , a 
‘Yatra pravistah: the person towards whom they were uttered. 
They merge losing their character as rivers lose their “HMdentity 
in the ocean into which they flow. 
linanti: liyante: merge: disappear. 
| na vikriyam utpddayanti: do not produce any ian in the 
form of joy or.anger or humiliation as river waters in ocean, too. 
The reason for this is given: sanmédtrataya. How can praise 
and censure etc., which relate to the body etc., affect one who 
remains in the firm consciousness that he is the infinite Brahman? 
Those who remain in Brahman void of guna or dosa are free from 
all kinds of changes. In this matter, all that others do. is futile 
like cutting the sky with a sword. | 
Such a yati who is not affected by whatever is directed towards 
him is said to be liberated, as all his .vasanas pave been ext neuen : 
and his mind too is inactive. or 7 | 
VIVEKACUDAMANI | 423 
443 
The éruti says: tasya tévadeva ciram yavanna vimoksye atha 
sampatsye (Chand.): “For him there is delay only so long as he 
is not delivered (from the body); then he will become one with 
Brahman”. The Brahma Siitra says: bhogena tvitare ksapayitva 
sampadyate: “Having. destroyed by fruition two other (sets of 
work), he becomes one with Brahman”. By these it follows that 
the experience of the fruits of prarabdha-karmas also by the jianins 
has to be conceded. If that is so, it may be doubted: since such 
experience is of the form of joy and grief, how can there be change-_ 
lessness? This doubt is removed by the following sloka: i 
fantangrreaea qa + aafa: 1 | 
afer aa a famarararal afgya: esa 
vijiatabrahmatattvasya yathapurvam na samsrtih 
asti cenna sa eee bahirmukhah Ho 
There is no samsara as before for one who ae on 
(realised) the truth of Brahman. If such samsara still _ 
_ persists, iteneans that he is not one who has realised Brah- 
man; but he is ‘an extrovert. | 
vijnatabrahmatattvasya: to him who has oe ie., expe- 
rienced Brahmatattva. 
yathapirvam na samsrtih: by reason of destruction of all 
mithyajnana, the attachments due to it do not exist as they did 
earlier, i.e., before the experience of Brahmatattva. 
na samsrtih: there is no experience of joy or grief as there is 
no desire or fear; vide the Gita: duhkhesu anudvignamanah sukhesu — 
vigatasprhah | vitaragabhayakrodhah sthitadhir munirucyate || 
“He whose heart is not distressed by calamities, from whom all 
longing for pleasure has departed, who is free from attachment, he 
is called a sage, a man of steady knowledge”. For others, it is not 
like this. -They are excited by griefs; they desire anes They. | 
are attached; they fear; they get angry. - | = 
‘So, it is said: asti cet .... If he experiences longing, desire 
etc., he is not one who has realised Brahman; his mind is directed 
outward. | 
ee oe He is one who is etched to his sheaths in the | 
bese that they are his atman. 
a | 
srdiwaremrdarent sire 9a 1 | 
mw aweaferareny Heal TAA ee 
_ pracinavdsandvegad asau samsaratiti cet | 
na sadekatvavijnanat mandibhavati vasand i) 
| If it is said that this knower of Brahman is again ; 
bound to sams&ra by the force of the past vasands, it is not 
so; for the vasana becomes dull on the realisation of the 
one true Sat. : | 
pracinavasand: the vasana that has been acquired from time 
_ immemorial prior to realisation of Brahmanubhava. If it is said 
_ that, by its force, this Brahmavit, knower of Brahman, gets into 
Samsara, acquires bondage, no. Reason for it is: | 
_ sadekatva-vijfiandt: because of realisation of oneness with 
Brahman which is eternal, infinite, self-effulgent and blissful. 
mandibhavati vasand: the vasana& born of the delusion of the — 
non-perception of the difference between the andtman and one’s own 
atman becomes tiny, becomes ineffectual, is ‘dispersed like dark- 
ness at dawn. 
445 
_ An illustration is given for this. 
MATH BEAT Bhat: grofar arate 
rae werten ard goa’ Feith: ey 
 atyantakamukasydpi ‘saktih kunthati matari | _ 
_tathaiva brahmani jiadte piirnanande manisinah ii 
Even the mind of one given to extreme lust is restrain- 
ed before his mother. So too is the case with men who en- 
_ joy the plenary bliss of the knowledge of Brahman. | 
piirnanande jfate: When Brahman which is of the nature of 
infinite bliss is realised. ts | 
manisginah: vivekinah:.of the wise man. ‘vasané kunthati’— 
‘modifications deminish’—is understood after ‘manisinah.. _ | 
kunthati: gets dried up. Vide what will be said later: ‘When 
the actual moon is shining giving great joy, who will want to look 
at a painted moon?’ | 
‘VIVEKACUDAMANI | 425 
446 
fafeeatepretteren aTITAT fad 
walle spfrtaer cred HHATATT USE 
nididhydsanaSilasya bahyapratyaya iksyate | 
_ braviti Srutiretasya praérabdham phaladarsanat 1) 
One who is given to nididhyasana (meditation) is 
found to have external awareness. The Sruti speaks of it 
and it is confirmed with reference to results. 
_nididhyadsana-Silasya: Either he who practises nididhyasana for 
the removal of wrong impressions or he whose nature is nididhya- — 
sana. He is found to have external awareness.as he is continuously 
exerting himself to establish his mind in his atman. 
phaladarsanét: as such, one who meditates is found f°: eX- 
perience pleasure and pain. 
Srutih etasya prarabdham braviti: For such a one éruti affirms 
the functioning of prarabdha. Also because whatever is of the 
nature of an anterior action is of the form of duhkha, and because 
the attachment to body: appears in the intervals of meditation. Or, 
it may be said that as .meditation is of the form of savikalpaka- 
samadhi, the sukha and duhkha acquired by previous karmas ap- 
pear. Hence it has been said (ls. 365 and 366): Sruteh Satagunam > 
vidydt mananam moananadapi | nididhydsam laksagunam anantam 
nirvikalpakam || nirvikalpakasamadhina sphutam’ brahmatattvam 
avagamyate dhruvam ; nényatha calatayé manogateh pratyaydan- 
tara-vimisritam bhavet };\: “Thinking (manana) is hundred times 
better than hearing; a lakh of times better than thinking is reflec- 
tion (nididhydsana);: infinitely better than that is nirvikalpaka. By 
nirvikalpaka-samadhi, the truth that is Brahman, is clearly appre- _ 
hended; not otherwise; for, the fickle mind gets mixed with other. 
cognitions.” Hence it is said: badhyapratyayah iksyate: “there is — 
external awareness”. So long as there is external awareness, then 
there is experience of sukha or duhkha accruing from prarabdha. 
That is confirmed by the gruti: na ha vai saSarirasya priydpriyayor 
apahatirasti (Chand.): “There is no cessation of the pleasant and 
painful to him who is with the body (i.e., who has body-conscious- 
ness).”” One is said to be with the body (ie., to have body-con-. 
sciousness) as then the direct experience of Brahman (Brahma- 
saksatkara) has not-arisen. The super-imposition (adhyadsa) has 
not been annulled and there is a super-imposition of the body and 
the mind. The same is affirmed by the Sruti: tasya tavadeva ciram 
426 7 VIVEKACODAMANI 
yavanna vimoksye’tha sampatsye (Chand): “For him there is de- 
lay only so long as he is not delivered (from the body); then he 
will become one with Brahman;” and the Brahma Siitra: bhogena 
tvitare ksapayitva sampadyate: “But, having destroyed by fruition 
(experience) the two other (sets of work, meritorious and other- 
wise) he becomes one with Brahman”. - Prarabdha etc.,; are quali- 
ties of the anatman. It does not accrue to the knowers of nirguna- 
Brahman. 
447 
What is conveyed in the sloka is further ee 
‘Sarerarwat: aaearracnreahasa | 
emlay: frarqat frieeat a fz watay Ww ss tt 
| sukhidyanubhavo yavat tivat prarabdhamisyate | 
phalodayah kriyapirvo niskriyo nahi kutracit We 
| So long as there is experience of pleasure etc., till 
then prarabdha is said to persist. Every effect is preceded 
by an action generating it. There is nowhere an effect 
that happens without an antecedent action. 
sukhaédi: pleasure etc. ddi: ‘etc’. is intended to include. dub- 
kha: pain. So long as there is experience of sukha etc., so long 
prarabdha is said to operate. The reason for that is stated. For, 
every effect is preceded and produced by an action. There is-no- 
where an effect without a causal action. Sukha and duhkha are to be © 
traced. to the operation of good and evil deeds.. The connection | 
with the effect of action associated with the anatman will not ensue. 
without the super-imposition of the andtman on the atman. Hence, 
it.is shown. that experience of karma arises in the case of one. who, 
though given to meditation, has external awareness. ceanyapae 
yaya). 
a 448 
In order to remove the doubt of the unlearned in respect of 
the aforesaid gruti and Brahma Siitra, and in accordance at first 
with the Sutra: ‘tadadhigama uttara-pirvaghayor aéslesavinasau 
(which means, when Brahman is comprehended—realised—there is | 
no contact of future sins and destruction of past sins) and in accor- 
dance with the Sruti: ksiyante casya karmani (all his karmas are 
liquidated), it is implied that reference is to karmas other than pra- 
rabdha. So, the destructibility of sancita-karmas (accumulated — 
actions), by Brahmasaksatkara is conveyed. 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 427 
ag waite faararg seratferenistey 1 | 
eifaet fant arfer saitera CLABHAT ULL UN 
- aham brahmeti vijidnat kalpakotisatarjitam | 
sajicitam vilayam yati prabodhat svapnakarmavat |) 
Even as actions done in a dream disappear on waking, 
the accumulated (sajicita) karmas which have accrued 
through hundreds of crores of-eons get extinguished upon 
the dawn of knowledge: “I am Brahman”. 
Sajicitam: the past karmas whose fruits have not begun to take 
effect. | tg t ae a 
kalpakotisatarjitam: acquired through hundreds of crores of 
eons due to the non-realisation of the pon aicrence fromm Brahman | 
which is actionless. 
prabodhat: on waking. 
vilayam: destruction. 
yati: attains. 
: | 449 
The illustration is explained. 
OeE FATASTAT TH AT TTA | : 
qritfercren fas ay eat TATA TATA AT eee 
yatkrtam svapnavelayam punyam va papamulbanam 1 
suptotthitasya kim tat ‘syat svargaya narakaya va th 
' Will even: the greatest punya or papa done. during. a 
dream make for heaven or hell for one bas has awakened 
from the dream? 
The meaning | is clear. The idea is that there is no 
fructification of karmas done due to avidya and during 
sleep to one who has. awakened: to realisation of his lone 
residual 4tman, whose avidya has been destroyed and who 
is free from agency for action brought about by upadhis.. 
450 
Having spoken about the destruction of scbdmnuiatad? (sancita) 
karmas by the annulment of the super-imposition of the anatman, 
Sri Bhagavatpada speaks. about the dissolution of future (agami) 
karmas. Previously, due to the super-imposition of the andtman 
428 VIVEKACODAMANI 
which was the locus of karma, the person imagined himself to be 
the doer. These actions done during the imagination of ‘doership 
get destroyed when the sense of doership goes away. Now, how- 
ever, upon the realisation of Brahman which'is not a doer (which 
is akarta), that. there is no connection at.all with future action is 
conveyed in this gloka. 
eaqeeqaritd afore ART wet 
aq-frocad ata: fafacnarfag: aifaaifa: WsKo 
svamasangam udasinam parijfiaya nabho yatha 
na Sligyate yatih kittcit kadacid bhavikarmabhih |, 
Knowing himself as unattached and as indifferent like 
the sky, the yati (the man of self-realisation), is not 
_ affected by future actions even in the least at any time. | 
 gvam: svatmanam: his atman. 
asangam: ekam: lone. 
udasinam: as not seine Sindee ne. 
parijfiaya: experiencing perfectly. | = 
nabho yathaé: as the sky is untouched by atee. fire saale air. 
So too, the yati who is an atmavit (the knower of the atman) 
is not ever affected even in the least by future actions, ie., by 
actions posterior to 4tmanubhava (realisation of the atman) even if 
they take place.in the body. etc. For there is no connection with 
them in the form of attachment. According to the rule dharmadh- 
yasa-piirvakah dharmyadhyasah: “The quality. (dharma) of a 
serpent is first super-imposed on the quality (dharma) of a ‘rope; 
thereupon ensues. the super-imposition of.the dharmin, ‘the serpent 
on the rope”, when there is a super-imposition of the qualities of 
the body on the atman, then there arises affection by the accordant 
karmas. -When that super-imposition vanishes by the destruction 
of primordial ajfiana (milajfiana), there will then be no affection by 
the qualities of the anatman. 7 
| 451 . 
The: aforesaid meaning is illustrated in the example and con- 
nected with the object of illustration. 
a wat weahia gerry feat | 
qantas aga: aa frcrt ueeqit 
na nabho ghatayogena suragandhena lipyate 1 
tathatmopadhiyogena. taddharmair naiva lipyate ee 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 429 
_ By reason of its connection with the jar, the sky is not 
tainted by the odour of the liquor in it. So too, the atman 
is not affected by the qualities of the upadhi with which it 
is connected. 7 
ae . The sky (space) is co-extensive with the ‘universe. It ioais 
limited by reason of its being enclosed in a jar. But it is pure and 
formless. It is not tainted by the smell of the liquor in the limited 
space of the jar. Even so the 4tman is not affected by the connec- 
tion with upadhis of the form of gross and subtle bodies like worship 
of the gods and meditation on the divinities in the stars etc., which 
‘continue. to be associated with it till videhamoksa (release after 
death). ns 
452 | 
Now is taught the meaning of the Brahma Sitra: bhogena 
tvitare ksapayitva sampadyate: “But having destroyed by fruition (experiencing their effects) the two other (sets of work, punya and 
papa), he becomes one with Brahman.” 
ATTA ALIS HY ALATA TVALT | 
AICI CAGA TSTAsaleamvsearyag UW v4Q 
jranodayat purdrabdham karma jrananna nasyati | 
adattva svaphalam laksyam uddisyotsrstabanavat tt 
Like an arrow released towards its target, the karma 
_ begun before the dawn of jnana is not destroyed by jnana. 
The action which has started effectuation before the rise of 
the realisation:—‘I am Brahman’—does not get destroyed like saii- 
cita (accumulated) karma without issuing. out its fruit as sukha or 
duhkha, i.e., pleasure or pain, as the case may be, like an ‘arrow 
flung at a target. (This is explained in the next sloka.). 
jnanait: by the realisation of the 4tman as akarta, non-doer. 
493 i | 
The illustration of the arrow and the target is explained. 
eqreageat fafaqadt arr: Tard aitrat 
a facefr feoreaa seq ata faster Rite 
vydghrabuddhya vinirmukto banah pascaéttu gomatau | 
na tisthati chinattyeva laksyam vegena nirbharam U1 
The arrow which is released from the bow under-the . 
impression that the target is a tiger does not tarry upon the © 
430 | VIVEKACUDAMANI 
realisation that it is a cow, but surely pierce its target 
with great speed. 
Under the belief “this cruel tiger sould be killed”, if ar 
_ arrow drawn upto the ear is released and if after the release, it i: 
known that the animal in front is a cow, it does not tarry in it: 
‘course; but it goes with great speed and ‘surely pierces the targe 
in front. So too, the prarabdha-karma, having begun to bear frui: 
‘Wears out only after producing its results even at the time wher 
Brahman-realisation springs. The good and evil actions that have 
begun to bear fruit are spent by the experience of their fruits and 
. the’ person then attains videha-mukti, liberation on disembodiment. 
That is the meaning of the siitra. Thus, to the jianin, the delay is 
only so long as he is not released from the body due to the operation 
of the prarabdha-karmas. After the fall of the body, he attains 
liberation after disembodiment  /( videha-mukti). That is the 
meaning of the éruti. jp aed 
In the first half of this Sloka, the meaning ve the sruti and 
siitra given above is summarised and in the second half the supreme 
truth is conveyed. 
«ad aeaat aa frat aitiia MED VA: 
AETSATALATRTAT fasa: srreataarntaany | 
_ WeTTATTaET THATAT TAT aifeaa: 
det aftand ate vafaate agra & frtorq ASH UI 
_ prérabdham balavattaran¢ khalu. vida bhogena tasya kgayah — 
|  ~samyajjndnahutasanena vilayah prak Saiicitigamindm | 
__ brahmatmaikyamaveksya tanmayataya ye sarvada sarnsthitah 
| testm tat tritayam nahi kvacidapi brahmaive te 
nirgunam }) 
Prarabdha is very strong indeed; for those of wisdom it 
is liquidated only by experience (of its effects). Of the 
saficita (accumulated) and agami (future) karmas the > 
liquidation takes place in the fire of jfiana. But, to those 
who perceive the identity of the 4tman with Brahman, .and 
who ever remain engrossed in it, these three do not obtain | 
anywhere. They are verily the qualityless: Brahman. 
Though jfidna is of an identical nature, yet, due to difference 
in the content of samadhi, thése who have attained Brahman-reali- 
sation are distinguished as Brahmavit, Brahmavidarah,' Brahmavid- 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 431 
variyan and Brahmavidvaristhah on the basis of the distinctions of 
levels called sattvapatti (abiding in the sattvaguna, or in the sad- 
vastu), asamsakti (non-attachment to anything external), padartha- 
bhavand (obliviousness to all objects), and turyaga (going to the 
transcendent). Among these, he who has reached the level of tur- 
yaga, who is a Brahmavidvaristha, is one of the nature of the 
qualityless Brahman. He is not even responsive when awakened by 
others. To such a one, the three kinds of karma do not pertain. 
The Brahmavidvariyan awakes to the world when so stimulated by 
others. Then he is connected with the prarabdha. This is like 
Prahlada getting out of his samadhi upon hearing the sound made 
by the Paficajanya conch of Mahavisnu.. Brahmavidvara, who is a. 
sthitaprajfia, gets out of his samadhi of his own accord by the force 
of his own karma, and sukha and duhkha pertain to him. This is 
clear from the query of Arjuna made to Krsna: sthitaprajiasya ka 
bhasd: “What is the language of the man of steadfast wisdom?” 
Brahmavits are those like the sage Yajiavalkya who adopted 
_samnnyasa for the fruition of his jfiana and induced Brahman- 
realisation to King Janaka and others by his instruction.57(®) 
vidim: to the jfianins. To such people, as between jana and 
prarabdha, prarabdha is more powerful. This is well known. Of 
such prarabdha-karma, liquidation is effected by experience (of its 
fruits). | | | 
hutéSanah: fire; samyag-jiana: right and perfect knowledge | 
itself is the fire. By such fire, karmas accumulated in the past, and 
those which may come about after the dawn of jfidna get destroyed 
and become unattached respectively. . | 
| brahmatmaikyam aveksya: realising. the identity of atman 
with Brahman; (aveksya: seeing, i.e., realising: saksatkrtya.) 
tanmayataya: by the rule of svdrthe mayat, maya is used to 
indicate that a thing is wholly compacted of it. The meaning is, 
being of the form of Brahman itself: brahmartpataya.** | 
cinmatra: compacted whole and entire of cit. 
_ 57(a) Vide at the end for this distinction of the four kinds of Brahmavits in 
the context of bhimikds in Yogavdsistha quoted in Sri Vidyaranya Svarnin’s 
Jivanmuktiviveka. he ae oo . | - | 
58 The suffix mayat is used in three senses: (1) vikérarthe: to indicate modi- 
fication of material as in mrmmayah ghatah: the pot of clay. (2). prdcuryirthe: to indicate abundance as annamayah yajitah: the sacrifice was full of food;. and (3) svdrthe: to indicate the entire nature of a thing. jhananandamayah devah: — God of the nature of knowledge and bliss. | - 
432 | VIVEKACOPAMANI 
To those who remain thus having attained to the stage of turya, which is the topmost and fourth, none of these three kinds of karma, 
operates anywhere and at any time. Such persons are the quality- 
less Brahman itself. That means that in their case there is no occa- sion for the operation of the sattva and other gunas. 
455 
- That is further clarified. | 
sorirararccatagteraa- 
werenraretts farssat qa: 1 
ya i. ai Tq , ra TeAe aaa: TR Tn 
upadhitadatmyo-vihina-kevulo- Re 
brahmatmanaivadtmani tisthato muneh t 
prarabdha-sadbhava-katha na yukta- 
- svapnartha-sambandhakatheva jagratah j) 
| For the sage who remains solely established in him- 
self as Brahman devoid of identification with upadhis, it is 
not appropriate to speak of the existence of prarabdha even 
as a man who has awakened from a dream has no concern 
with objects seen in it. 
In the state of ajfiana, there was the identification of the indi- 
vidual with the upadhis as a result of super-imposition. Now, 
however, by the knowledge of éruti and the grace of the guru, in | 
full measure the sense of the oneness of the infinite Brahman and 
the finite jiva has been acquired. The identification (with the body 
etc.) wrought by the upadhis like aharhkara has disappeared. He 
(the sage) is now the sole Brahman, free from the three kinds of 
| limitations of space, time and object. He remains established in 
himself as such Brahman. Vide the Sruti: sa bhagavah kasmin 
pratisthita iti; sve mahimni (Chand): “Oh! Worshipful One! in 
what is it established? In its own excellence”. Previously, the 
jiva was established in the upadhis; to show that it is not the case _ 
now, it is said: atmani tisthatah: remaining established in his own — 
atman. To the sage thus established in his atman, there is no rele- 
vance in speaking of the existence of prarabdha. That is likened 
to the impropriety of an awakened person to talk of the objects he 
saw in a dream. 
456 & 457 
a ig aga: strraae Qlaatfeafa @ saog -cptteagat anenfircat fry vat freer SET wg UL a ae fasordardatser + augersamatsta gee: | 
warafaatie aayart 4 frat yaa galerd TAR Wyo na hi prabuddhah pratibhaésadehe 
dehopayoginyapi ca prapance | 
karotyahamtém mamatéimidantam — 
kimtu svayam tisthati.jagarena || 
na tasya mithyaértha-samarthaneccha 
na sangrahah tajjagato’pi drstah | 
tatranuvrttiryadi tanmrsairthe 
na nidraya mukta itisyate dhruvam tH 
| For, the man who has awakened from a dream does 
not entertain feelings of ‘I’, my’ and ‘this’ with reference 
to the dream-body and the objects seen in it; but he remains 
awake distinct (from the dream-body etc.) 
_.-He is not interested in affirming the reality of the 
- false objects seen in the dream, nor does he act by them. 
‘If he still abides by those false objects, it surely means | 
that he has not yet awakened from the dream. 
_ prabuddhah: he who has awakened from a dream. 
 -—pratibhadsadehe: in the body which appeared during dream. 
He does not have the feeling of ‘I’ in his dream body, nor does" he 
= have the sense of ‘my’ and ‘this’ in.the dream: ropjerts: 
hi shows certainty. | oo 
kintu svayam. jagarena tisthati: he remains himself as the 
icra one. 
| For, seeing oneself as a herbivorous anieats in a dream, waking 
up, one does not proceed to eat grass abandoning one’s usual nature. 
He does not have the desire to substantiate the dream or the objects 
like the body which appeared in the dream. 
tajjagat: the world that Seer in the dream (svapatkam 
Pats dream-world). | 
 - $angrahah: acceptance. 
ne drgtah: is not. seen. 
¥ C—=2G 
434 VIVEKACODAMANI 
If there is accord of the mind with the body and the world seen 
in the dream as with objects experienced in the waking state, it 
has to be said that such a one has not surely awakened from his 
dream. | 
458 
aaert weifr aaa: aatarat fasafa areaatarct t 
eafaar caer fart fener aarfaa: TTA taaTat Rival 
tadvat pare brahmani vartaminah 
sadaétmana tisthati nanyadiksate 
smrtiryathé svapnavilokitarthe 
tathavidhah prasanamocanddau }| 
So too, a man absorbed in Brahman remains for ever 
in tune with his 4tman and sees nothing else.- Asis the 
remembrance of objects seen in dream, so are his reactions 
to eating, expulsion etc. 
tadvat: as one who has awakened from sleep. 
pare brahmani vartamanah: being with the mind firmly estab- 
lished in Brahman. a | a“ 
sadétmanaé tisthati: remains in the form of cit which is not 
-sublated and is unattached. | | 
anyat neksate: does not see anything other; for such other is 
non-existent to him. Vide the srutis yatra nanyat pasyati (Chand.): 
“does not see any other”; yatra sarvam atmaivabhit tat: kena kam 
pasyet (Brh.): “where one does not see another, where everything 
is the 4tman, then what can one see and by what?” — 
It may be doubted by the dull-witted that even the Brahmavits, 
those who have known (realised) Brahman perform the action of 
taking food and ej jecting. This is answered by the second half of 
the loka. Even as one who has awakened from a dream remembers 
the objects seen in the dream without the: belief that they are real, 
so too is the reaction of the jianin with reference to eating and 
ejecting. Vide the Paficada%: ndpratitistayorbidhah kintu mith- 
yatvaniscayah: “It is not that the jfianin is not conscious-of them; 
but he knows that they are mithya.” Every one who thinks of 
himself as a tiger in a dream, does not take it to be true on waking; 
but there will be memory of it. Previously. he thought of the body 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 435 
which ate and ejected as ‘I’; now, however, having realised his true 
nature the body which performed the actions of eating etc,, appears 
as separate without the identification as ‘I’ even on getting up from 
samadhi. 
459 & 460 
That prarabdha-karma does not pertain to the atman is proved 
by reasoning. 
aon fataal az: reed TET STAT 
| ATTA Tet AACA mapa: Uwe Ut 
ait face ef qa slater caqwlerare | 
aaTeHAT fawsaisen ae: TISUETAT NXE M1 
karmané nirmito dehah praérabdham tasya kalpyatam 
nanader Gtmano yuktam naivatmad karmanirmitah ;, — 
ajo nitya itt--brite srutiresi tvuamoghavak | 
tadatmana tisthato’sya kutah prarabdhakalpanad 1; 
The body is fashioned out of karma; prarabdha may be 
imagined with reference to it. And it is not appropriate _ 
with reference to the 4tman, which is beginningless, for 
the Atman is not fashioned out of karma. 
Sruti of infallible _speech says that this ‘(atman) yj | 
unborn and eternal. How then can there be the negli 2 
tion of prarabdha to one who remains as such atman? 
_ The proof of the 4tman being beginningless is conveyed in the 
words: ajo nityah: unborn and eternal. The Kathopanisad says: 
ajo nityah Sdsvato’yam purdénch na hanyate hanyamane Sarire: 
“This (4tman) is unborn, permanent, eternal and ancient; it is not 
killed when the body is killed.” 
amoghavak tu: abadhitartha vak: that distinguished speech 
whose words are. uncontradicted. a | - 
taddtmanaé tisthato’ sya: of him who remains as that Atman : 
which is verily his true’ nature. 
prarabdha-kalpana kutah: For wach a one, where can there be 
any imagination of prarabdha-karma? If one remains in the belief 
that his body is his a4tman by the super-imposition of the body on 
the atman due to prarabdha-karma, there could be peentineaicn 7 
with its qualities. That does not apply to jfanin. | 
436 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
That is further clarified. 
orved fargeafa wat war ager feafar:. | 
Sgrerayat dase: sread casa: 
Meteeals STTeITHCTAT wafiate fg uveque 
prarabdham siddhyati tada yada dehatmana sthitih | 
dehatmabhavo naivestah prarabdham tyajyatématah 1) 
Sarirasyapi praérabdhakalpané bhraéntireva hi.) — 
Prarabdha is relevant so long as there is identification 
(of the 4tman) with the body. But the sense of the body — 
being the atman is not valid; hence the prarabdha has to 
be rejected. The attribution of BiBraDene to the me too, 
is the product of imagination. ve 
So long as one identifies one’s 4tman with the body, t then the 
-prarabdha, which is a character of the body accrues to the atman 
by imagination. But such identification of the 4tman with the body 
is not valid as the primordial nescience (milajnana) has been 
destroyed. | | 7 | 
atah prérabdham tyajyatam: therefore, he association of pra- 
rabdha with the atman should be abandoned. On careful inquiry, 
it will be found that the attribution of ete. to the body, too, is 
a delusion.>8() 
hi: shows certainty. | 
That is explained with reason. 
| MeURAEN HTEATATT HACACA mat ala: | 
AAA eat TINT: ATLETAAT: BT: NER Tn 
adhyastasya kutassattvam asattvasya kuto janih ' | 
ajdtasya kuto nasah prarabdham asatah kutah 4 
How can anything that is super-imposed be said to 
exist really? How can what is not real, be said to be 
“born? ‘How can what is unborn be ‘destroyed? | Whence _ 
then is prarabdha? | om ees 
58a For the body is acetana, insentient, If prarabdha - is to pertain to it, it - 
should be a kartr and bhoktr, doer and enjoyer. It cannot be a kartr or bhoktr 
in dissociation with the mind. Body being acetana means it is ‘inert, not active. 
VIVEKACOPAMANI 437 
asattvasya: of what does not have sattva, i.e., existence, i.e., 
of what is non-existent. 
kutah: How or whence: intended to negate. 
ajdtasya nésSah kutah: Whence is destruction of the unborn? 
That too is not. : 
Prarabdha is accepted for origination (or birth); otherwise the 
differences of devas, creatures and men cannot be produced. When 
it has been determined that everything other than Brahman is 
mithya, then there can be no operation of karma with reference 
to what is the product of super-imposition due to ajfiana like a 
shell-silver. The éruti like sthinumanye ’nusamyanti yathikarma 
—yathasrutam (Katha.): “Others attain sub-human forms according 
to their karmas and upasanas,” should be considered to have been 
stated. only from a vyavaharika pone of view. : 
463 | | | 
Now is stated the meaning of the Sruti: tasya tavadeva ciram 
yavanna vimoksye atha sampatsye: “For him there is delay only 
so long as he is not. delivered (from the body); then he will become 
one with Brahman.” | - ~ 
AMATATTHTAET TISET TAY af L 
facsead ai 2g sft UETaat AST | 
BRTETY MTATTT sree wate af: eg 
jainenajnanakaryasya samilasya layo yadi | | 
tisthatyayam katham deha iti gankavato jadan || 
- samadhatum bahyadrstyd prérabdham vadati srutih \| 
In reply to the fools who asked if whatever is the _ 
yesul€ of ajfidna is liquidated along with its root by jfiana, 
then how does the body live, the sruti speaks of prarabdha 
from an empirical point of view. 
ajidnakaryasya: of the universe beginning with the sky etc., 
to whatever. begins with ahamkara and ends with the body; of 
‘whatever is caused by the mind. 
samilasya: mila here is ajfiana; associated with it. 
| FRanena: by realisation of Brahman. | 
— yads layah: if there is annulment, cancellation. 
 ayam dehah: this. body made of five elements. There may be 
doubt about how it remains. | | 
438 | VIVEKACUDAMANI 
jadan: the fools. 
samadhitum: to reply (to them). 
bahyadrstyad: vyavahara-ritya: from an empirical point of 
view. 
Srutih vadati: sruti declares by saying: ‘yavanna vimoksye’ ete. 
| 464 
One should not ever be deluded into thinking that the body etc., which is karma-born is not an appearance like the shell-silver. 
but is real. | 
a @ catieacacaatena facirqare | 
Ue: TATA: TTATIHMAT: SEY 
natu dehddisatyatvabodhamaya vipascitam | 
yatah Sruter abhipriyah paramarthaikagocarah || 
Not for teaching to the learned the reality of the body 
etc., (the said Sruti is to be interpreted). The import of 
the sruti relates to the transcendental only. ase? 
(Note: The last line of Sloka 463 should be taken along with Sloka 464). | | im yac eine ee na tu vipascitam bodhanéya: not to teach. the jfianins, the | learned. | y ae Be Boge tb 
The sruti does not speak to convey the reality of the body etc., 
to the jnanins. For, the learned entertain no such doubts as are 
referred to in the previous Sloka in respect of fools who alone are 
prone to do so: not the learned. a 
As darkness is destroyed by light, even if the ajfiana which 
is the material cause of the world is destroyed, it is said that the 
bady will be destroyed on the liquidation of prarabdha by the state- 
ment “tavan vilambah”. That will lead to the conclusion that the 
body is not the result of ajnana, but that it is true, being the pro- 
duct of karma. This is not right. According to the Tarkika theory 
the cloth which has the threads as its material, continues for a 
moment after the threads are destroyed.” Sri Vidyaranya writing 
33 The reference here is.to the theory of causation according to the Tarkikas. 
The cause according to Tarka is that it is the niyatapirvavrtti of the effect, i.e., 
the invariable antecedent and that there is a time interval, however short, between 
the origination (and destruction) of the cause and the origination (and destruc- 
tion) of the effect. If there is such a time interval, it means that after the des- 
truction of the threads which are the cause of the cloth, the cloth exists, and only 
later it gets destroyed. The interval may be very small; but that is not of signi- 
ficance. What is significant is that even for a short period after the destruction 
of. the cause (the threads), the effect (the cloth) abides. . a 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 439 
in the Citradipika says: “Even after the material cause goes 
away, the effect remains for an instant. If this; ie., the continuance 
of the effect even after the disappearance of the cause can happen 
in the case of. a causal nexus of a short duration like that of the 
threads and the cloth, why should it not be true of what is the 
product of a delusion operating for countless eons?” Hence it is 
possible to predicate the survival for some time of the body which 
is the effect of the operation of ajfiana from time immemorial, ater 
the destruction of ajnana. 
But for the satisfaction of those who wish to know the truth 
we say: from the paramarthika-point. of view, there is no destruc- 
tion or origination; there: is no one bound or who is an aspirant; 
none who seeks liberation or is liberated: na nirodho na cotpattih, 
na baddho ‘na ca:sédhakah | na mumukgur na vai mukta ityess 
paramarthata i For, Deshi alone is the supreme truth. — 
To resolve the doubt of the dull-witted ‘who may ask: if there 
is complete destruction of the effect of ajfiana by jiidna, how will 
one continue to be in the body, the sruti speaks of the operation 
of prarabdha. The purport of Sruti has reference to the paramar- 
thika which cannot be known by other instruments of knowledge, 
which is not known so far, which is purposeful and uncontradicted. 
For, that the body persists for some time éven.-after the destruction 
of ajiana till the working out of karma.-is of no significance to the 
jfianins (for they have no body-consciousness). The Sruti: tasya 
tavadeva ciram is only to satisfy those of inferior understanding. 
. 465 
‘The supreme: truth which is the import of Sruti is conveyed 
now in seven slokas. e | 
afeauprarercty —a L 
weed He Ag Ae Pa gy i 
paripirnam anddyantam aprameyam avikriyam 1 
ekamevadvayam brahma neha nanasti kiicana | 
Brahman is plenary, without beginning or end, beyond 
comprehension, changeless; one only without a_ second. 
There is no manifold here. 
paripirnam: devoid of spatial limitation. 
anadyantam: without origination or destruction. 
440 | VIVEKACODAMANI 
aprameyam: Phalavyapti-éinyam; what cannot be -Hlumined 
by: any: other illumined object. | 
wavikriyam: unchanging. | 
ekam eva: without internal and like difference (svagata- 
bhedarahitam and sajatiya-bhedarahitam ). | 
advayam: without unlike difference (vijatiya-bhedarahitam). 
tha: in Brahman. | 
kivicana: even a little. 
nana: difference. | 
The gruti declares the absence of ‘all kinds of difference. Vide 
the Brh.: manasaivinu drastavyam neha nanasti kivicana | mrtyossa 
mrtyumapnoti ya tha nineva pasyati ;; : “The atman must be per- 
ceived (realised) only by the infinitised consciousness of the antab- 
karana. He who sees difference here goes from death to death”. 
The Chandogya Upanisad says: ekamevadvitiyam: “one only with- 
out a second;” which means ekamevddvayam, one only, not two. 
«466 , | 
The supreme truth is told in the conde ‘of Sruti and i in a the guru’ Ss 
own words: 
waa feat feamracaerasiniy | , 
URtaad wet Ag arafer frst ves T 
- sadghanam cidghanam nityam anandaghanam akriyam i 
ekamevadvayam brahma neha naénasti kificana 4) 
Of the nature of existence and cit whole and entire, 
permanent,. compacted of bliss, inactive; Brahman is one 
only, not dual. There is no manifold here. : 
sadghanam: ghanam: form: with a body which is of the nature 
of sat, existent eternally. 7 | 
cidghanam: of cit, i.e. intelligence as the body. 
dnandaghanam: of ananda, i.e. bliss as the body i.e, which is 
sat, cit and Ananda in its nature. 
akriyam: without the activity of creation etc. 
467 
NUTS TH seared AaATTTTT | 
erettared wer Ag aTsfer FoRT Ge 1 
pratyagekarasam pitrnam anantam sarvatomukham 1 
ekamevadvayam brahma neha nanasti kificana 1) 
7 _ Internal (to every one) , homogeneous, full, endless, 
_.. facing everywhere, Brahman is one only, not dual. There” 
is no manifold here. | ee 
_* garvatomukham: because it is ipitidnels pervading 
everything; indestructible, it inheres in everything. Vide sruti: 
tvam jato bhavasi viqvatomukhah: “thou that art born hast thy 
face everywhere”. , | _ 
.. 4 468 
MEANATAA AAAITAATATAT | | 
URtated Her Ag aTaistes TereT Ue ge it 
aheyam anupddeyam anadheyam andsrayam | 
ekamevadvayam brahma neha nanasti kificana || | 
Not one to be discarded or accepted; not one resting on 
another, nor having any support or base, Brahman is. one 
only, not dual. There is no manifold here. 
aheyam: As it is one’s own (jiva ’s) nature, it cannot be dis- 
carded, and it is not as if it is taken. Being Bnattached to the world, 
it is without support. : | 
Or, it may be taken to mean: aheyam: without blemish (nir- 
dosam); anupadeyam: ea cas (nirgunam). 
469 & 470 
rie fronet aed falaaed farrsorry | 
cetera we ag aTaifes free UvEg ul 
airecqeqed waaay 
waters wer ag aratfer frat i xv i | 
nirgunam niskalam siiksmam nirvikalpam nirafijanam | 
ekamevddvayam brahma neha nanasti kivicana |) 
aniripyasvariupam yanmanovacamagocaram | — 
ekamevadvayam brahma neha naénasti kitcana 1; 
Qualityless, without parts, subtle, without change, 
without blemish, Brahman is one only, not dual. There is 
no manifold here. 
442 | VIVEKACUPAMANI 
Of undemonstrable nature, beyond mind and speech, 
. Brahman is one only, not dual. There is no manifold here. 
Because it is beyond mind and speech, hence of undemonstrable 
nature.. It is to be known only by realisation. Later on through 
the pupil, it is said: vaca vaktum asakyameva manasé mantum: 
“Impossible to be spoken by words or to be thought of by the mind.” 
471 
a aad exafend WS TeAAatswy 7 
aEtatet ae ag ararfes feat 10g tt | 
sat samyddham svatassiddham Suddham buddhamanidrsam 
ekamevadvayam brahma neha nanasti kiftcana jy 
Of plenary existence, infinitely blissful, self-subsistent, 
pure, of the nature of jfiana, without compare, Brahman is 
one only, not dual. There is no manifold here. , 
sat; abadhyam: uncontradicted. 7 
samrddham: of the nature of infinite bliss. | : 
svatassiddham: _ self-subsistent as it-is the cause of all canons 
of. proof. | 
Suddham: untouched by any defect.. 
buddham: of the nature of jana. 
anidrsam: ‘seen like this’.is idrsam. Not. idrsam is _anidyéam, 
i.e., incomparable. 
- As the endeavour is to convey to the mind the subtle purport of 
sruti, the repetition of the same idea here is not a defect. 
ar ae 
freerrm farcateaaht: 
WTPAC IT AT AAA ARTA: 
faata aca WRATAa 
STAT: qxi fra fererrenatera Ricca 
nirastaraga nirapastabhogah 
Santdssudinta yatayo mahantah | 
vijndya tattvam parametadante 
 ~praptah param nirvrtimatmayogat i 
- The great yatis who have discarded all attachments and 
pleasures, perfectly restraining themselves and at peace 
VIVEKACODAMANI 443 
realising the highest truth, at the end attained pene bliss 
by their realisation of the atman. | 
nirastaraégah: who have banished from their minds all desires 
for sense-objects. | 
nirapadstabhogah: hence, they have abandoned all pleasures, i.e., 
satisfied with what chance brings them. It is only when there is. 
desire that there will be enjoyment, as has been said supra: anyd- 
vedita-bhogya-bhogakalano nidraéluvad balavat: “Enjoying objects 
of experience offered by another like one in sleep or like a child”. 
Or, it may mean those who endure the dualities of cold and heat etc. 
Sintah: those who have made their mind rest in Brahman. 
sudadntah: those whose external organs are restrained. 
yatayah: prayatnasilah: those given to effort (in their verre 
quest). | : 
mahéntah: ies the mind goes out through the external 
organs, it gets transformed into the size of the limited object. The 
caitanya so delimited becomes small. But that does not happen to 
those who are Santa and danta. Greatness is natural to those whose 
minds are always turned inward. Such great outstanding men rea- 
lise the absolutely supreme truth conveyed in the words: paripiir- 
nam anddyantam, by their atmayoga or nirvikalpa-samadhi and.they 
attain the super-excellent bliss that is liberation upon the dawn of 
_ jnhana. | 
atmayogah: nirvikalpa-samadhi. sey Ege 
nirvrtim: nirati$dya-inanda-ripam muktim: the liberation 13 
which is of the nature of incomparable bliss. ag. 
ante: jfdnaprapti-anantaram: upon the attainment of | jiiana, 
praptah: attained. 
ante: may mean, at the end of prarabdha-karma, or, after the — 
fall of the body when they attain biases eaike el realising the 
supreme by atmayoga. 
473 
What was said earlier in $1.45 in the words: mabhaista vidvan 
tava nastyapayach, samsdara-sindhostarane ’styupdyah  yenaiva yatah 
yatayo'sya param tameva margam tava nirdisami 1; ‘Learned one, 
don’t be afraid.. There is no danger to you; there is a means to 
cross the ocean of samsara; I shall teach you the way by. which the 
vatis reached the other shore”; is completed here. | 
“44 VIVEKACODAMANI 
— Waradle rraranrera: 
caqeqaraaad Fray | 
faery alg carasraferdt : 
Waa: TATU ATY WAS: i woz ti 
bhavdnapidam paratattvamatmanah - 
- Svaripamanandaghanam nicaiyya | 
vidhiya moham svamanahprakalpitam 
muktah krtartho bhavatu prabuddhah i 
You too realising this supreme truth of the nature of 
the atman which is compacted of bliss, discarding the 
delusion which is the product of your mind’s imagination, 
wake up, become free and fulfil the purpose of as life. 
bhavanapi: you too. : 
_ @tmanah: bhavatah svariipam: your real nature as Brahman, 
the supreme Reality compacted of bliss. , 
| nicdyya: saksStkrtya: realising. 
| svamanadprakalpitam: imagined by your own mind. 
- moham: the delusion of imagining the andtman as your 
atman. | : ~ 
widhiya: destroying frou the root. | 
prabuddhah: awakened from the sleep of avidya.  _— 
muktah: freed from the bondage in the form of the super- 
imposition. | 7 
_ krtaértho . bhavatu:. attain. your life’s purpose. This is the 
benedictory instruction of the teacher. UD P gic a 
474 
aera at | ahrraererat 
eared SETA NTAATTT | 
freded aranaferarta 
sa: Tarat a gafaserd ver it 
samidhina sédhu suniécalatmand 
pasyatmatattvam sphutabodhacaksusa 1 
nissangayam samyagaveksitascet 
$rutah padartho na punarvikalpate 11 7 
Through samadhi in which the mind has been perfectly _ 
stilled, perceive the truth of the atman by the clear eye 
VIVEKACODAMANI 445 
_ of understanding. If it is so seen well, beyond any doubt, 
the meaning of the wore of the sruti do: not cause any 
doubt again. 
| suniscalatmand samédhind: by samadhi in which the atman 
_ (here antahkarana) is perfectly still, rendering it nirvikalpaka. 
sphuta-bodhacaksusé: by clear perception of the truth that is 
the atman, free from any doubt or eso, as you see the external 
objects with your physical eyes. | . | 
bodharépam caksuh: the eye of understanding. Vide supra: 
ee oe sphutam brahmatattvam avagamyate dhru- 
vam , nanyathé calataya manogateh pratyaydataro-vimisritam | 
piabet us (SL. 366). | | oe 
“pasya: saksatkuru: realise directly: < 
Srutah: heard from an apta, one who is beneficent. 
nissamsayam: free from every doubt, so that it is not the 
object of doubt. : : 
| _ aveksitascet: if it has been snieis | to attain the state of direct 
experience. : Dei, a TN 
| punar na vikalpate: does-not.become different again. 
ss _ 
cae a Tf aaarT aaa ATA 
UAATATTTSTTA aT | 
mea aferdirntican: caret 
“ava:feat earrafe: TATORT Ue vOy 
a svasyavidydbandha-sambandha-mokgat 
.Satyajninanandaripatmalabdhau | 
Séstram yuktir desikoktih praménam 
cantassiddha svanubhitih pramanam |; | 
In the matter of the attainment of the 4tman which 
is of the form of satya, jiiama and Ananda by getting 
from the bondage of one’s avidya, the proofs are scripture, 
reasoning and the words of the guru. In’ addition, is one ’s 
“own experience: got by internal realization. — : 
svasya: of oneself. 
avidyd-bandha-sambandha-moksat: 7“ freedom from’ the a ee 
wrought by avidya from ahathkéra to the Bedy.: he 
sambandhah: identity to be traced to super-im position; 
moksah: freedom from such sense of identity by se ae dls of one’ s 
true nature. 
pramanam: authority; proof. 
In this matter of the attainment (realisation) of one’s nature 
as satya, jnana and ananda, the following are proofs: (a) Sastra: 
texts like asya mahimanam iti vitasokah: (Munda.): “Bereft .of 
sorrow, he attains excellence;” brahmavidapnoti param: -“The 
knower of Brahman attains the highest”; (b) reasoning: the example 
_ of the ornament round the neck; (c) the utterance of the guru: the 
understanding of the identity of Brahman with the atman as con- 
veyed in tattvamasi (Chand): “That thou art”; and brahmani- 
atmatva-dardhydya: svadhyadsapanayam kuru: “For the firm convic- | 
tion of the identity of the atman with Brahman, bring about the 
extinction of your super-imposition”. The ground is experience in 
oneself in accord with sastra, Reasoning and words of the teacher. 
476 
In the idea declared, for illustration, other things in experience | 
are stated. 
at arava atara farrarcthaerearea: | 
Taq GUT AeA Gara Ug 1 
bandho moksagca trptisca cintarogyaksudhaddayah | 
svenaiva vedyd yajjianam paresimanumanikam | 
Bondage, liberation, satisfaction, anxiety, health, 
hunger etc., are to be known by oneself only, The know- 
ledge of these by others i is inferential. | 
bandhah: avidya. 
moksah: the extinction of avidya.. 
trptth: alambuddih: contentment. 
drogyam:. health, 
ksut: hunger. 
ddayah:' etc., includes pipasa: thirst, disease, stomachcasia etc. 
svenaiva vedyah: have to be known only by one’s experience. 
yat: yasmat: because. 
peresim jmainam: knowledge by others. 
Gnaumanikam: _ paroksam: indirect: seén from external factors: 
so, liable to delusion. | 
VIVEKACODAMANI ° 441 
ATT 
arefeor aerate ITA: aaT Tar 
aaa ater gererqygtea TRAcce 
tatasthita bodhayanti guravassrutayo yatha 
prajnayaiva tared vidvan iévaranugrhitayad || 
‘The gurus like the scriptures teach, ‘themselves 
remaining on the shore. The learned one must cross 
(samsara) by his own intellect backed by the grace of God. 
The man standing on the shore teaches one in the boat who 
is s not an adept in rowing: “Thus and thus must you row with your 
oar”, So too, the gurus and the Upanisads standing on the shore 
can only produce paroksa-jiana (indirect knowledge) and ‘thus. 
merely show the way. The learned should cross the ocean. of sam- 
sara only by their’own intellect reinforced by the grace’ of God. 
Swch intellect being a cinmatravrtti is indicated by the expression: 
brahmatmanoodhitayoh ($l. 428): by the analysis of Brahman and 
- atman. | | 
478 | 
SATATMETT ead AAT CANTATAS STA. ' 
dfag: aad fassfataacaenaissaiat uu wo tt 
svdnubhityd svayam jnatva svamatmanamakhanditam | 
samsiddhah susukham tisthennirvikalpatmandtmani 7 ee 
Realising oneself as the unlimited atman by one’s own 
experience, let one be established ala li in the 4tman by 
the nirvikalpa-state. | | 
The prose order is: svdtmanam akhanditam. svayam. svanubh- 
tityd jnatva, samsiddhah dtmani nirvikalpatmana susukham tisthet. 
The meaning is clear. | 
479 
aaraaaratrefatar agra sta: eee eT 
— Herseqieafata ate: wenigatd aa: TATA wos 
vedanta-siddhanta-niruktiresa 
brahmaiva jivah sakalam jagacca t 
akhandaripasthitireva moksah - 
brahmadvitiyam Srutayah pramanam 1 
. The conclusive assertion of Vedanta-siddhanta is that 
the jiva and the whole universe are Brahman only. 
Liberation is abiding in the form of the infinite. The | 
érutis declare that Brahman is one without a second. 
_ vedanta-siddhanta-niruktih: the conclusion. established by 
Vedanta is Vedantasiddhanta. 
| niruktih: nirnayah: conclusive assertion, the brief sound 
which produces it in the mind. 
The conclusion is this:. The jiva i is Brahman, ely: the entire 
world too is Brahman only. Moksa is abiding in infinitude; that is, 
being as Brahman. Brahman is without a second. For all this the 
_ $rutis are the ground. It is said ‘pramanam’ in the singular because 
_ though the érutis are many, the knowledge generated by them all is 
| identical. | | 
| __ pedanta-siddhanta-niruktiresa may be understood in . two ways. 
It means either the compact statement of the conclusion established 
by Vedanta, or the exposition of the conclusive meaning in the midst 
of the different interpretations by many people. ‘The Srutis under re- 
ference are those like tattvamasi, sarvam khalvidam brahma, brah- 
maivedam sarvom, ekamevaddvitiyam, etc.: “That thou art; verily 
all this is Brahman; all this is Brahman only; ors only without a 
second” etc. 
i NW Yoo 
- iti guruvacanat srutipramanit 
paramavagamya satattvamatmayuktya | 
prasamitakaranah samahitatma 
kvacidacalakrtir Gtmanisthito’bhit |, 
Having thus understood the supreme truth on the 
authority of the sruti, the instruction by the guru and by 
his own reasoning, with his senses stilled, and the mind 
controlled, the sisya became motionless in a gaa place, 
established in his own atman. 
guruvacanét: thus by the words of the guru uttered so’ ‘far at 
length. and in. brief. 
- grutipraménat: by the Srutis which were the ground of the 
guru’s instructions. Or, as sastra is mentioned separately, it may 
mean on the authority of the Sdstra in the form of gruti. Vide: Sas- 
‘tram yuktih desikoktih pramanam cantassiddhé svaénubhitih prama- 
nam: “The pramanas (grounds of proof) are eta reosonne the | 
_ words of a guru and inner self-experience.” | 
atmayuktyad: by meditating on the substance got from the | guru 
as well as Srutis. _ 
‘param satattvam: the supreme truth namely I Brahman, 
avagamya: on understanding. 3 pie 
prasamitakoranah: he whose sense-organs | like the eye ete. 5 
have been perfectly controlled. : 
Or, taking yukti to refer to yoga and by the definition of yoga 
as cittavrttinirodha: control of the mental modifications, Atmayuk- | 
tya may mean with the external organs well-controlled by the res- 
traint of the mind’s modifications. 
~ samahitatma: samyagahitah brahmani atma yasya: by whom 
or whose antahkarana is thus well-established in Brahman. Even | 
after control of the eyes etc., by the restraint of the mind, atma- 
nistha, establishment in the 4tma may not es hence the refe- 
rence to samahitatma. wed 
 kvacit: in a lonely place. © 
acalakrtih: immovable like a mountain. : aaa 
 Gtmanisthitah: Brahmanisthah: established in Brahman. Or | 
one to whom atmanistha has arisen. ae 
abhiit: became. oe. 
481 
a fereare AATATT TT AAI ATT 
SMT WAaas TATA CT 
kamcitkaélam samadhaiya pare brahmani manasam | 
vyutthiya paramanandad idam vacanam abravit 1) 
Establishing his mind for a while in the Supreme 
Brahman, he got up and spoke as follows out of the abun- 
dance of his joy. | 
482 
afafewer atferert safer 
HEAT TET t 
Vv. C.—-30 
40 VIVEKACODAMANI 
a — TT 
fis ar feat gener Te xc? 
buddhir vinasta galita pravritih 
- brahmaétmanor ekatayaddhigatya | 
idam na jane’pyanidam na jane 
kim va kiyadvad sukhamasya param |) 
By the understanding of oneness of Brahman and the — 
4tman my mind has ceased to function; its modifications 
have been stilled. I ‘know neither the this nor the yonder. 
_ Iam not able to fathom the nature or the extent of the bliss 
(which I enjoy). | + ie goat 
-brahmatmanor ekatayddhigatyé: by the direct vealizhtion: of 
the identity of Brahman and the atman. | | 
; idam na jane: idam: what is perceptible by the senses. 
_ @anidam: what is paroksa: beyond the senses. That is, pre- 
viously there was the distinction of pratyaksa and paroksa, that 
what is in front is pratyaksa and what is not so is parokga. Now, 
however, that distinction has vanished. oo 
kim va: of what nature is sukham. kiyat: hat is its mn’ 
The idea is that the sukha of samadhi experienced so far was 
infinite, unlimited by space, time or object. 
By idam na jane anidam na jane, that the experience is not 
limited by objects is stated. By kimvd, kiyadvd, it is conveyed that 
there is no limitation by time or space. . 
483-486 
ATA THTANTTAT AAA Hed. TAT WaAt 
taprrarad- » Taher THEI TA, L 
TRAE MaT OTT HART AA: 
aeainined facdtraaassacarcaat faa ¥e3 uN 
aa ad Ga at aid wa stafes oo, ‘aa 
MITT AAT avd wifes fe Herat uve u 
fe ga fanned fearaa te fase | 
HAAS ARITIT AAC 11 XC 
a fefaea oearie a oportfa at arog 1 
rare aarraedorien fase: uvce th 
VIVEKACUDAMANI | 451° 
vaca vaktum asakyameva manasé mantum na va sakyate _ 
svanandimrta-purapurita-parabrahmambudher ahead q 
-— ambhorasivisirnavarsikasilabhavam bhajan me manah 
yasyarnsarnsalave vilinamadhuné’nandétmand nirvurtam 1) — 
kva gatam kena va nitam.kutra linamidam jagat. | 
adhunaiva maya drstam nasti kim.mahadadbhutam MW 
kim heyam kimupadeyam kimanyat kim vilaksanam 
akhandananda-piyisapirne brahmamaharnave | 
na kivicid atra pasyami na srnomi na vedmyaham ; 
svatmanaiva sadénandaripenasmi vilaksanah iH 
483 
The magnificence of the ocean of the supreme Brahman 
filled with the nectar of the realisation of the Atman 
cannot be adequately expressed in words, nor thought of 
by the mind. My mind which has attained the state of 
_.a block of hailstone, and merged in a minute fraction of 
that ocean, is now contented by the enjoyment of that | 
bliss. 
varsikasila: hailstone. Vide Amara: “varsopalastu karakah”. 
484 
Where has this universe gone? By whom has it been 
taken away? Where has it merged? It was seen by me 
just now; or, wasn’t it? what a wonder’ 
| What is to be discarded or what is to be accepted and 
what is different or what is distinct in the great ocean filled — 
with the nectar of infinite bliss? | 
| 486 | 
I do not. see anything here; I hear nothing; I do not 
know anything. I simply abide as distinct in the form cr 
my atman in continued enjoyment of bliss. _ 
vilaksanah: "distinct from the five kogas. 
| 487 _ 
The gisya’s ajfiana has been burnt away. He has become one 
of fulfilled purpose. He makes obeisance to his guru. For the 
precept is: bhavaddvaitam sada karyam kriyaddvaitam na kutracit ; 
452 _ VIVEKACODAMANI 
advaitam trisu lokesu nadvaitam gurunad saha |, (Tattvopadesa): 
“In thought one should cultivate advaita (non-difference): not in 
action anywhere. Advaita is een in the three worlds, but 
not in respect of the guru.”@ 
AY aed Tra AeA faqRA_TT AeA | 
Prearg ATAe TTT SLT et warereeareqaret veo 
namo namaste gurave mahatmane | 
vimukta- -sangaya saduttamaya 
nityadvayananda-rasasvaripine 
bhimne sadapara-dayambudhémne iH 
| My obeisance to Thee again and again, Thou great 
One, free from all attachment, the best among Brahma- 
jignins, . who are the embodiment of. eternal ‘non-dual 
essence of bliss, the infinite, the qveriagHing. supreme reser- 
voir of mercy. . 3 Din, eae 
 saduttamaya: tahmavivanipndga’ the -supetlatively best 
amongst those who have known (realised) Brahman. _ 
bhimne: One who is devoid of seeing, hearing | about and 
knowing any object. other than Brahman. | 
sada apara-dayémbudhéimne: the reservoir of the everl- sting 
waters of mercy. e | 
488 © 
a a Be <a aa! 
TCLS SS MATA TTA AMT WU vo we rhe od 
-_-yatkataksa-Sasi-sindracandrika- — 
- pitadhita-bhavatipajasramah | 
praptavanaham akhandavaibhava- 
nandam atmapadam aksayam kganat || 
By the bestowal of whose gracious glance like ' the 
compact rays of the cool moon all my afflictions of samsara 
have been removed, and I have acquired in a moment the 
undecaying state of the a4tman which is of the nature of 
infinite bliss (is my obeisance to such guru). os 
The guru’s kataksas (gracious glances) produce joy to the world 
by the continuous flow of the nectar of bliss. They do SO by reason 
© The idea is, even after advaitanubhava, the duality of Guru and sisya aa 
persist and the latter must make obeisance to his Guru. ae 
VIVEKACUPAMANI _ 453 
of the mind being merged in the supreme Brahman which is niskala 
(impartible), niskriya (actionless), Santa (peaceful), niravadya 
(free from blemish), nirafijana (unmixed). They are compared to 
the cool rays of the moon, Or, it may be taken to mean ‘ney them- 
selves are the compacted light ‘of moon-beams. | | 
pitena: by unobstructed flow. 
dhitah: banished; warded off.. 
_ samsératapajasramah: the affliction ‘Springing “from the nat: 
of samsara. 
akhandavaibhavanandam: "incomparable bliss ‘of self-efful- 
gence. - 
aksayam: not decaying, eternal. 
atmapadam: Vignuparamapadam: the superlative state of the 
Supreme. 
I bow to such a guru (construed with previous stanza). 
489 : 
The Sisya describes his ne aoa soquired by the grace of 
the guru. 
 BeeTtse — er Wave 
freararacaetisg qciise eqaqTeta ¥eR We 
dhanyo’ham krtakrtyo’ham | 
vimukto’ham bhavagrahat i 
nityanandasvaripo’ ham 
pirpo’ham tvadanugrahat " 
I am blessed; I have attained my purpose; I have been | 
liberated from the clutches of samsara; I am of the nature 
of the eternal bliss; I am plenary by your grace. 
490 
TAB IEAT HSE, ay sEAIRTT: | 
TURAN MATRA fataa: u ¥zo 
asango’ham anango’ham alimgo’ham abhangurah | — 
prasdnto’ham ananto’ham atanto’ham cirantanah \; 
I am unattached; I am disembodied (I am not the 
body); I.am not the subtle or the gross body; I do not 
perish; I am all peace; I am the. infinite; I am free from | 
weariness; I am eternal. | cae 
454 . | VIVEKACUDAMANI 
 aténtah: aésrantah: who is not tired. | 
os ee) 
aadiserniaaisey afaarcisertra: 1 
Yadiueqeqisg Pathe aat fra: th weq ur 
akartaham abhoktaham avikéro’ham akriyah , — 
Suddhabodhasvaripo’ham kevalo’ham sada Sivah | 
~ I am not the doer; I am not the enjoyer; I am not 
subject to change; I am not the agent of action; I am of 
the nature of pure knowledge; I. am alone (what alone 
remains on analysis), ever auspicious. — 
492 
BSE: sigan: wdvtediatrs waer | 
ferea frerere fafa. Fareeiterrerge gota terre MW ¥BR my 
drastuh Srotur vaktuh kartur bhoktur vibhinna evaham | 
nityanirantara-niskriya-nissimasangapurnabodhatma | 
Iam distinct from the seer, the hearer, the speaker, 
the doer and the enjoyer. I am of the nature of whatis 
permanent, uninterrupted, actionless, boundless, unebached 
pinens ee 
493 
mreind sree Te ATT T _ 
TONGA WH aaettataay wu vez ue 
aha laasiLl nahamado’ eo avabhasakam param 
- guddham { 
| bahyabhyantaraginyom piirnam brahmadvitiyamevaham | Yh 
I am not this which I see; I am not that which I do 
not see directly; I am the illuminer of both, the Supreme 
and pure. I am only Brahman devoid of anything exter- 
nal or internal, the full, without a second. ; 
It means free from contact with every kind of upadhi. In 
what is beyond limitation of three kinds, how can there be imagina- 
tion of anything external or internal in Brahman? They may be 
imagined from the point of view of the body, but not noe the 
point ef view of the atman. — 
ubhayoh: of both—the pratyaksa and paroksa, the visible and 
invisible. ee Te 
VIVEKACUDAMANI | — 455 
| , | 494 7 
freqanatiaaed canginane sft aeTAaTETa, | 
 faeararcarcd aca aanigdiatarer, wey 
nirupamam andditatitvam tvam ahem idam ada iad 
kalpanadiram | 
nityanandaikarasam satyam brahmadvitiyamevaham L 
| Iam the non-dual Brahman which is without anything a 
like it, the beginningless truth, beyond all imagined dis- _ 
tinctions of ‘thou’, . ‘T’, ‘this’ and ‘that’, of the nature of — 
uniform permanent bliss and the supreme Truth. | 
495 
areas ataAatse TURABTSE qautsgete: 7 
— HeURa le lswasigarett fardleazisé Freganra NM ¥R le 
 narayano’ham narakaéntako’ham _ 
 purantako’ham puruso’hamisah | 
akhandabodho’ hamasesasakst 
nirisvaro’ham nirahammamas ca ii 
I am Narayana; I am the slayer of Naraka; I am the 
slayer of Tripurdsura; I am the supreme Purusa, the Lord; 
I am the infinite Intelligence; I am the witness of all; I 
am not subject to a higher ruler; | am without the sense 
of ‘Il’ or the ‘mine’. 
nirigsvaro’ham: I have no (higher) Ruler: pe as Brahma 
Sitra: ata eva cananyadhipatih: “And for this very. same reason — 
(the released soul is) without another lord.” 
496 
wag qasagaad afeua: 
stat (at) ) See ATTA: AF n 
tat & whe eqs aa 
(aq) aacqargeciqdaat TT “REN 
sarvesu bhitesvahameva samsthi tah 
jnang (tré) tmandntarbahirasrayah san | 
bhokté ca bhogyam svayameva sarvam | | 
(yadhtadyat prthagdrstamidamtayad purd 1). 
I alone abide in all beings, in the form of knowledge 
(or the knower) as their internal support. I am myself 
456 -VIVEKACODAMANI 
the enjoyer and all that is enjoyed of whatever is seen in 
front distinctly as ‘this’, earlier. ~ | 
I alone reside in the form of jana (or the knower) as the 
support inside and outside of all created things from the sky on- 
wards. The pramdatr-caitanya (the cit which is knower) reaches 
out to the object through its upadhi, the antahkarana. It then illu- 
mines it. In doing so, it becomes one with the caitanya that governs 
the object. Consequently, the pramatr-caitanya itself becomes the 
substratum (adhisthana) of that object. ‘Identical is the case in the 
apprehension of all objects inside or outside. [So, the jivanmukta 
makes the exclamation in this gloka that, as jfiana, he is the support 
(adhisthana) of everything inside or outside]. By the rule: nad- 
histhanat bhinnata dropitasya: ‘The super-imposed is not different 
from the substratum”, whatever was previously seen as separate 
_has not a state or existential character distinct from the substratum. 
The enjoyer, the object of enjoyment, sound etc.—all are oneself 
- only. Vide the case of shell-silver and rope-serpent. 
497 
wyarsqaraia ager fasadtaz: | 
Set facitad MATAR AAT 1 YS 
3 -mayyakhanda-sukhambhodhau bahudha visvavicayah | Lo 
utpadyante viliyante mayamarutavibhramat i 
: By the play of the winds of maya, the various waves 
_ Of the universe arise and are merged in me, the infinite _ 
ocean of bliss. a | 
In the work Svatmaniripana of Sri Bhagavatpada it is said: 
‘mayt sukhabodhapayodhau mahati brahmandabudbudasahasram ; 
mayamayena maruté bhutvé bhitvd muhustirodhatte 1; “In the 
great milky ocean of blissful knowledge that is myself, thousands 
_. of bubbles of the world raised by the wind of maya arise again ane 
again and disappear”. 7 : 
— 498 
wqatfearar afa aferar sata 
ARUTAT ACHAT ATH: 
Te WaT Hea acaaa- 
meearet faonofatanet i xec ut 
VIVEKACUDAMANI | 457° 
sthiladibhava mayi kalpita bhramat 
dropitanusphuranena lokath | 
kale yatha kalpakavatsarayana- 
rtvadayo niskalanirvikalpe | 
- -‘The idea of the gross etc., are imagined in me by 
people by the manifestation of what is super-imposed in | 
me by delusion even as in Time which has no parts or > 
difference, distinctions are made of Kalpa, i.e., a unit of 432 
millions of years, year, half-year, season etc. 
“Kighteen moments are known as a kastha and thirty of them 
as a kala”. By such divisions, in the one infinite Time which is 
without parts, difference or measures like kala and kastha, people 
imagine differences of moment, day, month, rtu, half-year, year and 
kalpa. Even so, merely by what is seen by their imagination ideas 
like gross, subtle, causal bodies, forms etc., are er in me by 
men through delusion. | . fe , 
sthilidi-bhavah: objects in the form of die. grosa, ‘the subtle 
and causal bodies. | oe _ | | 
Really, however, the a4tman which transcends the divisions of 
nada, bindu and kala, does not apprehend Time or its differences. 
Similarly, I who am conscious of the Infinite which is devoid of limi- 
tations of space, time and object (deSa-kala-vastu-paricchedas), have 
liquidated ajfiana entirely and so for me, there is no apprehension 
of what is super-imposed, as delusion of any kind has been uprooted. 
— 499 
aad AAT WaT a a sifeataatid: | 
aigterckaacafrart metfarmrartcaerrate: TRA 
aropitam nasrayadtsakam bhavet 
kadapi midhair matidosadisitath | 
nardrikarotyisarabhimibhagam 
maricikavarimahadpravahah 
That which is super-imposed by those subject to. 
delusion of the mind cannot affect the substratum. The — 
flood of waters seen in a mirage do not wet the desert 
sands. | 
matidosadisitaih: affected: by defects of the mind; mighaih: 
by fools (subject to avidya, karma and kama). 
458 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
na asraya-disakam bhavet: will not affect the substratum, 
lacking such substratum itself. For, as has been said in the Adhya- 
sabhasya of the Brahma Sitras by Sri Bhagavatpada: tatraivam 
sati yatra yadadhydsah tatkritena gunena dosena vaé anumdatrenapi sa 
na sambadhyate:. “As it is so, that on which the super-imposition 
is made is not affected in the least by. the good c or bad qualities of 
the super-imposed thing.” 
That is made clear by. an. example. : The water of a mirage does 
not wet the desert. The desert is the substratum of the super-im- 
position of the great flood of the mirage. | 
500 
ATETTAT —o 
“anfeaag areafamarniser | 
aera freafatrrasisen : ; 
| wratfrag arefaatarttser T cl th 
 Gkasavat. kalpavidirago’ham 
Gdityavad bhasyavilaksano’ham 
aharyavat nityaviniscalo’ham 
-ambhodhivat paravivarjito’ham 11 _ 
Like the sky I-am beyond all the imagined divisions; _ 
like the sun I am different from the illumined; like the — 
immovable mountain, I am permanent and unmoving; like ° 
- the ocean I am without a shore. | 
By the Sruti: dakdasavat servagatasca nityah, this is a matter of 
one’s own experience. 
kalpavidiragah: unlimited by time. 
Gdityavat .... : the Sruti says: svayamjyotih: sak cileeaee Its — 
meaning is stated: bhasya-vilaksano’ham: I am eh from what 
is illumined. (The illuminer cannot be the evaemned 
 aharyavat: like the mountain. | 
o01 
TH aaa areal Haag fagraa: | 
HA: HAT A ACAI: AVUTITATATAA: 11 4o4 un 
na me dehena sambandho megheneva vihaiyasah | 
atah kuto me taddharmah jagrat-svapna-susuptayah 1 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 459 
As the sky is not connected with the clouds, so too I 
am not connected with the body. How then will its qua- 
- lities like waking, dream and dreamless sleep affect me? 
Kalidasa. says: dhima-jyotis-saltla-marutém sannipaitah kva 
meghah: ‘Where is the cloud that is the result of the combination 
of smoke, light, water and wind?” Even as the sky is not- touched 
by the cloud which is the effect of the combination of earth, water, 
fire and wind nor is made wet by the downpour of water particles 
by reason of its uncontaminability and formlessness, so too there is 
no connection of my atman with the body composed of the five ele- 
ments by virtue of the stated reason only. Hence, as there is no 
connection with the bearer of the qualities (dharmin), how. will the 
dharmas like waking, dream and dreamless sleep attach to me? 2: 
502 
satraara a va aeafe 
a ua matty Hutte Waa 
ava staat Fane aa oe 
| qolratrras Ua BETA: Wt Hor It 
upadhirayati sa eva gacchati 
sa eva karmani karoti bhunkte | 
$a eva jivan mriyate sadéham ; 
kuladrivannigcala eva samsthitah \ 
It is upadhi (super-imposed quality) oniy that comes; 
it alone goes; it alone does actions and enjoys; it is that 
which lives and dies. Like the Kuladri_ oe called: ee 
ene) I stand unmoving. ye ae 
503 
TH safe: 7 a 4 fafa: 
a aneqey faeaeT 
warerat ay frfaet fread | 
sag Wo: A HA T AAA 1 YR tt 
na me pravrttir na ca me nivrttih 
sadaikaripasya nirankusasya | 
ekatmako yo nibido nirantaro 
vyomeva pirnah sa katham nu cestate }| 
For me, ever-of the same form and without parts, ‘hese | 
is no activity nor withdrawal. How will anything act which | 
460 VIVEKACODAMANI 
is ever identical, compact and undifferentiated? Y 
These ideas are discussed in the following . Brahma Sitras 
seriatim. | 
= ikranti-gatydgatindm (II .i.1): “on account of the : spiritual 
declarations of (the soul’s) passing out, going and returning (the 
‘soul is. of atomic size). 
 tadgunasdratvat sedvuapadeiak prajnavat (IT .iit. 29): “But it 
is designated thus (i.e:, as atomic), on account of its having for its 
essence the qualities of that (i.e., the Buea). as in the case . the 
— Self (1.e. pine : | is Bose og 
account of vipers haute a ee , ae 
 yatha ca taksobhayatha (II. rit. 40): heels and as the car- 
' penter, in double fashion.” , 
cardcaravyapasrayastu syat eoouaediens bhaktas tadbhavabha- 
vitvdt (I1.iii.16): “But the designation (as being born and dying) 
abides in the (bodies of beings) moving and non-moving; it is 
secondary (metaphorical) if applied to the soul, as the existence (of 
‘those terms) depends on the existence of that (ie., the body ).’°61 
(All these sittras state the purvapaksa ( opponent’s views) about 
the soul which are considered and refuted by the author of the 
Brahma Sitras in the sequel). 
I am ever unmoving like the Kula mountain. Activity and with- 
drawal cannot pertain either together or in succession to what is 
always one. What is without parts or limbs cannot change. How 
- will what is one through and through closely compacted and wa 
out intervening space like the sky ever act? 
504 
goat aratia inane 
fardaat fataga: fated: | 
Hatt HATESTSTT A: | | 
aa graranratacata atta: 4o¥ Ul 
61 The, Siitras discuss the questions about the size of the atman, whether 
it is an agent (karta) of action and if. it is capable of motion and decide that 
it is infinite (vibhu), that it is not an agent (akarta) and that it is not subject to 
motion, For elucidation of the siitras the reader is referred to the excellent trans- 
lation by Swami Gambhirananda of Sri Sarnkara’s Commentary on them in the 
rhe of the Brahmasiitra Bhasya, published by the Advaita pone Ramakrsna 
ission. 
VIVEKACUDAMANI | 461 
punyani pipani nirindriyasya 
nigcetaso nirvikrter nirdkrteh | 
kuto mamakhanda-sukhanubhiteh 
brite hyananvagatamityapi srutih || 
How can there be for me merits and demerits (punyas 
and papas) who am without organs, without mind, with- 
out change and without form? How can these pertain to 
me who enjoy infinite bliss? The ananvagatasruti also de- 
elares that these will not attend on me. 
-Punya is what arises from doing what is prescribed. Papa 
arises from doing what is prohibited. Karma is of three kinds: per- 
taining to the body, to the mind, and to speech. Vide the Gita: 
éariravanmanobhir yat karma praérabhate narah nyayyam va 
viparitam vd: “Whatever karma a man begins to do, proper or 
otherwise by the body, the mind and speech”. The bodily punyas 
are: bathing in the great sacred rivers, and circumambulating gods 
and brahmanas. The oral punyas are: mutterance of the great man- 
tras and singing the names of God and talking about His glories. 
The mental punyas are thinking of God and reflecting on what is 
good to oneself and to others. Going to prohibited places, speak- | 
ing ill of others and uttering falsehoods and thinking of forbidden 
things are respectively the bodily, oral and mental papas. It is said: 
garirajaih karmadosair yati sthavaratam narah | vacikaith paksimr- — 
gatim manasair antyajatitim 1}; : “One is born as an immobile by 
the bodily sins, as a bird or an animal by oral sins and is born — 
very low by mental sins.” - When reference is made to. speech, it is 
to include the eye, the ear etc. Or, by vak (speech), it may be — 
taken to refer to motor organs enabling action, and manah (mind) — 
may be taken to refer to sense-organs like the eyes giving know- 
ledge of objects. The distinction of good and bad with reference 
to the process of acting, seeing and hearing make for punya and 
papa respectively. All these relate either to the mind or to the 
body with form. ‘Says the sruti respecting what is without indri- 
yas or organs: na tasya kdéryam karanam ca vidyate (Svet.): ‘“‘to 
it does not pertain either action or its instrument”. The Sruti also 
says: sacaksur acaksuriva sakarno’karna iva samanaé amanda iva 
sapréno’prana iva: “With eyes but as if without eyes, with ears as if 
without ears, with mind as if without mind, with breath as if with- 
out breath”. As a matter of fact, though really an acaksu (with- 
out sight for external objects), the jivanmukta appears to others as 
sacaksu as if with eyes looking at the world. But he remains with- 
462 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
out the connection of super-imposition. Similarly, being with 
organs, being with mind, being with the body. are products of mithya 
and ajnana (wrong knowledge). Possession of these things is due 
to the false identification born of attachment. 
For one whose ajhana has been burnt by direct intuitional rea- 
lisation (Brahma-saksatkara), where will attachment arise, where 
again identification? Therefore, by the use of the three words: nir- 
indriyasya (of one without organs), niscetasah (of one without the 
mind, i.e., without the mind operating outward), nirakrteh (of one 
‘without the sense of the body) has been declared that the jivanmukta 
is bereft of the means of acquiring punya and papa through speech, 
the mind and.the body. 
Tarkikas predicate punya and papa of the atman only. 
nirvikrteh: of what is unchanging. If what is nitya (eternal) 
is associated with anitya in the event of being subject to punya and 
papa due to prescribed and prohibited karmas, the Atman will become 
anitya. Hence the atman is said to be vikrtisinya: devoid of change. 
For, it has been declared by Sri Totakacarya in his Sruti Samud- 
dharana: na hi nityam anityagunena guni: “By reason of its asso- 
ciation with a quality which is non-eternal, what is so pene is 
not eternal’’,@ 
In the Brahma Sitras, in the’ Viyadadhikarana: it has been said 
that the sky is anitya (non-eternal ) by its association with Sabda 
(sound) which is anitya. 
fs 0 ee om 
So, I am in essence unchanging; my milajfana (primordial 
nescience) has been destroyed; I am not connected with the upadhis 
of the form of the body, the organs, and the mind; my experience (of 
the 4tman) is infinite: I am of the nature of self-effulgence which 
is unlimited and unconcealed. Then how will punyas attach to me? 
How again will papa affect me? Sri Bhagavatpada quotes éruti in 
support of this by saying: brite hyananvagatamityapi srutih: “The 
Sruti declares that he is not accompanied (by punya and papa). Vide 
ananvagatam punyena ananvagatam papena tirno hi sada& sarvan 
Sokan hrdayasya bhavati (Brh.): “Unaccompanied by punya, un- 
accompanied by papa, he becomes one who has crossed all griefs of 
the heart.” By this it has been taught that in dreamless sleep, 
though there is then the operation of primordial nescience (mili- 
jnana), there is no super-imposition wrought by it, and one is un- 
62, The idea is that what is qualified by a guna cannot be said to be nitya, 
eternal. Having a guna is a mark of the anitya, for guna itself is anitya. 
VIVEKACUDAMANI | 463 
touched by punya and papa and unaffected by any grief of the heart. 
That is the actual experience of everybody. In this context (i.e, in 
the case of the jivanmukta), even the causal ajnana (kdranajaana) 
having been destroyed, that there is no connection at all of punya, 
papa or sorrow is declared by the use of the word ‘kutah’ (whence 
or how) after the manner of the Sruti: ko mohah kassokah (where 
is the delusion or the grief?). Their existence is effectively denied 
by an interrogative. ; | 
If punya and papa pertain to the atman, then it must accom- 
pany the state of dreamless sleep also. At that time there is the 
transcendental experience of bliss of one’s real nature; the effect 
of punya is not experienced as a limited sukha. For, that sukha is 
not generated by connection with sense-objects. At that time, 
there is no grief either; for, the Sruti says: eso’sya parama énandah: 
“this is this person’s supreme bliss”. And this is also a matter of 
experience by the jivanmukta. Therefore, there is no accompani- 
ment of papa. By the expression: hrdayasya sokan: the griefs of 
the heart, it is conveyed that no grief signified by the word Soka 
is a quality of the a4tman. Waking and dream are conditions of 
super-imposition; hence they are imagined. Here, however, there is 
no super-imposition and so no imagination (by super-imposition). 
That is the meaning of the Sruti. 
905 
The meaning of the above is explained clearly with the aid of 
an illustration in two Slokas. | 
ora eqeqent at viet aT ae a5 aT 
aT ead atentad yar afgwaTery 11 Kok 1 
chayaya sprstam usnam va Sitam va susthu dusthu va | 
na spréatyeva yatkincit purusam tadvilaksanam | 
If heat or cold, good or evil touches the shadow of a_ 
man, it does not affect the man who is different from the 
_ shadow. | 
Even as there is no connection of a body with cold or heat etc., 
by contact of the body’s shadow with cold or heat, or good or evil, 
so too the upadhi reflected in the buddhi (which is the pratibimba) 
does not touch the atman which is the original (bimba) different 
from it and plenary in nature, after it has got over its jivatva (qua- 
lity of being a jiva) upon the destruction of ajfiina. In the case of 
purusa here, the body is to be understood in the place of the shadow. 
WA VIVEKACUDAMANI 
tadvilaksanam: chayavilaksanam: distinct from the shadow. 
The qualities of what is witnessed -do not ever affect the 
witness. | | _ 
506 
afrercsereti Tee: Tara | 
aéhxanataat: AACA eT MRE Ros Il 
avikaram udasinam grhadharmah pradipavat ; 
= dehendriya-manodharmah naivétmanam sprsantyaho iT 
The qualities of the body, the organs and the mind do 
not affect the 4tman even as the qualities of the objects of - 
a house will not affect the lamp that illumines them. 
As the objects in a room do not affect the lamp that illumines 
_ the room, so too the qualities of what is witnessed i.e., qualities of 
the buddhi, indriya and garira which are the dréya (the seen), do 
not ever affect what is different from them, which is of the nature 
of the drk (seer), self-effulgent, unchanging and indifferent and 
which is the witness. By saying this with the example of the light, 
the aenemne si the aaa referring to punya and papa i is made clear. 
507 
_ The unattached character of the atman is explained by three 
slokas. 
wade fey arferaTat TAT arsafer TTERCAT 
walinssifiaaqay: Ta aeeafsaraat a ru koe T 
raver yatha karmani siksibhavo | | 
vahner yatha va’yasi dahakatvam 7 
rajjor yatha’ropitavastusangah — | 
tathaiva kitasthaciditmano me }; 
As the sun is a mere witness of an action, as the fire 
makes for the burning quality of iron, as the rope is asso- 
ciated with the object super-imposed on it, so too is what 
pertains to me who am the cidatman in my inmost being. 
Known as karmasaksi (the witness of all actioris), jagaccaksuh 
(the eye of the universe), the sun is the witness of actions of all 
creatures. But it is not connected with any of these actions. So 
too I am the witness of all actions being the inmost unchanging 
cidatman. As the burning character of fire is imagined in the iron 
when it is. said that the (heated) iron burns, the agency for action 
VIVEKACUDAMANI_ 56 465 
which pertains to buddhi is attributed to me. So too, as the ser- 
pent imagined in the stick, or the waterline or the cleft in the 
ground, the connections with body etc., are imagined in me, the un- 
changing cit. In fact, being unattached ‘applies in all the three 
illustrations. 5 
508 
From his own experience the disya ee his being qua- 
lityless. 
aeaisfr ar areferensti arg witaatste at witsifaarste ae 
geasta at anfacst ag 
alse caasatfarcatenar it yoe. T 
 kartapi va karayitapi naéham . 3 
- bhoktapi va bhojayitépi niham 
drastapi va darsayitapi naham a 
soham svayamjyotiranidrgétma | 
- Tam neither the doer nor one who makes others do; I — 
am neither the enjoyer nor one who makes others enjoy; — 
I am neither the seer nor one who makes others see. I am 
the self-effulgent 4tman indescribable by qualities. | 
As the sruti says: vijidnam yajiam tanute; esa hyeva sidhu 
karma kaérayati (Brh.): “Vijfiana or the caitanya which has bud- 
dhi as its upadana performs action; it itself causes good actions to 
be performed” etc., it is only to the vijiiana subject to the upadhi 
of buddhi and maya respectively that acting and causing to act, en- 
joying and causing to enjoy can be attributed. As seerhood is de- 
pendent on the seer, in the non-dual atman that too is imagined: 
it is not real. The induction of the eye etc. (towards objects) is 
only in vyavaharika stage, not really. Therefore, I am not he who 
causes to see. I am beyond compare. Vide Svetésvatara-éruti: 
siksi cetaé kevalo nirgunasca: “The witnessing consciousness, the 
lone without qualities’. The Atman is self-effulgent, shining with- 
out dependence on anything else. 
509 
Sagat 9 3 
- afterfiraé aafirit nie i 
tafarare cfaafefifera 
maister aitearsfer eaistet git koe tt 
V.C.—31 
466 | VIVEKACUDAMANI 
- calatyupadhau pratibimbalaulyam 
aupadhikam midhadhiyo nayanti | 
— svabimbabhitam ravivad viniskriyam 
kartasmi bhoktasmi hato’smi heti 1) 
When the upadhi (water) is moving, the movement of 
the reflection due to it is ascribed by the ignorant to the 
original, like the sun which is unmoving. So too, the atma 
is neither actor nor enjoyer, but due to upadhis: in which 
it is reflected, it appears as such, and the ignorant exclaim: 
I am doer; I am enjoyer; I am lost, alas! ete. 
The gruti says: dhydyativa leldéyativa (Brh.): “appears as if 
thinking and shaking”. By their delusion fools attribute to the re- 
flection of the sun the agitation which pertains to the water in 
which the sun is reflected and they say the sun moves hither and 
thither. The atman is the original (bimba). Its reflection is seen 
in. the upadhis like buddhi, Sarira, etc. When these upadhis shake, 
seeing the reflection ( pratibimba) shake, by wrong super-imposi- 
tion with buddhi with which the atman is wrongly thought to be 
identical, the ignorant exclaim: I am karta, bhokta, i.e. doer, en- 
joyer, etc., attributing to the 4tman what happens ta the jiva bound 
by upadhi. Even in the reflection, the qualities of the upadhi do 
not exist. For the pratibimba is not really agitated. It is the 
water that is agitated giving a false impression of the agitation of. 
the reflection. When that is so, it follows that these dharmas do 
not at all pertain to the 4tman. But still the fools believe so. Thus 
there is no contradiction to the established nirguna-character of the 
atman considering Sruti, yukti and anubhava. | 
510 
By the illustration of the space enclosed in the pot, it is shown 
that the qualities of the gross body do not pertain to the atman, 
aa arf erat arf qoate terre: 
we fafort aaa: aaa AY TAT T mn T 
. jale vapi sthale vapi luthatvesa jadatmakah | 
naham vilipye taddharmaih ghatadharmair nabho yatha }} 
‘Let this insentient body wallow on water or land: I am 
not affected by their qualities as the space in a ae is not 
affected by the qualities of the pot. 
nabhah: akasa; space. 
_ VIVEKACUDAMANI 467 
As the space is not affected by the impermanent qualities of a _ 
pot like bigness, stoutness, and colours like black ete., I am not 
affected by the qualities of grossness etc., like cold and heat arising 
from contact with water and from old age and death. 
- 511 
Hea A eCaAAo CAT AT 
WVATSCA ATTRA TA: | 
qgtancat a aq afer aed: 
vatery I “aertor HAASTT 1 4IF 
kartrtva-bhoktrtva-khalatva-mattata- 
_ jadatva-baddhatva-vimuktatadayah | 
buddher vikalpa na tu santi vastutah 
svasmin pare brahmani kevale’dvaye 1) 
Agency, enjoyment, cunning, inebriation, insentience, 
bondage and liberation, etc., are imagined on buddhi; they 
do not exist in reality in one’s atman or in the supreme 
Brahman which is without a second. 
In the sole secondless Brahman as in one’s atman, all qualities 
from agency to liberation are wrought by super-imposition on bud- 
dhi and they are variously imagined. Really they do not exist. 
512 
eed Fae: THAT MATT ART atte 1 
a: fe asergfaa: a grqaeratisert ef 4a 
santu vikérah prakrter dasadhé Satadhé sahasradhé viipi i 
taih kim me’sangaciteh na hyambudadambaro’mbaram Sprsati iy 
Let there be changes in Prakrti in tens, hundreds or 
thousands. What is my connection with them? I am un- 
_ connected cit. uh the thunder of the cloud does not touch 
the sky. | | 
7 The entire universe is born of the primordial Prakrti in. succes- 
sion. Let these changes of primordial Prakrti be in tens, hundreds 
or thousands. I am asanga cit, unattached intelligence; what are 
they to me? An illustration is given. 
ambuda-dambarah: the roar etc., of the cloud. 
ambaram: the sky. 
468 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
The thunder does not affect the sky. The sky is for ever change- 
less, is not affected by the arising of the eS. its thunder or its 
destruction. : 
513 
The sisya clarifies the experience of non-duality (advaitanu- 
_ bhava) that has accrued to him i in accord with the instruction by the 
. Guru. 
seamatle eyearaaag fad TaTaTAATa — 
sqlaned CeNATaa sedd Tadareafer 1 493 
avyaktaédi sthilaparyantametad vigsvam yatrabhasamatram — 
pratitam | 
vyomaprakhyam siiksmamadyantahinam brahimadoainn. 
yattadevahamasmi 4; 
I am that Brahman itself. which is without a second, 
which is like the sky, subtle, without beginning or end in 
which the whole universe from the unmanifested to the 
- grosS appears as a projection. 
| This is clear. 
O14 
ea tert waar cere aa hart aay TATETA 
fara yz fron fafaned wanda mea aTEnten WAGE 
sarvadhéram sarvavastuprakésam 
sarvakaram sarvagam sarvasiinyam | 
nityam suddham niskalam nirvikalpam 
 brahmadvaitam yattadevahamasmi | 
| Iam that Brahman itself, which is without a second, 
which is the support of all, which. illumines all objects, 
which has all forms, which is omnipresent, which has no 
modifications, eternal, pure, without parts, changeless. 
sarvavastu-prakasam: illuminating.all objects. Vide the éruti: 
tasya bhasd sarvamidam vibhati (Mand.): “By its effulgence all this _ 
Shines”. That from which all things get their mney is sarva- 
vastuprakagam. S , 
sarvakéram: extended everywhere, i.e., aparicchinnam: not 
limited in any way. Vide the Sruti: idam sarvam yadayam atmi: 
“all this is the atma.” (Mand. ) 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 469 
sarvasiinyam: as there is nothing apart from it, i.e, it is not 
available for other modifications than the akhaygakera-yytt, modi- 
fication of the antahkarana as infinite. 
O15 
BEET ( aferrereat ) MTT ETT era 
HeATT WETATTFARTAT | 
MUA TATT TET 
aaa waeareatert 1 4qe Ut 
yat pratyasta (yasminnasta) Sesamayavisesam 
pratyagriipam pratyayagamyamanam | 
satyajnandnantam dnandaripam 
brahmadvaitam yattadevaham asmi || 
I am that Brahman itself, which is without a second, in 
which have set all distinctions of maya, which is the inmost 
entity, which cannot be comprehended by the mere intellect, 
and which is of the nature of satya, jana and ananta (in- 
finity ), and of the form of ananda (bliss). ~ 
516 
farfomatserafaardisten fropettster frre: 8 wea, ¥ 
fafanedisfer freatsfen farcrercatsien fda: 1 49 uw 
niskriyo’smyavikaro’smi niskalo’smi nirakrtih | 
nirvikalpo’smi nityo’smi niralambo’smi nirdvayah 11 
| am. actionless, unchanging, without parts, ‘without 
form, without difference; I am eternal; I have no other sup- | 
port. I am without a second. 
O17 
sates aaisg aatetaisenga: | 
BATAAN SEATS SRT Nee 
sarvatmako’ham sarvo’ham sarvatito’ ham advayah t 
kevalakhandabodho’ham anando’ham nirantaram | 
I am universal; (lit. I am of the nature of all). I am 
everything; I am beyond everything; I am non-dual; I am 
the sole infinite intelligence; I am bliss; I am indivisible: ; 
470 _ ‘VIVEKACUDAMANI 
| 518 
earersn-ararsa-farahrtan ACHAT AAT ATTA t 
STAT AAT ATLA ABTA TAY TARAS Gra tseq mage 
svdrajya-samrdjya-vibhitiresa | 
bhavatkrpasrimahitaprasadat 1 
prapta maya srigurave mahétmane 
namo namaste’stu punar namo’stu 1} 
It is by your grace and your benediction that I have 
attained the splendour of this self-sovereignty and lordship 
over everything. My obeisance to you, my noble Guru, my 
obeisance to you again and again. 
519 
Bits ATTA ATTA | 
ward frosaed agTaTATT TH | 
ager asataateancaagiat 
water searrercaraaany Arar aati mag 
_ mahaésvapne maiydkrta-jani-jard-mrtyugahane 
bhramantam klisyantam bahulataratapair anukalam | 
ahamkaéravyaghra-vyathitam imam atyantakypaya 
prabodhya prasvapaét param avitavan mamasi guro tI 
In my great dream, in the forest of birth, old age and 
death wrought by maya, I had got exhausted by various 
afflictions which affected me every moment. I was tormen- 
ted by the tiger of aharnkara. By your infinite grace, my 
Guru! you have awakened me from the sleep and saved me. 
520 
TRA TeneA THA AE: | 
| MAAAVAS TN WHT STA T tl &Qo tt 
namas tasmai sadekasmai namascinmahase muhuh | 
yadetadvisvariipena rajate gururaja te i) 
Obeisance to you, King among Gurus, who are always 
one; obeisance again to you, whose eHUlgence of cit shines 
as this entire universe. 
| VIVEKACUPAMANI | 47] 
521 
gfa aaaaciter frrsqat 
aaeaTAATS TASACAA_ | 
 wafeagea: a Sheva: 
qahaargs Fa: TE ARTA 429 1 
iti natamavalokya Sisyavaryam 
samadhigatatmasukham prabuddhatattvam | 
pramuditahrdayah sa desikendrah 
punaridamiha vacah param mahdtma }) 
Perceiving this best among pupils who made obeisance 
to him and who has perfectly realised the bliss of the Atman _ 
and who has awakened to the Truth, with a happy heart, 
the best of Gurus, the noble soul, uttered these wise words 
again. , 
O22 
ACAATAA AAA ARTA ACTA: 
TIAMAT TATA A TAT eaferaenteaty | 
ereaaiad feafrarcaorat faa | 
age wefae: aa: firaat qatagreeaaa 1 RRR Ww 
brahmapratyayasantatir jagadato brahmaiva sat sainatak 
pasyadhydtmadrsa prasdntamanaséa sarvasvavasthadsvapi | 
rupadanyadaveksitum kimabhitascaksusmatém he el 
tadvad brahmavidah satah kimaparam _ 
buddh evoiharaepaddasi: 1" 
‘The universe is a continuous stream of cognition of 
Brahman; hence it is totally Brahman only. . See this’in all 
your states by the soul-sight of the 4tman with your mind 
at perfect peace. For those with eyes, is there anything to | 
see other than forms? So too, for those who have known 
(realised) Brahman, is there anything other than it to 
engage their intellect? | 
_ 523 
Ser wig wa fast 
wa Weretlats seas 
Fadrantettatad % FST 1 4RR UN 
472 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
 kastém pardnanda-rasénubhitim 
utsrjya Sinyesu rameta vidvan | 
candre mahahladini dipyamane | 
citrendum dlokayitum ka icchet u : 
Which wise man will indulge in the void (the unreal) 
abandoning the experience of supreme bliss? When the 
moon is shining giving infinite delight, who will cae to 
look at the painted moon? 
ae: ag ; face MAAS AT 1 UR A 
asatpadarthanubhavena kincit 
nahyasti trptir na ca duhkhahanih 
tadadvayaénanda-rasinubhitya 
trptah sukham tistha saddtmanisthaya — 
In the enjoy ment of: unreal things, there is no satis- 
faction or annulment of grief. So, remain satisfied and 
happy in self-realisation enjoying the non-duai bliss. 
029 
"gama ada: sea Ae: FARE, 7 
CATT AAAI SAT: oy aq Ae AP KQR UN 
svameva sarvatah pasyan manyamanah svamadvayam | 
svanandam anubhurjanah kélam naya mahamate i) | 
Noble soul! Spend your days seeing yourself every- 
where, thinking yourself as non-dual, enjoying atmananda. 
526 
seugatarcata fatanet 
fancad cater ot: THOTT | 
ACEATTAAAAAT AAT 
miter Teac AHA ATT 1 QE UI 
akhandabodhatmani nirvikalpe | 
vikalpanam vyomni purakprakalpanam 
tadadvagdnandamaydtmana sada | 
éantim paraémetya bhajasva maunam 41 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 
The attribution of difference in the impartible infinite 
intelligence is like imagination of a city in the sky. Hence, 
observe silence attaining supreme peace. BY. the contempla- 
tion of your non-dual atman. | 
D27 
ascitaaear ocatamfea: 
agrrcncatamergat: 
qa Taaal Ageaa: 
VaeaTTragS FATATT WG th 
| tiignimavastha paramopasantih - 
buddher asatkalpa-vikalpa-hetoh tL 
brahmétmana brahmavido mahat~n.no | 
yatradvayanandasukham nira. aram ji 
To the mahatma who is the knower of Brahman, the 
mind which is the cause of imagination of the unreal, re- 
mains silent by reason of his being Brahman ‘(having rea- 473 
lised Brahman) in the enjoyment of Der Panene: ‘bliss: of 
non-dual experience. 
528 
_— fraferre stn Ot GaHTUAA | 
faararereaetet eararacaataa: tt URS I 
nasti nirvasanat maundt param sukhakrduttama:n ; 
vijnatatmasvaripasya svanandarasapayinah T 
To one who has known (realised) his atman and drinks : 
the nectar of the bliss of the tman, there is no other higher 
source of joy than silence free from every desire. 
329 
- asefieearqafirery a aiseaarty at 1 
BASHA qafgEr STAT: AAT AAT 4 RS tt 
gacchamstisthannupavisan Sayadno vainyathapi va 1 
yathecchaya vased vidvan atmarimah sadé munih 1) 
Delighting in his a4tman, the muni always lives as he 
pleases, going, standing, sitting, lying down or otherwise ¢ as 
he pleases. 
—AT4 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
030 
wearer sitaaga: | 
afagaraey agrentistea 
tadaa wt FAAATAACAT It YR UL 
na desakalasana-digyamdadi- 
laksyddyapeksé pratibaddhavrytteh | 
samsiddhatattvasya mahatmano’sti 
svavedane ka niyamadyavastha I | 
The mahatman whose mental modifications have been ; 
rendered ineffective, does not depend on place, time, ‘pos- 
ture, direction, mental disciplines and objects of meditation. 
To the mahatman what regulations c¢an there be in the 
ila of himself? . | oe 
531 
eetsafafa fad fra: wt ratent t 
fant sarrgeset afera afer cert: W438 
eeneneyt vijnatum niyomah ko peaeeaen ‘s 
Vind pramdénasusthutvam yasmin sati padarthadhih 11 
What restriction or rule is needed (just) to know 
‘this is a jar,’ in the existence of which (rule) (alone) 
there can be perception of an object without the authenti- | 
city of the ground (of perception)? ? This means nothing — 
of the sort is needed. _ 7 
«582 
saan: faratag: srerret afer Tea | 
at dat anf ar are a ate arscatetg 1 4aR 
| ayamatma nityasiddhah pramdane sati bhasate | 
na degam napi va kalam na suddhim vapyapeksate |) | 
This 4tman is eternal and shines when apprehended by 
proper canons of knowledge. It does not need a place or a 
time or purity. 
533 
aaarisghaataart Friary | 
Weg welfaatscaey warefata sary 1 4aR 
devadatto’hamityetadvijnanam nirapeksakam | 
tadvad brahmavido’pyasya brahmahamiti vedanam | 
VIVEKACUPAMANI 
The knowledge “I am Devadatta” does not depend on 
anything else. Likewise is the cognition: ‘I am Brahman’ 
for the Brahmavit (for one who has known i, e., _Tealised 
Brahman). 
034 
ATT HTT Wa AEA AAT 1 oe 
TaHAASS fH A AEATAATATA 1 4RY th 
 bhanuneva jagat sarvam bhasate yasya tejasé } 
anatmakam asat tuccham kim nu tasyavabhasakam u 
What can be there to manifest that by whose lustre, as 
of the sun, shines all that is the anatman, asat (unreal) and 
insignificant? | 
“535 
demeageents wath wEerats | 
dardater afar a faarar’ seareraa N&sh 
-_ vedasastrapuranani bhitani sakalanyapi) 
yenarthavanti tam kim nu vijnataram prakasayet 1 
What can illumine that supreme Knower by whom the 
Vedas, the Puranas and all the things that are originated 
become significant? 
Waa wufeqeatem: Uae at 
esa. edie anantasaktir 
tma’prameyah Sakalanubhitih | 
yameva vijiiya vimuktabandhah © 
 jayatyayam brahmaviduttamottamah vi 
_ This is self-effulgent atman, of infinite power, payed 
intellectual comprehension, yet experienced by every one. 
Realising it, freed from oneeeee lives happily the aden 
latively eminent Brahmavit. | 
VIVEKACUPAMANI 
537 bebe 
ir faa a fet sited i owed ine Face 1: aa 
eatery war atsfa vrata ta PrAUaCaA FET: i UR9 1 
na khidyate no visayath. ania 
na sajjate napi virajyate ca | 
svasmin sada kridati nandati svayam  _ 
nirantardnandarasena trptah 11 | 
He is not grieved, he is not pleased by cbiecte: a is not 
_ attached, nor is he detached. He sports and delights in his 
self ever content in the elixir of incessant bliss. — 
| «B88 
aat dgerat carat ates: ateta acai | 
aaa fasta wad fat fare aeT gael 
ksudham dehavyathim tyaktva balah kridati vastuni . | : 
tathaiva vidvin ramate nirmamo niraham sukhi | 
Unmindful of the bodily affliction or hunger, the child 
sports with its playthings. So too, the realised man delights 
without the sense of the ° my’ and 1’, and is happy. 
| 539 
pis aes sac OTH afeartey 
wa emenianticcad fararsea, AT Ne 
aaret frrareaatfag faat sitet qt areator u 43S u 
cintéstinyam adainyabhaiksam aganam pinam saridvarisu 
svdtantryena nirankusa sthitir abhir nidra smasdne vane | 
vastram ksdlanasosanadirahitam digvastu Sayya mahi — 
sancaro nigamantavithisu vidim krida pare brahmani || 
Feeding carefree on alms got without humiliation, 
drinking the waters of rivers, remaining in freedom with- 
out restraint, sleeping without fear in the cremation ground 
or in the forest, clad in clothes unwashed and undried as such 
or even undressed, sleeping on the ground and wandering 
VIVERACODAMAN! - 
in the highways of the Upanisads, the wise sport in the Sup- 
reme Brahman. 
— 640 
farrraresteg WUAATT 
ae fanarqafeaeny 
Aomateg ours U&¥o WO 
viminamilambya Sartrametat 7 4 
bhunaktyasesan ee aan | | 
eee balavadatmavetta ss Gi 
yo ‘vyaktalingo’ nanusaktabahyal ue 
‘ ‘Without. any marked features, or any. external ‘atiach- 
‘ment, the knower of Brahman experiences all sense-objects 
through this body like a child, as they come to him by the 
wish of others, but without identification with them. 
541 
fereact asia a areal at 
aura ashe Frararey: | 
SAAS | ASAT | 
fraraagistt aeararary i We wv 
digambaro vapi ca simbaro va 
tvagambaro vapi cidambarasthah 
unmattavad vapi ca balavadva 
pisacavad vapi caratyavanyam iH 
Remaining in the plane of the cit, he wanders on. the 
earth without any clothing, or normally clad, or clad in 
skins, like one mad or like a child or like : a a ghoul. 
542 
enka’ BMS ATALUHAt af: to ae 
PARNAT BAT AST: TAT water feaa: 1 U¥R 1 
kamanni kamariipi samécaratyekacaro munih , 
svatmanaiva sada tustah svayam sarvatmand sthitah | 
The muni wanders by himself, apparently enjoying 
everything remaining as the all, always: satisfied . ine his 
atman. | 
478 
wafers fe faary _—s mations 
wafaa wid: dea: tafqasmerarcated: 1 
qafaeardtan: rafaaana: arcafatad: 
‘awa Tat: AATTTATTTafee: 1 eR 
kvacinmidho vidvan kvacidapi maharajavibhavah 
kvacid bhraéntah saumyah kvacid ajagaracarakalitah | 
kvacit patribhitah kvacidavamatah kvapyaviditah 
caratyevam prajnah satataparamanandasukhitah TT 
This wise man, always enjoying bliss, goes sometimes 
like a fool, sometimes as one learned, sometimes with royal 
magnificence, sometimes as mad, sometimes auspicious, 
sometimes unmoving as a python, sometimes evoking res- 
pect, sometimes derided and sometimes unknown to any- 
body. 
| 544 
freratsit qat qectscaagral metas: | 
PRAT SASHA: ASNT: UGS 
nirdhano’pi sada tusto’pyasahadyo mahabalah ; 
nityatrpto pyabhunjano’pyasamah samadarsanah |; 
Though devoid of wealth, he is ever content; strong | 
though helpless; though not eating, ever satisfied; though 
seeing all with an equal eye, still beyond compare. 
545 
afr gaara fereareteat GoArae y 
droite afefeostsis ade: 1 yey tt 
api kurvannakurvanas scibhokta phalabhogyapi , 
Sariryapyasariryesa paricchinno’ pi sarvagah 4; 
Inactive though acting; experiencing fruits of actions, 
yet not enjoying them; though embodied yet not afflic’ 
by the body; he is everywhere though localised. 
546 
eee war aah meafad safag | 
‘fratiea + eprrerta we TATA ae 
VIVEKACUDAMANI 
agariram sada santamimam brahmavidam kvacit | 
priyapriye na sprsatas tathaiva ca gubhdsubhe 4) 
Neither the pleasant nor the unpleasant ever affec t the 
Brahmavit who remains unattached to the hedy,, nor. do 
the good or the evil. : eas, od Sachi, 
047 
--egefiteeatofomnten: 
aa aq a TATTA a 
facaenareret azeAAT aA: 
Ra: aH TUCATA wet Tu peas u 
sthaladisambandhavato’bhimaninah : 
| sukham ca duhkham ca subhagubhe « cat. 
vidhvastabandhasya saditmano muneh eer 
kutah Subham vapyasubham phalam va ue 
Joy and sorrow, good and evil, pertain to one who is 
connected with the gross body etc., and is attached to it. 
To the muni who has broken the bonds and has realised | 
the atman, how will there arise the fruits of good or of 
evil? | 
aaa - 
TAT ETA TATRA SH <fasrat 
Wet FIST FITRAT QIAICAT EIA 11 ee te 
tamasé grastavadbhanad agrasto’pi ravir janaih | 
grasta ityucyate bhrantya. hyajnatea vastulaksonam L 
The sun is said by people to be swallowed, its bright- 
ness being hidden by darkness without knowing the truth 
and due to delusion. 
549 
Tat faq mea fererry 
aI feet Sarat: MAATTATNAT 14S Ut 
tadvad dehddibandhebhyo vimuktam brahmavittamam 
‘pasyanti dehivan mudhah Sarvrabhasadarsanét 1 ny 
Similarly, merely seeing the appearance that is the 
body, fools see the eminent Brahmavit, who is free from | 
the bonds of the body etc., as one possessing the body. 
VIVEKACUDAMANI | 
550 
afefeetarieri watageq farcofe 1 
 Reerarateaarat afesfaq srerarazat it 4yo UN 
ahinirlvayanivayam muktadehhastu tisthati 1 
itastatas calyamano yatkincit prdnavayund 1) 
The body of the released one moves here and there 
slightly moved by the breath just as | the sleog of a 
serpent (moving by the wind). _ 
BART aituad ars Tat faeatmaeanq te 
aaa ated eet wararetrafere 1 449 
srotasd niyate déru yathi nimrionnatasthalam t 
devena niyate deho yathakalopabhuktisu i 
A log of wood is tossed up and down by the ‘floods. 
The body is led here and there according to destiny as 
‘may be determined by the fruits of Prevage actions. 
| | | 552 
siaiuniiaitateeduatiie : 
defcacacia afera Haag: 1 
fag: cad aaft afraaa asi — 
aaeq qotra weafeanrTara: WW 4RR u : 
prérabdhakarma-parikalpita-vasanabhih : 
samsarivaccarati bhuktisu muktadehah ra. 
siddhah svayam vasati siksivadatra tisnim 
Ha cakrasya milamiva kalpavikalpasinyah th 
‘Without attachment to the body, the jivanmukta moves 
about amidst objects of enjoyment like a sams&rin due to the 
‘vasanas wrought by the fruition of prarabdhakarmas. He 
lives dumb like a witness and unmoving like the nave of a 
wheel. : 
553 
sian faqag Fae ug. 
SU GRR 
_ VIVEKACUPAMANI 
naivendriyani visayesu niyunkta esa 
naivopayunkta upadarsanalaksanasthah te 
naiva kriyéphalamapisadapeksate sah : 
svananda-sindra-rasapéna-sumattacittah Ty aa, 
His. mind full of the ecstasy of drinking the elixir of 
his bliss, he does not direct his organs towards sense- 
objects, nor does he use them (for anything else) he being 
merely an unconcerned spectator, and he does not care even 
in the least for the fruits of actions, Om 
O04 
seUTHEIMTT ETAT afeasda RAGA | 
fra va ead arena a warfaga: 0 Orr aa 
| laksyaélaksyagatim tyaktvd yastisthet kevalatmana a 
siva-eva svayam siksaidayam brahmaviduttamah " ve 
Giving up all thought of what should be known | or not, ~ 
_ he who remains as the sole atman is verily Siva Himself, 7 
and he is the superior Brahmavit indeed. ; 
555 | 
‘aitaga gar qa: warat wafer. " a oe 
— Saferreg ada agaereate Fra yay jivanneva sada muktah krtartho brahmavittamah L- 
| upadhinas asid brahmaiva sadbrahmapyeti nirdvayam | 1 
Even while alive, he is ever free; he is a Bidhinavies | 
tama having realised his life’s purpose; by the destruction _ 
of the upadhis, he is Brahman alone; and he attains aa ae 
riences) the non-dual Reality that is Brahman, 2 
556 
wget aeargrararaaiea TIT TATA | 
aaa qetaesss: Hat wea ATT: WRENS 
Sailizgo vesasadbhavabhavayosca yatha puman | | 
tathaiva brahmavicchresthah sadé brahmaiva naparah | 
- The actor is always the same man whether he puts on 
the attire of his part or does not. So, too, the pre-eminent 
Brahmavit is always Brahman and not anything else, 
V.C,—-32 
482  ‘VIVEKACUDAMANI 
557 
et aerfe feet eeifirr atta: TAT — 
meiner aa: se fZ afeaaferat GATT AKO 
yatra kvapi visirnam parnamiva taror vapuhpatanat | 
brahmibhitasya yateh prageva hi taccidagnina dagdham u 
_ Let his body fall anywhere like the leaf of a tree. Of 
the yati who is Brahmibhita (one who has realised Brah- 
man) the body has eee been burnt by his fire of epee 
ence seceee 
7 558 
waretiat aarty ferssat qa: ‘- 
QHAMAAATATA AAT | 
a Serqrorerferareitert : 
_ aantafactiesfaasiara 1 UUc un 
sadatmani brahmani tisthato muneh 
 piirnadvayanandamayatmand sada i 
na desakaladyucitapratiksa 
tvanmamsavitpindavisarjanaya 1) 
To the muni who remains in the continuous experti- 
ence of the bliss of the full non-dual atman (Brahman) 
there is no consideration of space, time, or appropriate- 
‘ we ness in discarding the bases sc aaidiath oe ‘skin, Lae or 
" refuse. — | : z REPENS | 
559 
Jone er ee 
afaargaaateartant aetl TaeTT: 1 ARS 
dehasya mokgo no mokso na dandasya kamandaloh | 
avidyahrdayagranthimokso mokso yatastatah |) 
The abandoning of the ‘body or of the. staff or ‘the 
water-pot is not liberation. The giving up ies ne ¢ sae of 
| ajaana: in the heart is real liberation. 
960 
-geararra cert mt fraetast ara 7 7 
Siem ae at: fe J YATYAR UW 4Ro Ww 
VIVEKACOUDAMANI 483 
- kulyayaématha nadyam va Sivaksetre’pi catvare 1 
parnam patati cet tena taroh kim nu Subhaéubham. | n 
Whether a leaf of a tree falls in riverlet or river or in | 
the holy place dedicated to Siva, or where four roads meet, 
_ what does it matter, good or evil, to the tree? 
561 
TACT TACT Hoey ATT 
— Raftxasrnfizat farare: F 
TATA: Tata TITCAHEAT- | 
AraHa: AAT TH: 1 4S UN 
patrasya puspasya phalasya nésavat - 
dehendriyapranadhiyam vindsah , 
‘naivatmanah svasya sadaétmakasya- 
-nandakrter vrksavadasta esah no 
The destruction of the body, the sense-organs, the 
breath and the buddhi are like the destruction of the leaf, 
the flower and the fruit. It does not mean the destruction 
of one’s true nature as the pisetl: atman- wae survives 
like the tree. 
962. 
‘Sat SCUTETEA uf UTAH q 
witnfaseata aqafa fan EER HN 
prajidnaghana ityatmalaksanam satyasiicakam | 
aniidyaupadhikasyaiva kathayanti vinasanam tl 
The nature of the atman is truly indicated by saying | 
it is compacted of prajma (higher wisdom). Having said | 
that it is the Real, the upadhi only is dae of as st bject 
to destruction. 3 
‘ool 
afaarsit ar — seen: to 
Sarita fararrfaned faracq faerie TRCTY u  avinasi va are’yamatmeti Srutiratmanah N 
| prabravityavinasitvam vinasyatsu vikari $u ty 
The gruti speaking of the Stman says: ‘Verily, my 
dear, the atman_is indestructible’,-and declares its indes- 
a 
| ceptible nee in Brahman. tructibility amidst the changing things liable to destruction | 
avert wafer fg qea TAT TAs | 
srrarrieerarery rater TUETATAT Wee D. 
pisinavrksatynadhanyakatambarédyah — ee! 
 dagdha bhavanti hi mrdeva yatha tathaiva : 
dehendriyasu-~mana-adi-samastadrsyam a | 
jianignidagdham upayati paratmabhavam. We 
Even as, when burnt, the stone, the tree, the grass, 
the grain, the mat and the cloth turn into clay, so too, all. 
‘that is the object of sense-perception like the body, the 
organs, the breath, the mind etc., burnt by the fire of oh | 
becomes the Paramatman (attains paramatmahood).; 
565 
| coed et Sart ats ra | fy as 
TAT AHA TAT TATA sfacitaa W4ek Nl 
vilaksanam yatha dhvantam lyate bhanutejasi 1 
tathaiva sakalam drsyam brahkmant praviliyate }| 
As darkness which © distinct (from sunshine) | 
vanishes in the lustre of hg sun, gested all that i is  per- 
~—~«6B66 
| gd med we eh str wat HER, gS 
. aatatafafaed aaa welfaq TATU RRR 
ghate naste yatha vyoma vyomaiva bhavati sphutam ! 
tathaivopadhivilaye brahmaiva brahmavit svayam }| 
As when the pot is broken, the space in it becomes one 
with the outer space, so too the Brahmavit becomes Brah- | 
man when the upadhi vanishes. 
567 
afte a2 en fared ed AA we BL _ 
one anf aanssorrareataryia: N4get u 
VIVEKACOPAMANI | 
kestram ksire yathe ksiptam tailam. taile jalam jale ;. 
tamyuktam ekatém yati tathatmanyatmavit munih ir 48s 
The muni who is the knower of (who has realised) the _ 
atman, attains oneness with the atman as milk poured into 
milk, oil into oil and water into water becomes identical 
with milk, oil or water respectively. 
568 
va fadgeaed sear neeeaeantst \ 
ware saa afaatada wt: 4g 
evam videhakaivalyam sanmatratvamakhanditam 7 
brahmabhivam prapadyaisa yatir néivartate punah || 
| Attaining Brahmanhood marked by liberation upon the _ 
falling off of the body and being the pure infinite Sat, the Sates 
yati does not come back again (is not born aES? 
= 569 
AseaHeaaaAATItaqieasay: | : 
AAS AAAAATT AM: HA BRA: UW YES uw 
sadatmaikatvaviji fi@na-dagdhavidyadivarsmanah oS 
amusya brahmabhitatvad brahmanah kuta udbhavah Hi 
His body constituted of avidya etc., having been burnt 
(having vanished from consciousness) by the realisation of 
the ever-existing sole 4tman, he becomes Brahman here — ce 
and now. Whence will there be birth for him again? | 
570 
arareacait qeereiteit aq ta: eaten aaa: 7 
TAT Test fafesatat aatarafafaiat ry igo th 
| méyaklptau bandhamoksau na stah svatmani vastutah | 
yatha rajjau niskriyayam sarpabhasavinirgamau Hl 
Bondage and liberation are imaginations due to maya; 
they do not pertain to the atman. It is like the appearance 
and disappearance of the serpent in the inactive rope. — 
571 
AAA: ALACATEAT AAAS APIA | 
arta feraer: wrfqararMreaetgay a 
NARITA: wate gat at aga etfe: 4199 Th 
486 VIVEKACUDAMANI 
Gvurteh sadasattvabhyam vaktavye bandhamoksane 
navrtir brahmanah kacid anyabhavadanavrtam | 
yadyastyadvaitahanih sydd dugitam no sahate srutih "7 
When there is presence or absence of concealment 
‘bondage and liberation may be spoken of. But there can’ 
be no concealment of Brahman;.for, there is no second thing 
to conceal it. If there is such a thing, advaita. will be dis- 
rupted, and duality is not supported by sruti. 
BTR 
rar wera AN FET: 
ger avait aeratea | 
anata aaa zat vat | 
ma lse TAS AST NW ORT 
- bandhagca moksasca mrsaiva miidhah 
buddher gunam vastuni kalpayanti | 
drgavrtim meghakrtam yatha ravau 
yato dvaydsangacidekamaksaram 1; 
Bondage and liberation are both false. Fools imagine 
the qualities of buddhi on the atman, as covering of the 
sight caused by the cloud is attributed to the sun (saying 
‘sun is covered by cloud’). But the cit is non-dual, un- 
attached intelligence, one only and indestructible. 
573 
areata scar ara ara aMectia areal 
agra anadt aq faeaea TeAT: 1 GOR UN 
astiti pratyayo yasca yasca nastiti vastuni | 
_buddhereva gundvetau na tu nityasya vastunah | ] 
The expressions ‘is’ and ‘is not’ (that bondage exists | 
and that it has been removed) are only qualities of buddhi; 
they do not pertain to the eternal Sat, i-e., Brahman. 
574 
adeal ATAIT FTA aeeraleall aT aera | 
frond fafead mat frrad frrewa Wo 
afgatad 9% aed catead BETA Fa: ox 
atastau mayaya klptau bandhamoksau na caitmani ; — 
VIVEKACODAMANI 
niskale niskriye Sante niravadye nirafijane 
advitiye pare tattve vyomavat kalpana kutah 1) — 
So, these two, bondage and liberation are imaginations 
wrought by maya; they do not pertain to the Atman.. 
Where can be any imagination of (i.e., how can any imagi- 
nation. affect) the partless, actionless, peaceful, defectless, 487 
taintless non-dual supreme Reality which is (infinite) like 
the sky? | 
: | S75 
a factat & ateafa: 1 agt a a ae: | 
TMA: TT Waa: TOT TTATAAT NYG 
na nirodho na cotpattir na baddho na ca sédhakah | 
na mumuksur navai muktah ityesé paramarthata | 
The transcendental Truth is that there is no death, no 
origination, no one bound, no seeker, no ) aspirant for libera- 
tion, none liberated. apes 
AAHAAHCT ATAAT AAA: 1 KOS Ni vv vO 
sakalanigamacidasvanta-siddhantaguhyam 
paramidamatiguhyam darsitam te mayddya ' 
apagatakalidosah kamanirmuktabuddhih © Pattee 
tadatulamasakrt tvam bhavayedam mumukguh 1) | 
Oh you who seek liberation! I have now shown to 
you the secret doctrine which is the crest-jewel of all grutis. 
Rendered free from the defects of (the) kali (age), and, 
with your mind freed from all desires, meditate always on 
this incomparable Truth. 
3sT7 
“eft gear aqdtated TNAY Hatta: | 
@ aa aaaanat aat freaarera: TROON 
iti Srutua guror vakyam prasrayena krtanatih | 
sa tena samanujndto yayau nirmuktabandhanah i 
433 
Having listened to these words of the Guru with re- 
verence, and having prostrated before him, with his gra- 
cious permission, the sisya went away freed from bondage. | 
B78 ar’ 
ete sarereafereeit ferret 
qraaq aqet val ferare fea: it aed. We 
gururesa sadénandasindhau nirmagnamanasah | 
paivayan vasudhim sarvam vicacéra nirantarah | 
With his mind immersed always in the ocean of bliss, 
the Guru roamed along sanctifying the entire world com- 
pletely. 
579 
- gearardem fareqer aTTAT HATH L 
“Grete THAT TAAANTTTT 11 Yee sev & 
‘itydedryasya Sisyasya eieumanintn L 
niripitam mumuksinim sukhabodhopapattaye i 
For facilitating the understanding of the aspirants to 
liberation, this dialogue between the Guru and the & pe 
_ the nature of the dtman has been expended: 
580 
“erent 
‘aie ak el un “ue u 
| hitamimam upadesam adriyantam 
vihitanirasta-samastacittadosah — i 
bhavasukhavimukhah prasantacittah 
srutirasika yatayo mumuksavo ye 1) 
May the yatis (prayatnagilah, those given to spiritual 
effort) who desire liberation, who have been purged of all 
_ defects of the mind by the prescribed disciplines, who turn 
their faces against pleasures of samsdra, who have a placid 
mind and find pleasure in Srutis, look on a this ‘good instruc- 
tion with deferential regard. | we 
MUTA TaTEa le qaat aged etz- 
SaOT ‘ecard fanaa Ratodarfeat u 4g 1 
 samsaradhvani tapabhanukiranaprodbhitadshavyatha- 
khinnanam jalakanksaya marubhuvi bhrantya 
paribhramyatam : 
atyésannasudhambudhim suichalearann brahmidvayam darsaya 
tyesi sarnkarabharati vijayate nirvdpasandayini || - 
For those who are afflicted by the scorching rays of the 
paths of samsara, who wander forth in quest of water inthe 
-mirages of desert sands, may this auspicious message of _ | 
Sarnkara point out in close proximity the blissful ocean. of 
- non-dual Brahman which dowers one with the surpassing ; 
joy of liberation. | 2 
afe satreradaformarraea aitacaracger 
| pdaabas! atin a 
AAe: | 
iti ais iudbiasieaabalamalaiiiaa 
Srigovindabhagavatpijyapddasisyasya 
_ §rimacchamkarabhagavatah krtau 
- wivekdicidaimanih 
érigagiri-jagadguru-éricandrasekharabharati- 
svamyanugrhitavyakhya- : 
 sanathah samaptah 
. ‘Thus anda the Vivekaciidamani written by Sri Sarhkara 
on the pupil of Srimat Paramahamsa Parivra] akechrya” 
Sri Govinda Bhagavatpijyapada 
along with the Commentary on it 
graciously Sewer by the Jagadguru Sri Candraégekhara Bharati 
Svaminah of ‘Srhgagiri. | 
Om Tat Sat 
o> s REIL TTS 2 
APPENDIX I 
_ Note on bhimikdas mentioned in the commentary to $loka 2 and 
Sloka 454 and on the distinctions of Brahmavits mentioned in the: 
commentary to gloka 454. SO a eee 
| (Source: Jivanmuktiviveka of Sri Vidyaranya Svamin) 
A. The seven stages of yoga (Yogabhimayah): 
1. Subheccha, 2. Vicaérand, 3. Tanumanasé, 4. Sattvapatti, 
3. Asamsakti, 6. Padarthibhavini, 7. Turyaga. Toss a8 
1. Subheccha: When a man involved in the world about him 
begins to reflect and tells himself: ‘What a fool am I to be thus 
involved! Should I not study the Sastras and be dowered with the 
Saving glance of good persons who have the experience of the 
Truth?” Such a desire preceded by a sense of detachment (vai- 
ragya) is called Subheccha. | 
2. Vicadrand is active inquiry into the nature of Reality pre- 
ceded by. study of the Sastras, association with the good and wise, 
vairagya and meditation. | See 
| 3. Tanumanasé arises when the attachment to sense-objects 
gets tenuous as a result of Subheccha and vicdrana. __ = 
4. Sattvapatti is the stage of the establishment of the mind in | 
the atman chararterised by pure Sattva-guna by virtue of the pre- 
vious three stages and by non-attachment to sense-objects. 
5. Asamsakti is the stage in which the effect of attachment 
to the world is negated by the practice of the previous four stages 
and which is characterised by being rooted in the Real. 3 
6. Padarthabhaivini: When by the practice of the aforesaid 
five stages, a person delights in his 4tman as nothing else — internal 
or external — appears to him, and he is awakened only by long effort 
of others — that is the stage of padarthabhavini. 
7. Turyaga: By long practice of these six stages, when the 
sense of difference vanishes and one is completely absorbed in one’s 
self; that is the goal of turyaga. | 
__ B.. The distinction of Brahmavit, Brahmavidvara, Brahma- 
vidvariyan and Brahmavidvaristha: | , 
The first three bhimikas are only means (sadhanas) to Brahma- 
- vidya and are part of the effort to acquire vidya. For, in these 
three the sense of difference among things is not annulled. Hence, 
it is called the waking state (jagarana). es 
Then the intellectual realisation from the Vedanta text of the 
oneness of Brahman and the jivatman freed of upadhis is the fourth 
stage and is the result of the previous three. It is called Sattva- 
APPENDIX I 491 
patti. Brahman which is the material cause of the entire universe 
is known to be the non-dual Reality. Name and form which are 
the features of the universe and which are super-imposed on Brah- 
man are understood to be mithya in this stage. This stage is like 
unto a dream (svapna) to the seeker of salvation compared to the 
waking state mentioned earlier. For, the objects of experience are 
felt to have only as much reality as those in a dream. In that state 
all sense of duality disappears and one becomes steadfast in the 
non-dual, seeing oneself and others as the Real only. One who has 
this fourth bhiamika is said to be a Brahmavit. _ 
The three bhimikas beginning with the fifth are the distinc- 
tions among the jivanmuktas. These distinctions arise due to re-— 
lative effectiveness of nirvikalpa samadhi and to the strength and 
duration of absorption in Brahman. | | : ey, 
In the fifth stage, one wakes of one’s own accord from nir- 
vikalpa-samadhi. Such a yogin is Brahmavidvara. This is likened 
to sleep (susupti). In it all determinants are stilled and one has 
the awareness of only the non-dual. Though prone to external 
activity when awake, being introvert and enjoying supreme tran- 
quillity, one appears as one in sleep. 
_ In the sixth stage, the yogin gets up awakened by persons 
who are near him. Such a one is called Brahmavidvariyan. This 
is likened to very deep sleep (gadhanidra). One attains it after 
practising the fifth bhumika and getting rid of the residual tenden- 
cies (vasands). There is no consciousness of sat or asat, no sense 
of the ‘I’ or the aharnkara. All mental activities vanish. Like a 
pot in space, there is nothing inside or outside, and again like a 
pot immersed in the ocean there is a fullness inside and outside. — 
The former state arises as the mind of one in nirvikalpa-samadhi 
is left only with remnants of sarnskaras of duality and cannot func- 
tion to indulge in any imagination or to receive impressions of ex- 
ternal objects. The latter is to be traced to the fact that one in 
that condition is lost in the plenum of the experience of Brahman 
which is self-effulgent and is sat, cit and 4nanda whole and entire. 
- He sees both within himself and outside all things only as Brahman. 
The one makes for Sunyatva, and the other for purmatva. 
To the yogin who has attained the seventh bhumika, there is 
no getting up either by oneself or induced by others. The yoga- 
éistras which explain asamprajnata-samadhi culminate in this. 
Such a yogin is called Brahmavidvaristha. ° | 
APPENDIX II 
A NOTE ON SAMANADHIKARANYAM 
_ Samanddhikaranya may be defined as a common reference of two 
words. in an expression each by itself applying to a different object. 
bhinnapravrttinimittinam sabdanim 
ekasmin arthe vrttih simanaidhikaranyam 
This is of four kinds: (i) badhayam simanadhikaranyam 
(ii) adhydse samanddhikaranyam (iii) visesane sémanadhikaranyam 
(iv) atkye simanadhikaranyam. 
(1) badhayadm simanadhikaranyam: This relates to bhranti or 
delusion arising from error of perception. In the darkness of a night 
in which visibility has not been completely obstructed, a person 
mistakes a tree-stump for a thief and he cries in fright. Upon this, 
another with a better vision tells him, “this ‘thief’ is a tree-stump”’ 
coro'yam sthinuh. Both these words thief (corah) and tree-stump 
(sthanuh) which ordinarily apply to different objects, are used by 
two different persons with reference to the same object. The first 
man calls it a ‘thief’ and the second man calls it a ‘tree-stump’. But 
the same object cannot be both a thief and a tree-stump. If it is the 
one, it cannot be the other. The truth is that it is a tree-stump and 
not a thief. On being enlightened by the second man, the delusion 
_{bhranti-jfiiana) in the mind of the first man that what he saw was a- 
thief is annulled. It becomes badhita, The two ways of underestand- 
ing, one wrong, and the other right, had an identical reference, that 
is, they had samaéna-adhikarana. One of them which is the product 
of delusion is cancelled on the:dawn of right knowledge. This is 
_ called badha’yam samanadhikaranyam. The ‘coratva’ (being a thief) 
is cancelled and ‘sthanutva’ is affirmed. baidhyamanatadaétmya-upa- 
laksita-adhisthanasya . bodhakam. _ | | | eo os 
(ii) adhydse siémanadhikaranyam: This applies to the common 
_ reference of the super-imposed (aropita) and the substratum (adhis- 
thana). Adhyasa is defined as “atasmin tadbuddhih”, the idea of a 
_ thing in what is not that thing. This may arise in some places from 
external defects and in others from one’s own supposition. General- 
ly, it is a delusion from defective perception as where a person mis- 
takes a rope for a serpent. Upon the dawn of correct knowledge 
either by his own clearer perception or being corrected by another, 
he says ‘this is not a serpent but a rope’. (naYyam sarpah kintu 
rajjuh). The object about which it was said that it is a serpent or 
a rope is referred to in both cases by the same word, namely, ‘this’ 
(ayam). Rope and serpent have a common reference, namely ‘this 
object’, ‘ayam’. This object is the substratum, adhisthana and ser- 
pent is the super-imposed, 4ropita or adhyasta. The wrong identi- 
fication of what is signified by adhyasta with the adhisthana is 
APPENDIX Ii | — 493 
adhyase simanadhikaranyam. It is called vyavaharikapratibha- 
_sikayoh tadatmyabodhah. 7 
The difference between badhayam ssmnénidhikeronyam, and 
_adhyase samanadhikaranyam is that the former refers to the state 
of mind after the delusion has been removed and which affirms 
“yah corah sah sthanuh” (that which appeared as a thief is really 
a tree-stump). But adhydse samanadhikaranam refers to the state 
of mind during the pendency of the delusion, when it says, sock Se 
at a rope, ayam sarpah: ‘This is a serpent’. 
(iii) visesane. simanadhikaranyam: This arises whew! an ob- 
ject designated by a common noun is particularised by qualifying 
the noun by an adjective as when it is said: nilah ghatah (the — 
black pot) or dandi purusah (the man with a stick). The black- 
ness inheres in the same object as is. designated by the word ‘pot’. 
Similarly, carrying a stick goes with the man. If ‘pot’ or ‘man’ 
only is uttered the reference may be to a pot of any colour or to 
any kind of man. The adjective ‘nila’ or dapat restricts the re- 
ference to a particular kind of pot or a particular man. . Being nila 
and being ghata go together. Similarly, being dandi and being 
purusa go together. This is the identical reference or samanadhi- 
karanya of the two terms. While the badhayam = and adhyase 
samanadhikaranyams relate to the pred bhastna satis, this one. is a 
vyavahirika-tadatmyam. | . i tinh, aay 
This viSesana-visesya relation, that is, the relation between the 
7 adj ective and the substantive may be of various kinds as ‘follows: 
(a) between guna and guni (the quality and the bearer of the | 
quality as in nilah ghatah). 
(b) . between kriyi and dravya (the action and the acter: as in 
calan pumdan). | 
(ce) between jati and vyakti (the genus and the ees as in ayam gajah). 
7 (d) between visesana and visista (the qualification and the 
qualified as in dandi purusah). 
(e}) between avayava and avayavin (the part and the whole | 
as in sakalakalah candrah). 
(iv) atkye saémdnddhikaranyam: Two words are used in 
juxtaposition indicating an identity between their references. When 
the words are understood literally, that is by their vacydrtha, the 
juxtaposition seems to be a contradiction which is removed when 
they are understood in their true reference (laksya@rtha). In the 
_ expression, so’yam devadattah (this Devadatta is he), the simanaddhi- 
' karanya is between the man seen elsewhere and at past time and 
he who is seen now and here and the two are identified to be the 
.same Devadatta. The apparent contradiction between the two in- 
dividuals is got rid of by removing the irrelevant features of ‘then’ 
and ‘now’, and ‘there’ and ‘here’. The Devadatta then and else-— 
494 : VIVEKACUDAMANI 
where was young and strong; the Devadatta seen now and: here is 
old and weak. These are adventitious to Devadatta. Ignoring 
them, their identical reference is established when it is said ‘so’yam 
devadattah’. — 
| Similarly, when it is said baiteamasi (That. thou art), “That 
(tat) refers to the caitanya delimited by maya and ‘thou’ (tvam) 
to the caitanya delimited by avidya or antahkarana. The former 
refers to ISvara who is infinite, omniscient, omnipresent and who is 
the creator and sustainer of the world and in whom finally the 
world merges; and the latter is the jiva who is finite, of little know- 
ledge and who is restricted in time and place. ‘These are the literal 
meanings, vacyarthas of ‘tat’ and ‘tvam’. When it is said ‘tat- 
tvamasi’ (That art thou), it would mean, according to vacydrtha, 
that jiva is Isvara, which makes no sense. So, to rightly under- 
stand the expression, a portion of the literal meaning has to be re- 
jected for the implied meaning of laksyartha. Omitting the adven- 
titious limitations (upadhis) of maya which is responsible for the func- 
tions of creation, preservation and dissolution, and of avidya which 
causes the wrong identification of the 4tman with the series exten:- 
ing from the antahkarana to the body respectively, what remains in 
both cases is the caitanya and the identity between them is esta- 
blished. One is méyopahita-caitanya, the other is avidyopahita- 
caitanya. When the maya and avidya are negated, what remains is 
the caitanya in both cases and then, the ‘tat’ and ‘tvam’ become 
identical. This way of understanding tattvamasi is on the principle 
of jahadajahallaksana or bhagalaksana as it is.called. This is aikye 
simanddhikaranyam or the identity of reference of the words by | 
virtue of their common nature. This is referred to as ‘vyaktisvari- 
a aa 
THAT Fala TA, 
sTausfacatet 
HAVENT 
TATA TT 
AACHACACAT 
aratt free afer et 
HATATATACA Ses 
STATA STAT 
HATTA TTT 
HAAATT SET ~ ~ 
bi EL | 
qa eaaaeg ear 
Aa: TL Tar | 
Ta: TAS ales 
HA: TATETH TH INDEX TO SLOKAS 
ABA 
79 
80 
166 
472 
402 
395 
435 
137 
174 
64 
78 
345 
408 
254 
252 
324 
205 
355 
486 
165 
417 
350 
228 © 
300 
37 
14 
216 
424 (The Numbers Indicate the Pages) 
marcaca — 
xaratearaetate 
sarenals ast 
aaa aerate 
Tet aTaeUTT 
aaa aren afte 
atferearforarared 
TAT St: Ted 
TEATTARTCTETE 
HAA ATE STAT 
- pare eae 
HAAATAATATA: 
HAT SHTAISTAS 
aatfacaafaaran: 361 
. 369 
163 | 
187 
110 
158. 
152 
459 
25 
436° 
204 
393 
367 
286 
£210 
229 
220 
Aad 
101 
209 
+122 
285 
374 
332 
360 
e 4 ee 131 
291 
478 
137 
496 
aa eae: 
HAAATCAT fact 
sarstaarnfet 
ater frrrat 
afearaqared tt 
arfearare Tt tet 
afaararranife 
arferarreft at at 
HUTA HT TAT 
HORT CTT 
ANC Tal Feat 
mag harry 
qareneny frweqtsez 
AACTATA TAT 
TRYIN AT 
HOTA ATA, 
ecient MERE: & feaaa: 
AERTS: 
HSSTUSAS Ia: «54 _ VIVEKACODAMANI 
- « afehredaatara 
qerneaitara: 
| MATRA 
ASARTTIAT WaT 
ATRT MACHT | 
THT aT 
aaa aag: 
arene fz 
aret fereariger 
arreanta tare 
ATT HAATH MET 
ATTA TMA aT 
arena Sat 
AT SSMFITLSAT 
STU aaTs 
areenen frat: 
Mat: AeAeaT eat 
ara fata 
eet: alrafet 
ata TeqAard 
afe wanaater 
afa seat Toalst 
aa fariraq 
serraigeg firorey 
Rt WUT YY ee pier 
SIaTl ACG TCTM 
sara terareaia 
SFTITATTAETA: 
Teearay aT 
SEAT 
TITAVTTS IF 
Sartrearrarcey 
sofartrrreesaita 
sathrcrarta & wa 480 
50 
441. 
254 
458 
377 
(175 
124 
33 
429 232 
696 
81 
336 
. 4597 
340 
485 
365 
12 
«448 
eae vp 
ee Tey 
ey 
483 
113 
418 
281 
277 
121 
17 
47 
432, 
348 
459. 
274 
390 
356 
341 
368 
. (45 
are bP) 
258 
. 485 
475 
367 
134 
8 ABST 
«457 
449 
330 
58 
171 
—A65S 
. 467 — 
PAGS: 
191 
388 
AT71 
133 
477 
— 313 
(450 
394 
482 
65 
247 | 
aTeat TAT AAT Ar ter | 
aardle cat Ta 
POOR IGE iar 
oe B18 SP ogag 
168 
473 
389 
301 
186 
104 
345, 
477 
12 
53 
334 
474 
240 
185 
— - 358 
£82 
190 
eee 
36 
331 
199 
B54 
375 
188 
419 
420 
182 
~—©186 
«454 
388 
WTS FAFA 
eftarae tartar 
a fefaca vearft 
a faad ay fara: 
4 weota farat 
qT aad al fart 
a cea faearet 
ag ceifarenes 
of SaHTHTaT 
# AMT Wears 
a farvay a arate: 
Hf Tera 
aT TATaTAA ASAT 
THAT TAT, 
HAACA TARE 
tA tea dare: 
TH Tafadt +A 
TAT TART TA 
a atta 4 afeta 
a fe sqa: sfrara 
at afed fart 
aT Weafea4r | 
ATTA TCHTCHTSS 
Heat Weather 
até Sita: Tt TET 
atefad aTeaat 
feqmerasea areoT 
Foyer TaTeAT 
Fred fy waa farrraarausfaereqt 
ferfreatercratteret 
frarafereresr 
faxrat sraaqratat 453 
119 
430 eGR CECE 
facerarared 
fircererm fireated 
freqaaariaacd 
fret frenet get 
feeraistt gar 
ferfarrerararery, 
fafaneqaerartirat 
faata: TlAT afta: 
Ta Te Hferacarat 
areas TTT 
TATTATASH: 
qatar fray 
TSaraTary BTANTAT A 
Sararty aaa fare 
qa Harat Tat: 
grasa: Tarte 
qorgd Wreath 
FAST FIT 
qeqaTaaa4r 
Tera hate fe 499 
. $53 
954 
(442— 
455 
AAl 
478 
78 
. 354 
405 
469 
. 359 
492 — 
239 
480 
179 
A233 
vues 104 
So DOB 
ah? 
.. 483 
70 
Pes 
338 
439 
184 
484 
460 
183 
161 
. 394 
483 
135 
292 
. 440 
220 
.. 320 re 
111i 
— 289 
4300 
480 
A0L ATTA aT ST 
atleet feat crags 
— Stferaferasrra 
assays: TH 
ma: Tae favarrstary 
MAY AT WATeaTeT: 
mareay arf wag 
TTTTST 
| HopeVSgarearay 170 
210 
216 
(253 
417 
471 
90 
202 
«301 —- 
(207 
44 
456 
700 
169 
470 
— 293 
32 
—6«61 
485 
393 
gi 981 
oo 23g 
oo 139 
180° 
246 
39 
99 
86 
206 
102 
103 
“154 
92 
aa safe fastvr 
ya sfaset fasar: 
qa arecat aferd 
wat WTENTat 
TATTHSS WATS 
wat gat FETs wat war ares 
aM 2° 
UTA ST: 
aren dfafaarat 
wen ferat aq 
aL CATT FAST 
aa favafad card MEAT HEAT 
afreatrefa arate 
arwaraaar Ara: 
aaarast Sesheny 501 
481 
366 
a 
.. 415 
. 283 
- 483 
379 
417 
71 
wo AT 
. 76 
Soest 357 
450 
198 
.. 409 
oe = 314 
— 299 
338 
131 
.. 419 
. 423 
407 
SEereaeny 
37 
. 484 
.. 200 
ne oe 29 . 
=: SE 
eae SY) 
. R42 
97 
. 123 
,  3al 
5020 
fearrarerrrgrarerel 
fasaer: (acd 
faravafareae: 
TAMTCATUT A 
| Ferarifiearter 
Sana a yard 
TAA Fares 
AAT TX Fa 
Meee AAT 
— wearfafir: afte 
WaT $5 
ae 323 
76 
22 St AOATS 
447 
62 
hdd 
361 
403° 
. . 363 
- 4293 
- 78 
93 
102 
. 185 
. - 383 
416 
54 
346 
40 
(130 ae’ 
— 481 
63 
176 
326 
354 
48 
270 
20 
224 
264 AA AA IM ATA 
waar aa: fas 
warertt carter 
a 1 ararctioatade 
waae wa sea 
WaTATCH AT TT 
weg fear: rea: 
| PATCTTAT 
aarfiataat 
aaArteaat By 
aarfecred:- wT: 
aatfgarat aft 
‘warfgar a sfrerer 
aasaaste 
aA aad TT . 284 
314 
ABS 
402 
487 
460 
349 
138 
244 
250 
ia BBS 
vot BRI 
Le 442 
7-2 482 
485 
ee» - R45 
ben R64 
- 467. 
128 
353 
444 
397 
. 386 
347 
310 
40.0 
216 ahd 
23 
INDEX TO SLOKAS — 
—egenfeerar aft 503 
, 479 
. 480 
278 
197 
116 
295 
428 
472 
214 
373° 
638 
218 
445 
47 
—6385 
288 
| 447 
51 
470 
488 
(There being wiiliniie: no errors in English matter, correc 
tions in Sanskrit matter alone are given here. The figures . unde! 
Columin ‘Line’ refer to ) the lines of Sanskrit matter on the respective 
page. ) Pe 
: Page Line Correct Reading a 
63 rea 
oe al! the four q>a3 
oH Seite | 
oe aarti Pepi 
art Mal 4 2 
2 
2 
1 4 
2 
3 3 
1 
2 1 2 
237 kag 
i 
2 
7 
1 2 
1 
| | 2 360 3 : 
2 3 
1 
3 5 
yay} @) 0 Wt Us I hom 5 @.@) 4 
Sri Sarhkara, reverentially adored as Sri 
Bhagavatpada, wrote illuminating Commentaries on 
the triple classics of Vedanta Philosophy, _ the 
Upanisads, the Bhagavad Gita and the Brahma Siitras 
to provide knowledge of the scriptural texts, 
reinforcing them by accordant reasoning and 
verifying them by personal experience. Out of 
compassion for those who are incapable of mastering 
these commentaries and to instruct them in the 
verities of Vedanta, he wrote a number of minor 
works known as Prakarana Granthas. Of these, the 
Vivekacidamani is the best known. It gives the 
quintessence of spiritual knowledge. Significantly 
called ‘the Crest Jewel of Discrimination’, it shows 
that the ills of life are to be traced to one's inability to 
discriminate between the eternal and the ephemeral. 
Mistaking the worldly things which are the non- 
atman for one's real atman, one loses oneself in 
pursuit of them, and thus prolongs the samsaric 
cycle. Discrimination between the 4tman and the 
anatman is the primordium on which the entire 
spiritual process for atmasaksatkara which leads to 
liberation is based. Sri Bhagavatpada charts out this 
voyage of an afflicted and earnest inquirer across the 
sea of samsara in the form of a dialogue between a 
Sisya and his Guru to whom he has supplicated, and 
who helps to transmute the textual knowledge of the 
Sisya into a fact of realisation. 
There was no extant commentary on this work 
for long. This has now been graciously provided by 
the celebrated Jivanmukta, His Holiness Jagadguru 
ro) y MG Valo be-V--) datete- We slabbe-tal Pujyapadah of revered 
memory who adorned the Sarada Pitha at Srngeri as 
its thirty-fourth pontiff, on the lines of Sri 
Bhagavatpada's Bhasyas on the Prasthanatraya, 
endowing the golden petals of this classic with the 
fragrance of his masterly exposition. 
This book is an English rendering of this 
Commentary by a feeble pen which is conscious of its 
limitations to bring out the spirit of the original with 
fidelity to content an accuracy of expression. 
